THE CODE OF THE CITY OF UNION POINT, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
UNION POINT, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ann Pump 
Mayor 
____________ 
Paul Callaway 
Richard Newsom 
Jill Rhodes 
Kenneth Rowland 
James M. Scott 
City Council 
____________ 
Peter J. Rice, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Wayne Jackson 
City Clerk/Treasurer 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
UNION POINT, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Lanier Rhodes 
Mayor 
____________ 
Yvonne Heidbrider 
Bert Mathews 
Joel McRay 
Dennis Mitchell 
Jill Rhodes 
Janie Watts 
City Council 
____________ 
Joe Reitman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Wayne Jackson 
City Clerk/Treasurer 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Code Attorney, and William Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Wayne Jackson, Clerk/Treasurer, and Mr. Peter J. Rice, Jr., City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Union Point, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Union Point, Georgia. 2005. 
ORDINANCE NO. 050701 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF UNION POINT HEREBY ORDAINS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the City of Union Point, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 82, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 8, 2005, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine $1,000. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 8, 2005 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall be effective July 12, 2005. 
Passed and adopted by the Mayor & City Council this 12 th day of July, 2005. 

ATTEST: 

1 st Reading: June 6, 2005 
2 nd Reading: July 12, 2005 
Board Action July 12, 2005 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city, held on the 12 th day of July, 2005. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what legislation has been considered for codification in each supplement. Legislation that is of a general and permanent nature is codified in the Code Book and is considered "Included." Legislation that is not of a general and permanent nature is not codified in the Code Book and is considered "Omitted." 
Adding to this table with each supplement enables users of this Code of Ordinances to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's charter as set forth in 1978 Ga. Laws, page 3966. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-30 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; powers of municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the whole Charter of the City of Union Point, repealing and replacing the charter provided by an Act of the General Assembly, approved August 15, 1904 (1904 Ga. Laws, page 678), and all amendments thereto. The City of Union Point, Georgia, in the County of Greene, and the inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of Union Point, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all the courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure. 
(1904 Ga. Laws, page 678) 
Section 1.11. - Corporate Boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this City shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made, from time to time, in the manner provided by general State law. The current boundaries of the city, at all times, shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Union Point, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map or description. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description, certified by the city clerk, shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  In addition to the area now embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Union Point, the following described property shall be included within said corporate limits: 
TRACT I 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 140th District, G.M., Greene County, Georgia, Parcel 1 containing 11.88 acres, and Parcel 2 containing 9.76 acres, said parcels being divided by County Road No. 101, according to a plat of survey prepared by James M. Paul, Registered Surveyor, dated April 11, 1988, said plat being recorded in Plat Book 16, Page 80, Office of the Clerk of Greene County Superior Court; totalling 21.64 acres, but not to be included is Parcel 3 containing 1.34 acre, which was deeded to Richard E. Ogletree which is shown on said plat of survey. Said plat being incorporated herein by reference as containing the true and accurate description of said tract. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 3752) 
TRACT II 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 140th District, G.M., Greene County, Georgia, containing 3.402 acres, more or less, according to a plat of survey prepared by James M. Paul, Registered Surveyor, dated April 2, 1988, said plat being recorded in Deed Book 139, Page 65, Office of the Clerk of Greene County Superior Court; said plat being incorporated herein by reference as containing the true and accurate description of said tract and made a part hereof." 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 3752) 
(d)  In addition to the area now embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Union Point, the following described property shall be included within said corporate limits: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 140th District, G.M. of Greene County, Georgia, and being a section of the right-of-way of Georgia Hwy. No. 77 between mile post 6.75 and mile post 7.00 as shown on a plat of survey for the City of Union Point, Georgia, by Gerald W. Torbert, Registered Land Surveyor #1717, which plat is recorded in Plat Cabinet 1, Slide 434, Page 2, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Greene County, Georgia, which said plat and the record thereof are hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference. 
(1999 Ga. Laws, page 3806) 
Section 1.12. - Powers and Construction. 
(a)  The City of Union Point shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this State as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter, including all powers of self-government, not specifically prohibited by general law or local Act of the General Assembly and including all powers enumerated in Section 1.14 of this charter. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of Powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agency, agencies, or employees shall be exercised as provided by this charter, by ordinance, or by pertinent laws of this state. 
Section 1.14. - Enumeration of Powers. 
The corporate powers of this city may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  to levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  to levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades and professions and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(3)  to make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  to appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(5)  to acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property in fee simple or lesser interest inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(6)  to accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source, for any purpose, related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(7)  to condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia 1933 [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.], or under other applicable Public Acts as are or may be enacted; 
(8)  to acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same; and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(9)  to grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services not to exceed periods of 35 years; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, standards, and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Public Service Commission; 
(10)  to lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon, close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; 
(11)  to grant franchises and right-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; 
(12)  to provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playground, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Section 36.202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933 [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.], or other applicable Public Acts, as are or may be enacted; 
(13)  to require real estate owners to repair and maintain, in a safe condition, the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances, establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)  to regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, heating, and air-conditioning codes; to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license all building trades; and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(15)  to provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(16)  to regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops; the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms, and to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(17)  to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever by taxation, or otherwise; 
(18)  to license, tax, or regulate professional fortunetelling or palmistry; 
(19)  to prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstruction upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(20)  to prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(21)  to regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(22)  to fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(23)  to provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(24)  to provide for and regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse; and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials; and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(25)  to levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection, disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(26)  to levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage systems, a sewer service charge fee of sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(27)  to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same, from time to time, such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage systems; 
(28)  to define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city; and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(29)  to define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(30)  to provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration, and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(31)  to establish minimum standards for, and to regulate, building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing, for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city; and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(32)  to provide that persons given jail sentences, in the municipal court, shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(33)  to adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city; to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein; and to prohibit, or regulate by ordinance, such other conduct and activities within said city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this State, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(34)  to regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping of, or running at-large of animals and fowl; to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift or humane destruction when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinance enacted hereunder; 
(35)  to regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(36)  to regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(37)  to provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(38)  to levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(39)  to enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(40)  to create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(41)  to make, ordain, and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(42)  to provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(43)  to exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen; 
(44)  to establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(45)  to exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT 
Legislative Branch 

Section 2.10. - City Council Creation; Composition; Number; Election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter. 
Section 2.11. - Terms of and Qualifications for Office. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor and councilmember unless he or she shall have been a resident of the city for twelve months, immediately prior to the election of mayor or councilmembers; each shall continue to reside therein during said period of service; and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; Filling of Vacancy. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State. 
(b)  Filling of Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in Article V. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The compensation of each councilmember shall be $100.00 per month, to be paid only upon attendance of the monthly regular council meeting. The mayor shall be compensated in the amount of $200.00 per month, to be paid only upon attendance of the monthly regular council meeting. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, page 3535; Ord. of 11-8-2005, § 1; Res. of 11-10-2009) 
Section 2.14. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Conflict of Interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city, any agency, or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interest when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official, who is a candidate for public office, may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against the city or any portion of its government; 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any manner pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  Use of Public Property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such government for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council, or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Contracts Voidable and Rescindable. Any violation of this Section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale, shall render said contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Ineligibility of Elected Officials. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city, or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof, during the term of which he or she was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which he or she was elected. 
(f)  Political Activities of Certain Officers and Employees. No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment, upon qualifying as a candidate for election to any public office within the political subdivision of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
(g)  Penalties for Violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee, who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this Section, shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and upon conviction therefor shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee a the city who shall forfeit his or her office or position, as described in (1) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1997, § 1) 
Section 2.15. - Inquiries and Investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department or office thereof and for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - General Power and Authority of the City Council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I. 
Organization and Procedures 
Section 2.20. - Organization Meeting. 
The city council shall meet for organization on January first next after the time for the election, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members by an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor or councilmember) of the City of Union Point and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Section 2.21. - Regular and Special Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least forty-eight hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general State law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made five days prior to such meeting. 
Section 2.22. - Rules of Procedure. 
The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Section 2.23. - Quorum; Voting. 
The mayor or mayor pro tem, and four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances or resolutions shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present and voting shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. The mayor or mayor pro tem, if presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie vote. 
Section 2.24. - Ordinance Form; Procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Union Point hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in Section 2.26. 
Section 2.25. - Action Requiring an Ordinance. 
In addition to other acts required by general state law or by specific provisions of this charter to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance. 
Section 2.26. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within thirty days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed thirty days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this Section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this Section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.27. - Codes of Technical Regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.28. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 2.28. - Signing; Authenticating; Recording; Codification; Printing. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Union Point, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers and departments of the city and made available for inspection by the public at the city hall. Copies of the code shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Office of Mayor 
Section 2.30. - Election; Forfeiture; Compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of two years and until a successor is elected and qualified. He or she shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of this city for twelve months immediately prior to the election of mayor. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during said period of service. He or she shall forfeit the office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Section 2.31. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
The city council shall elect by majority vote from among the councilmembers a mayor pro tem who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon declaration by the city council of the mayor's absence or disability. 
Section 2.32. - Powers and Duties of the Mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(a)  preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(b)  preside at all meetings of the city for service of process and ceremonial purposes; 
(c)  be the official head and spokesman for the city for service of process and ceremonial purpose; 
(d)  sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(e)  participate in the discussion of all matters brought before the city council and vote on such matters only in the case of a tie vote; 
(f)  appoint and remove, for cause, upon the recommendation and approval of appointment or removal by the council, all officers, department heads, and employees of the city except as otherwise provided in this charter; 
(g)  recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he or she may deem expedient; 
(h)  fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1997, § 2; Ord. of 5-11-2004, § 1) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and Service Structure. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The city council shall have the authority to delegate, by ordinance, responsibilities of an administrative nature to the city clerk/treasurer or any other such officers as it deems necessary. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or general State law, the directors of department and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation a prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, Commissions, and Authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasijudicial, or quasilegislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or general State law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expense of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
(d)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or general State law. 
(e)  No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed, and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(f)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, or by general state law, each board, commission or authority of this city shall elect one of its members as chairman, one member as vice chairman and one member as secretary. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Section 3.12. - City Attorney; Duties. 
The mayor may appoint, upon the recommendation and approval of appointment by the city council, a city attorney whose compensation shall be established by the city council by ordinance. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the mayor, city council, and other officers, and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by ordinance or by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City Clerk/Treasurer; Duties. 
The mayor shall appoint, upon recommendation and approval of appointment by the city council, a city clerk/treasurer who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk/treasurer shall be a custodian of the official city seal; maintain city council records required by this charter; receive, keep, and disburse all money of the city upon proper orders and maintain accurate records thereof; prepare and submit to the city council an annual statement covering the financial conditions of the city; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Section 3.14. - Personnel Administration; Position Classification and Pay Plans. 
The city council shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be adopted by ordinance. Said plans may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. For purposes of this Section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Section 3.15. - Personnel Polices. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning (1) the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; (2) the administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotions and transfer of employees within the classification plan; (3) hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leave of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; (4) such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and (5) such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1997, § 3; Ord. of 5-11-2004, § 2) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The city's original charter, as set forth in 1978 Ga. Laws, page 3966, provided for a recorder's court of the city. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the term "recorder's court" has been changed to "municipal court." 

Section 4.10. - Creation; Name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Union Point. 
Section 4.11. - Judge of Municipal Court. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge who shall be appointed by the city council and serve at the pleasure of the same. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of twenty-one years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  The judge of the municipal court may be removed for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(e)  Before entering upon the duties of office, the judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office of judge of the municipal court to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of ten dollars or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction, not exceeding a fine of three hundred dollars, or imprisonment for ninety days or both, or to sentence any offender upon conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public works for a period not exceeding ninety days. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of State law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of person charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge, declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a State law has been violated. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(h)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties, necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by general State law. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general State laws to mayors, municipal and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic offenses. 
Section 4.14. - Appeal. 
The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs of appeal to the Superior Court of Greene County from the municipal court, shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court. Any person who fails to file an appeal within ten days of the date of his or her conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
Section 4.15. - Rules of Practice. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations for procedure in the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least forty-eight hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of General State Law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 (1968 Ga. Laws, page 885) [Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Regular Elections; Time for Holding. 
On the first Wednesday in December, 1978, and on that day biennially thereafter, there shall be an election for the mayor and city council. The terms of office shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in Section 2.20 of this charter. 
Section 5.12. - Vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. 
(2001 Ga. Laws, page 3646) 
Section 5.13. - Other Provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 324A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 (1968 Ga. Laws, page 885) [Georgia Elections Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.14. - Nonpartisan Elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Section 5.15. - Election by Plurality. 
The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 5.16. - Grounds for Removal. 
The mayor, councilmembers, or other elected officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(a)  misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(b)  conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(c)  failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(d)  knowingly violate any express prohibition of this charter; 
(e)  abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(f)  failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by State law. 
Section 5.17. - Procedure for Removal. 
Removal of an officer described above may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a)  By the vote of four councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Greene County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(b)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Greene County as provided by general State law. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
Taxation and Fees 

Section 6.10. - Ad Valorem Tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the State and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, and providing governmental services; for the repayment of principal and interest of general obligations: and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage Rate; Due Dates; Payment Methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city ad valorem tax, a due date, and in what period of time such taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the due date. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and Business Taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy reasonable occupation or business taxes on both individuals and corporations doing business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses; Permits; Fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations doing business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general State law so as to preclude regulation by the city. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. The city council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys and for the purposes of railroads, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration; provisions; terms, including whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive; and the consideration for such franchises. Provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of fifty years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book to be kept by him. The city council may provide, by ordinance, for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.15. - Service Charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees and charges for sewer, sanitary, and health services or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city, which reflect the total cost to the city of providing such services. Unpaid fees and charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. 
Section 6.16. - Special Assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such special assessments shall be collected pursuant to the provisions in Section 6.18. 
Section 6.17. - Construction of Language; Other Taxes. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by State law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this Article shall not be construed as limiting, in any way, the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of Delinquent Taxes and Fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city pursuant to Sections 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general State law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes and fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; allowing exceptions for hardship; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - (Reserved) 
Bond and Other Indebtedness 
Section 6.20. - General Obligation Bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or general state law. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.21. - Revenue Bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as State law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.22. - Short-term Notes. 
The city must obtain and repay any short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year or as otherwise provided by present or future State law. 
Accounting and Budgeting 
Section 6.30. - Fiscal Year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general State or federal law. 
Section 6.31. - Preparation of Budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvements program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budget and program. 
Section 6.32. - Submission of Operating Budget to City Council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than sixty days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city treasurer shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The operating budget and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
Section 6.33. - City Council Action on Budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city treasurer, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by State law or by this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 31st day of December of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal on a month-to-month basis with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.34. - Tax Levies. 
Following the adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by said ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Section 6.35. - Changes in Appropriations. 
The city council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular, or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies or on a revised estimate of revenue. 
Section 6.36. - Independent Audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the State or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Contracting Procedures and Property Management 
Section 6.40. - Contracting Procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(a)  it is in writing; 
(b)  it is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by attorney, designated by the city council, and, as a matter of course, is signed by him or her to indicate such drafting or reviews; and 
(c)  it is approved or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of minutes required under this charter. 
Section 6.41. - Sale of City Property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general State law, except as otherwise provided in subsection (d). 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to and abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner or owners. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(d)  The city council is hereby authorized and empowered to sell, lease or otherwise transfer any land belonging to the city and held by the city for purposes of industrial development. Such contracts of sale, leases or transfers shall be entered into upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall determine to be in the best interest of the city. Such lands may be sold, leased or otherwise transferred without the necessity for taking bids or advertising such lands for sale, lease or transfer. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Eminent Domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and, for such purposes, property may be taken under Chapter 36-202 of the Georgia Code [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.], subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other Georgia law applicable now or provided in the future. 
Section 7.11. - Official Bonds. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by State law. 
Section 7.12. - Existing Ordinances; Resolutions; Rules; and Regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of this city, not in conflict with this charter shall continue in force, until repealed or amended by subsequent enactment of the city council. The city council shall review all such provisions and shall readopt, repeal or amend each, so that a codification as provided in Section 2.28(b) is begun. 
Section 7.13. - Existing Personnel and Officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect until the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. The mayor and council who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve for the remainder of the terms of office to which they were elected. 
Section 7.14. - Pending Matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel or officer as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.15. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provisions of this charter, for which a penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(1983 Ga. Laws, page 4061) 
Section 7.16. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is intended to be permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural and the masculine the feminine and vice versa. 
Section 7.17. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Section 7.18. - Repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Union Point in the County of Greene, approved August 15, 1904 (1904 Ga. Laws, page 678), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Charter. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the ordinances amending the Georgia laws in the Charter. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Union Point, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1982, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
City council. The term "city council" shall mean the legislative authority of the government of the city composed of a mayor and six council members as provided in Charter section 2.10. 
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
Code. The term "code" shall mean The Code of the City of Union Point, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the City of Union Point. 
County. Whenever the words "county," "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to Greene County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" shall mean the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" shall mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Union Point" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the words "state," "the state" or "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. 
(Code 1982, §§ 1-102, 1-103) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1982, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1982, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of the City of Union Point, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of the City of Union Point, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows: …." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1982, § 1-108) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 1-109) 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee; or concerning employee benefits. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, unless otherwise provided by state law, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, and by imprisonment in the city or county jail not to exceed six months, and to work on the city streets and public works not exceeding 90 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 1-110; 1983 Ga. Laws, page 4061) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-20 et seq., the city has entered into the following intergovernmental agreements for the purpose of providing joint services in conjunction with the implementation of its service delivery strategy for the county and municipalities in the county. Official copies of the agreements are on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(1)\  Agreement dated October 1, 1999, for the provision of fire protection. 
(2)\  Agreement dated October 1, 1999, for the provision of library service. 
(3)\  Agreement approved June 8, 1999, for solid waste collection. 
(4)\  l1;Agreement dated October 1, 1999, regarding jail services. 
(5\  Agreement approved June 8, 1999, for establishing, funding and administration of the Greene County Recreation Department. 
(6)\  Agreement approved June 8, 1999, for the provision of emergency dispatch services. 
(7)\  Agreement approved May 12, 1998, for the joint county/municipality land use classification dispute resolution process. 
Cross reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); civil emergencies, ch. 30; planning, ch. 54; administration and enforcement of collection and disposal of solid waste, § 58-33; taxation, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Location of polling places. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265, the location of the polling place for elections in the city is at Union Point Gymnasium, 200 Witcher Street, Union Point, Georgia. 
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2).; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-31. - Meetings generally. 
The city council shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at the city building at 211 Veazey Street. Notice of such regular meetings shall be conspicuously posted at city hall at all times; provided that the mayor may specifically convene the council whenever in his opinion the public business requires it; or he shall do so upon the application of three members of the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-201; Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 1; Ord. of 6-9-1994, § 1; Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 1; Ord. of 10-12-2004(1), § 1; Amend. of 7-13-2010, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-32. - Agenda of meetings. 
There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each city council meeting. Per the Georgia Sunshine Laws, 2012 Rewrite, HB 397, Open and Public Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.) and the Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), the following apply: a formal, written agenda, following the official order, shall be prepared in advance of each meeting. The meeting agenda will be available to the general public a week in advance, and a notice containing such information will be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the public at the regular meeting place of the agency and on any city website. The agenda shall list all items to be considered at a particular meeting and briefly state what action is requested. All items timely submitted by city officials and staff to be on the agenda shall be placed on the agenda, and no one shall prohibit such a timely request from appearing on the agenda. Public requests to have an agenda item require clearly advising the clerk of the nature and details of the item, provision to the city clerk at time of request of all supporting documentation to be referenced in the meeting, and being sponsored/approved as an agenda item by the mayor or a council member. To appear on a regular monthly meeting's agenda, the item must be submitted to the clerk by 1:00 p.m. on the Tuesday preceding the scheduled regular monthly meeting. The agenda, together with data, reports, and memoranda, should be sent early enough to reach each member at least three days before the meeting. 
Any item received after the deadline will be held over for the next meeting unless a majority present at the meeting vote to add it to the agenda. For specially called meetings, other than the regularly scheduled monthly meeting, the agenda shall consist only of the item or items specifically indicated as the purpose of the called meeting in accordance with the Open Meetings Act. Failure to include on the agenda an item which becomes necessary to address during the course of a meeting shall not preclude considering and acting upon such item. 
When any called meeting is to be held, the city will give due notice thereof, the posting of a written notice for at least 24 hours at the place of regular meetings and giving of written or oral notice at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to the legal organ in which notices of sheriffs' sales are published in the county where regular meetings are held and, upon written request from any local broadcast or print media outlet whose place of business and physical facilities are located in the county, notice by telephone or facsimile to that requesting media outlet at least 24 hours in advance of the called meeting. 
When special circumstances occur and are so declared by the mayor and council at the meeting, they may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice upon giving such notice of the meeting and subjects expected to be considered at the meeting as is reasonable under the circumstances including notice to said legal organ or a newspaper having a general circulation in the county at least equal to that of the legal organ, in which event the reason for holding the meeting within 24 hours and the nature of the notice shall be recorded in the minutes. Any oral notice required or permitted by this subsection may be given by telephone. 
A summary of the subjects acted on and those members present at a meeting shall be written and made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of a meeting. The minutes of a meeting shall be promptly recorded and such records shall be open to public inspection once approved as official by the agency, but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting, but nothing herein shall prohibit the earlier release of minutes, whether approved or not. Said minutes shall, at a minimum, include the names of the members present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made, and a record of all votes, who voted for and against. Official minutes of the meetings shall be maintained in the city office. Copies of contracts, maps, or similar material or documents related to actions taken may be included in the minutes or incorporated by reference to an alternate location. Where incorporated by reference, such documents shall be stored in a central location or locations identified by ordinance or resolution. 
Open records shall be maintained per the state Records Retention Act, O.C.G.A. 50-18-90 et seq. See O.C.G.A. 50-18-71(a). Records must be produced within three business days of an open records request if possible. If not, the response must be made within three business days as to when the records will be produced (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(A)). Requests can be made orally or in writing (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(B)). All written requests shall go to a records custodian (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(B)), the city clerk. This provision is the statutory designation in writing and the legal organ is notified of such, and the custodian is to be posted on any city website (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(2)). The three-day response period starts when the custodian gets the request. Charges for search, retrieval and production of copies is at the rate of the lowest paid full time employee able to respond (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(1)), and the first 15 minutes are free. The city charges for the cost of redacting records by a full time employee (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(1)). Fees for copying records are $0.10/page for letter or legal size documents. For odd-size printed documents, the actual cost of producing the documents is charged. For electronic records, the city charges the actual cost of the media on which the records or data are produced (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(2)). 
The city charges for requested records, even if not picked up (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(3)). If estimated cost of producing records is over $25.00, the clerk shall notify the requestor within three business days of the request as to the estimated amount. The city can defer search and retrieval until the requestor agrees to pay the amount. If estimated cost of producing records is over $500.00, the city requires prepayment before the search, retrieval, review or production of records (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(d)). If costs are not paid to the city for prior requests, it requires prepayment for all new requests, regardless of amount, until the previous charges are paid (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(d)). 
If records are sought as part of ongoing litigation, the request must be in writing and copied to the city attorney simultaneously. The city will prepare a duplicate set of the requested documents produced that must be provided to the city attorney unless the city attorney elects not to receive them (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(e)). Requests for emails shall contain information about the requested messages reasonably calculated to allow the clerk to locate the requested messages such as name, title, office or specific data base to be searched to assist the clerk in finding the emails (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(g)). The city shall not prepare new reports, summaries, or compilations not in existence at the time of the request (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(j)). Personal email addresses, unlisted phone numbers, cell phone numbers found in public records are exempted and will be redacted before the underlying document is released (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72(a)(20)(A)). The exemption for personal information regarding public employees, such as home address, home telephone numbers, social security numbers, birthdates, credit card information, bank account information, and similar personal data is extended to former employees as well as current employees (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72(a)(21)). 
Executive session. When any meeting is closed to the public pursuant to state law, the specific reasons for such closure shall be entered upon the official minutes, the meeting shall not be closed to the public except by a majority vote of a quorum present for the meeting, the minutes shall reflect the names of the members present and the names of those voting for closure, and that part of the minutes shall be made available to the public as any other minutes. Where a meeting is devoted in part to matters within the exceptions provided by law, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exception, privilege, or confidentiality shall be open to the public, and the minutes of such portions not subject to any such exception shall be taken, recorded, and open to public inspection as provided in state law. Executive session minutes must be kept, but are confidential unless reviewed by a court in chambers. The executive session minutes will specify each issue discussed in executive session. If matters are discussed subject to the attorney-client privilege, the fact that an attorney-client discussion occurred and the subject shall be identified, but the substance of the discussion need not be recorded or identified in the minutes (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(2)(C)). If a non-exempt topic is brought up in executive session, the mayor must immediately rule the discussion out of order. If the non-exempt discussion continues, the chairman must adjourn the meeting. When any meeting is closed to the public, the mayor and council shall execute and file with the official minutes of the meeting a notarized affidavit stating under oath that the subject matter of the meeting or the closed portion thereof was devoted to matters within the exceptions provided by law and identifying the specific relevant exception. 
Criminal penalty for violation of the Sunshine Laws is up to $1,000.00. However, the court, as an alternative, may impose civil penalties of up to $1,000.00 against a person violating the open meetings act. The penalties will increase to $2,500.00 for subsequent violations in the same calendar year. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 2-33. - Duty to attend. 
It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each regular or special meeting of the city council, unless prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(Code 1982, § 3-201) 
Sec. 2-34. - Standing committees. 
The following shall be the standing committees of the city council: 
Cemetery. 
Equipment. 
Facilities. 
Health officer. 
Pensions. 
It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor and city council, to examine any matter referred to such committee and make a prompt report or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-202; Ord. of 2-8-2005, § I; Amend. of 12-13-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 2-35. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
(a)  Rules for conduct. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised shall generally govern the conduct of council meetings, as a guideline, to the extent applicable. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any councilmember who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, for appealing from decisions of presiding officer. 
(2)  No speaker, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the presiding officer, and no one shall interrupt anyone who is speaking except to call him to order or for explanation. 
(3)  Any person not a member of the council who desires to address the council shall first secure permission of the presiding officer, then shall step up in front of the council tables, give name and address, and direct remarks to the council as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting remarks to ten minutes unless additional time is granted. 
(5)  The specific agenda item to which any comment relates must be stated and the comment should be succinct, clear, and non-repetitive. Any comment should be appropriate speech, free of inflammatory rhetoric and inappropriate statements lacking civility. 
(6)  The council is willing to receive written comment in lieu of a personal appearance and verbal statement, upon certain conditions. Any written submission must be received no later than 3:00 p.m. on the date of the scheduled meeting, and be signed and dated by the author, and provide the author's home address. 
(7)  Pursuant to Charter section 2.23, no transaction of business of the city council shall take place unless those necessary to constitute a quorum are present. 
(b)  Order of business. The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
(1)  Call to order by presiding officer with legislative prayer and pledge of allegiance; 
(2)  Notation of quorum, and names of those present shall be entered in the minutes; 
(3)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting then approval of agenda; 
(4)  Legal matters; 
(5)  Public comment; 
(6)  Reports of standing committees and special committees, respectively; 
(7)  Unfinished business; 
(8)  New business; 
(9)  Executive session if needed; and 
(10)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1982, § 3-203; Amend. of 12-13-2016, § 1) 
Secs. 2-36—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The city has adopted a retirement plan for city employees, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk/treasurer. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); zoning enforcement officer, app. A, § 11.1. 

Sec. 2-61. - Oaths. 
All officers and employees required by Charter or some other provision of law, to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of ____________ of the City of Union Point and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(Code 1982, § 3-103) 
Sec. 2-62. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the city council may require any city official, department head, or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the city council. Such bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of such duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations, or unlawful expenditures in office. The surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the city council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-63. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted. 
This code has the following purposes: (1) to encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; (2) to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; (3) to require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners affecting the city; and (4) to serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(b)  Scope of persons covered. The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all members of the city council, planning and zoning commission all advisory commissions, and committee members. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council and includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this section by the city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a council member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the council member would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: (1) the interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or (2) funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaling or exceeding $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; (3) the person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or (4) the person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(d)  Standards of conduct. 
(1)  No council member or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(2)  No council member or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(3)  No council member or member of a board or commission shall act as a agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission. 
(4)  No council member or commissioner shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(5)  No council member or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any council member or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(6)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(7)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with Georgia law. 
(8)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair in judgment or performance of city duties. 
(9)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(10)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(11)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(12)  No city official shall order any goods and/or services for the city without prior official authorization for such expenditure. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. Prohibition of conflict of interest. A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(f)  Exemptions. This code shall not be constructed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(g)  Severability. The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. 
(h)  Ethics committee. 
(1)  The city council shall appoint an ethics committee consisting of three persons. All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve a three-year term. 
(2)  Prospective members shall be identified and their names submitted to the clerk/treasurer within 30 days of the date on which a vacancy position occurs. The clerk/treasurer will sound their names at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(3)  Nominees shall be subject to an education and employment background check as well as a criminal history check. Nominees shall execute all releases necessary to accomplish the same. 
(4)  The clerk/treasurer shall assemble all relevant information and present it to the city council contemporaneously with the presentation of the nominee for consideration. 
(5)  Members of the ethics committee must be approved by at least a four-fifths vote of the city council and shall be appointed in staggered term lengths initially in such manner as to permit one term to terminate each year. The members of the ethics committee shall serve without compensation. 
(6)  The position of a member of the committee shall be deemed vacated: 
a.  Upon the expiration of his or her term; 
b.  Upon the death of a member or the disability or incapacity of a member for more than 90 days; 
c.  Upon the written resignation of the member; 
d.  By the member ceasing to be a resident of the city; or 
e.  Upon removal of the member for good cause by a majority vote of the city council. 
(7)  Ethics committee members shall be prohibited from engaging in city election political activities and from making campaign contributions to candidates in city elections during their terms as committee members. Violations of this subsection may be punished by removal from committee membership by a majority vote of the city council. 
(i)  Receipt of complaints. 
(1)  All complaints shall be verified and filed in writing with the clerk/treasurer and referred to the ethics committee. All written complaints shall contain a clear and concise statement of acts upon which the complaint is based along with an allegation that such facts constitute one or more violations of law, a reference to the statutory provision(s) allegedly violated, any further information which might support the allegations in the complaint including, but not limited to, name and address of all other persons who have firsthand knowledge of the facts alleged in the complaint and any documentary evidence that supports the facts alleged in the complaint. 
(2)  The ethics committee may require that complaints illegibly or informally drawn be reduced to a complaint in proper form. The ethics committee shall in such instance advise the complainant of the defect in the complaint and that the complaint will not be considered unless the defect is corrected. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a complaint, the ethics committee shall send a copy of the complaint to the accused affording an opportunity to respond to the complaint within seven days in writing if desired. Responses or other documents submitted by the complainant or the accused after the seven-day period may be disregarded during the preliminary investigation. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form and notice to the accused and the passage of more than seven days, the ethics committee shall within two weeks of receipt of the original complaint: 
a.  Review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to show there may be probable cause to invoke the disciplinary action or is to be considered for further investigation. 
b.  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to show there may be probable cause to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he or she might otherwise have at law or in equity against the accused. 
c.  Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
d.  Be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence, and hold hearings. The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. 
e.  Make recommendations to the city council to invoke disciplinary action as described hereinafter. 
f.  All recommendations by the ethics committee shall be taken within 30 days of receipt of the complaint. 
(j)  Service of recommendation; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
(1)  The recommendation by the ethics committee shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties in interest and to the clerk/treasurer and to the city council within five days of reaching a recommendation. Service shall be by personal service. 
(2)  The city council shall take action upon the recommendation of the ethics committee at the next regular meeting of city council following receipt of the recommendation, by holding a hearing at said meeting. Notice thereof shall be personally served upon the complainant and the accused. 
(3)  The city council shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The accused and the complainant shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(4)  Upon the conclusion of the presentation of evidence, the city council shall deliberate in public, and reach a majority decision by public vote. 
(5)  The decision of the city council shall be tendered to the accused and to the complainant within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(k)  Right to appeal. 
(1)  Any accused or complainant adversely affected by the decision may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. Decisions of the city council shall be reviewable by the county superior court upon notice in writing filed within 30 days of receipt of notice of the decision of the city council. The filing of such application shall act as a supersedeas, staying the enforcement of the decision appealed from. 
(2)  Review by the superior court shall be limited to inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the city council. 
(3)  Provided, however, no action of the city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(l)  Penalties. Any person found to have violated any provisions of this section may be subject to written and oral reprimand or public censure by the city council and/or request for resignation by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-106; Ord. of 11-14-2006; Amend. of 5-8-2007, § 1; Amend. of 12-9-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 2-64. - Personnel management system. 
There is hereby adopted by reference for the purpose of establishing a comprehensive personnel management system, the ordinance entitled "An Ordinance to Provide For The Adoption Of A Personnel Ordinance To Include Personnel Policies, A Position Classification, And A Pay Plan For The City of Union Point, Georgia," with all appendices thereto. Copies of the referenced ordinance are on file in the office of the clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1982, § 3-303; Ord. of 10-12-2004(2)) 
Secs. 2-65—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-91. - Departmental organization. 
The administrative service of the city shall be comprised of the following departments and heads thereof: 

 
(Code 1982, § 3-401) 
Sec. 2-92. - Public works department. 
(a)  Composition. The public works department shall consist of the public works superintendent, who shall be the head of the department, and all officers and employees assigned thereto by the city council or its designee. 
(b)  Appointment of superintendent. The public works superintendent shall be appointed by the city council and shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department, subject to the control of the city council or its designee. 
(Code 1982, § 3-402) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78. 
Sec. 2-93. - Fire department. 
(a)  Composition. The fire department shall be a voluntary organization and shall consist of a fire chief, an assistant fire chief, and a suitable staff of volunteer firemen. The volunteer firemen shall be chosen by the fire chief and assistant fire chief, by and with the advice and consent of the fire committee. The city council shall have full authority to dismiss any volunteer firemen for cause. 
(b)  Election of fire chief, assistant fire chief, and other officers. The fire chief shall be elected by the city council, upon the recommendation of the volunteer firemen. The assistant chief, captain, and all other officers shall be elected by a majority vote of the members of the volunteer fire department. 
(c)  Oaths. The fire chief, assistant fire chief, and all firemen shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed in section 2-61 before entering upon the discharge of their duties. 
(d)  Use of equipment beyond city limits. Use of the firefighting equipment beyond the city limits shall be permitted in accordance with agreement for fire protection in the county. 
(e)  Compensation. The city council shall determine the compensation for the members of the volunteer fire department as necessary. 
(f)  Rules and regulations. Subject to approval by the city council, the volunteer fire department may formulate rules and regulations governing the matters of fire drills and other procedures in connection with the use, operation, and maintenance of the firefighting equipment, provided such rules and regulations are not in conflict with this section. 
(Code 1982, § 3-403) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
Sec. 2-94. - Police department. 
(a)  Composition. The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other policemen as may be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Police chief. 
(1)  Appointment. The police chief shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve as the head of the police department subject always to the rules and regulations established by such authority. 
(2)  Bond and oath. The police chief shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, execute a bond as required by the city council and take and subscribe to the oath prescribed in section 2-61. 
(Code 1982, § 3-404) 
Secs. 2-95—2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-121—2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-136. - Established. 
There is hereby established a Union Point Housing Authority which shall be vested with the powers, execute the duties, and comply with all the requirements and regulations prescribed by the Housing Authorities Laws in O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 3-502) 
Secs. 2-137—2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(2). 

Sec. 2-161. - Fiscal year. 
Pursuant to the authority granted in Charter section 6.30, there is hereby established a fiscal year which shall begin on October 1 and end on September 30. 
(Code 1982, § 4-104) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The amendment of May 13, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-6, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to alcoholic beverages and derived from Ord. of 12-13-1988, §§ I—VI) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places, § 50-6. 

Sec. 6-1. - Malt beverages and wine pouring licenses for consumption on the premises. 
In accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia, it is necessary and expedient for the City of Union Point, to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations in regard to the sale, tax and control of malt beverages and wine in said city. The following rules, regulations, pouring licenses, taxes and standards shall be effective once passed, and until amended and modified thereafter: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words shall be defined in this article as follows: 
Alcohol means the product of distillation of any liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include synthetic ethyl alcohol. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to all fortified wines. The sale of distilled spirits is expressly prohibited. The consumption of distilled spirits outside of personal residences is expressly prohibited. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to brandy. The sale of fortified wine is expressly prohibited. The consumption of fortified wine outside of personal residences is expressly prohibited. 
Lounge means a separate room or clearly distinguishable area where meals are not served and malt beverages and wine are served by the drink which is either connected with or part of and is adjacent to a restaurant and operated in conjunction with and under the same management as the restaurant operations. No lounges shall be permitted. 
Personal residence means a home used for residential, not business purposes, and yard surrounding the home. 
Place of business means the premises described in a pouring license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Premises means the location where a pouring licensee is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages. The premises of restaurants shall include outdoor seating areas owned or leased by the pouring licensee. 
Restaurant means any public or private place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the general public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations. Such place shall be air conditioned and contain adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and inside seating capacity for at least 40 people, and have employed a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its patrons. At least one meal per day shall be served at least five days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. The serving of such meals and food shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental to such business. A restaurant shall derive at least 75 percent of its total annual gross from food and nonalcoholic beverages sales and shall have gross food sales in excess of $100,000.00 per year. 
School means a building, publicly or privately owned, which is used for teaching or giving instruction in any subject to pupils of the school, and includes a school or division of a school below the first grade usually serving pupils of the four—six age group and fostering their natural growth and social development through constructive play, including pre-K and kindergarten programs. 
Wholesalers or wholesale distributor means any person, form or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of malt beverages and/or wine. 
Governing authority means the city council of Union Point Georgia. 
Malt beverage(s) means any beer, ale or like beverage. 
Wine means the fermented juice of any fruit or plant. 
(2)  Eligibility requirements for malt beverages and wine pouring license. 
a.  No malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be granted to any person unless such person is at least 25 years of age and has been a resident of the state for a minimum of one-year prior to filing an application for such pouring license. In the event a corporation or LLC should be an applicant and said corporation or LLC has not been incorporated and/or allowed to do business by the secretary of state in Georgia for said one-year period, then the incorporator or organizer of said corporation or LLC and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock or membership percentage of said corporation or LLC shall all have been resident of said state for one year prior to filing an application for such pouring license. If a corporation or LLC shall be an applicant, the corporation or LLC must designate a person who will be responsible for all matters regarding the operation of the business, and that person shall be at least 25 years of age. 
b.  No officials or employee of the city, or member of its governing authority shall be eligible to receive a malt beverage and wine pouring license; provided, however, that any nonprofit corporation whose earnings are purely civic and for community purposes may be organized or owned by or operated by members of the governing authority of said city, and by employees of said city as the case may be. 
c.  No malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any school building, school grounds, or college campus, any housing authority property or any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center. The 100 yards shall be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street, or highway, as provided by law. The governing authority may require each application for a malt beverage and wine pouring license to include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school, and a certificate of a registered survey or that such location complies with this chapter with reference to this section. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, the term "school building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. The term shall not apply to homes or buildings where home schooling is conducted. 
d.  A separate malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be required for each such place of business. 
e.  No malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with all resolutions and ordinances of the city, and regulations of the state revenue commissioner and state laws. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval, when completed, by the city building inspector. Each applicant for a license must provide evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease, if the applicant is leasing the building. 
f.  No applicant for a pouring license, including shareholders/members of corporations/LLC's, who has a conviction or has pled nolo contendere within the previous ten years of the date of his application to a felony, or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, shall be granted a pouring license. 
g.  Minimum percentage of nonbeer and nonwine product sales required. No pouring license shall be issued under this section to any public or private business or person unless such business or person derives at least 75 percent of its total annual gross sales income from the sale of products other than beer or wine. 
h.  Minimum amount of nonbeer and nonwine product sales required. No pouring license shall be issued under this section to any public or private business or person unless such business or person has total annual gross sales income from the sale of products other than beer or wine in an amount exceeding $100,000.00 per calendar year (January 1 to December 31). 
i.  The governing authority, in its reasonable discretion, may consider any and all relevant circumstances which may reflect favorable or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business if in its reasonable judgment, circumstances are such that the granting, suspension or revocation of the pouring license would or would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for the decision of the governing authority. The decision shall be made within 60 days. 
(3)  Applications. Application for a malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be made on forms furnished by the governing authority as follows: 
a.  A pouring license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such pouring license may be renewed. A pouring licensee who desires to continue in business during a subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year prior to December 15 of the preceding year. 
b.  In addition to the completion and submission of application form as required by the governing authority, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed form with all attachments and requirements for a state pouring license. 
c.  Before any malt beverage and wine pouring license is granted, the applicant must post with the governing authority, along with his application, a performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond is to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the pouring licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this section. Upon the violation of this section, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the governing authority. Said bond is to be approved by the governing authority and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $2,500.00 for a wholesale license and $500.00 for a pouring license. In lieu of the $500.00 bond required hereinabove, the city will accept a letter of credit or a certificate of deposit from a FDIC insured bank in the amount of $500.00. 
d.  All applications for a malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be presented in person. 
(4)  Pouring license fee for sales of malt beverages and wine. 
a.  The annual fee for a malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be $500.00 per annum and shall be paid prior to the issuance of such pouring license, said fee to accompany the application and shall be either in cash or bank certified check. All pouring licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year they were granted. No pouring license fee shall be prorated. No partial pouring licenses either for malt beverage or for wine sales shall be issued, nor may they be assumed by any pouring licensee because the potential pouring licensee does not intend to sell one or the other. The issuance of pouring license for either the sale of malt beverage or wine or both must be preceded by the payment of the full fee of $500.00 upon application for said pouring license. 
b.  In addition to said annual malt beverage and wine pouring license fee required there is hereby levied an excise tax computed as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § § 3-6-50, 3-5-60, 3-5-60 and 3-5-80 with the following addition: 
1.  Wine sales. Wine shall be taxed at the rate of $.22 per liter and proportionate taxes at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. 
2.  Beer sales. 
i.  Malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, shall be at a rate of $6.00 on each container sold, containing not more than 15½ gallons; and 
ii.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(5)  Wholesalers. 
a.  Any wholesale distributor in malt beverages and wine licensed by the state or the agent of such licensed wholesale distributor, may be granted a permit to distribute such malt beverages and wine in the city, upon application of such permit to the city clerk/treasurer, upon the presentation of evidence satisfactory to said city that the applicant understands and will comply with all terms and conditions and provisions of the section governing the sale of malt beverages and wine in the city, as said section may be amended, including, but not limited to, those under which licenses are issued, and upon payment of an annual fee of $2,500,00. 
b.  Permit fees and performance bonds required. All wholesale distributors doing business in the city shall also be required to provide with the aforesaid application, a performance bond in the amount of $2,500.00 in cash or with security satisfactory and payable to the city council. 
c.  Pouring licensees cannot operate as wholesalers. No pouring licensee shall keep any malt beverages or wine stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby malt beverages or wine ordered by him by any licensed wholesaler. A pouring licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of malt beverages and wine at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business. 
(6)  Telephone. A pouring licensee shall maintain on the licensed premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
(7)  Sundays. On all Sundays, all pouring licensees shall fully cover with opaque material or put under lock and key all malt beverages and/or wine on the premises of the pouring licensee. 
(8)  Transportation. 
a.  All malt beverages transported or delivered to a pouring licensee in the city, shall be packaged in the following manner, to-wit: 7, 8 or 12 oz. sealed containers packaged 4, 6 or 12 per package; 16 oz. sealed containers packaged 6 per package; 24 oz. sealed containers packaged only by the full case; 32 oz. sealed containers packaged only by the case; and draft beer in sealed containers which contain ½ barrel (15½ gal.). One-quarter barrel (7-3/4 gal.) or any other size as draft beer is normally sold, transported and delivered in sealed containers within the state. 
b.  All wine transported or delivered to a pouring licensee in the city, shall be packaged in containers specified in the standards of fill for wine prescribed by the Department of the Treasury of the United States for wines shipped in interstate commerce. The federal regulations relating to standards of fill for wine are adopted and incorporated by reference in this paragraph. Wines manufactured and produced in the state shall be exempt from the provisions of this paragraph to the extent that they are exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-6-28 as amended from time to time. 
(9)  Pouring licensee qualifications. The following additional requirements shall be considered in all decisions pertaining to the issuance or denial of pouring licenses hereunder: 
a.  All applicants for a pouring license must show financial responsibility. The council may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. The form of the application shall be set by the council, and must be fully completed by the applicant and filed by the applicant with the clerk/treasurer. 
b.  No officials or employees of the city shall be eligible to receive a pouring license. 
c.  All applicants for a pouring license must be the owner or lessee of the premises to be used for the sale and consumption of malt beverages and wine, and must provide evidence of ownership of the premises in the form of a fully executed deed in recordable form, or, if applicant is leasing the premises, the applicant must provide a copy of the lease. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  All applicants for a pouring license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of good character. Furthermore, corporate or firm applicants shall also be of good business reputation. 
f.  A pouring license may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a pouring license for any reason whatsoever. 
g.  The council, in its reasonable discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in the reasonable judgment of the council circumstances are such that the granting of the pouring license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
h.  A corporate pouring license applicant shall appoint and designate to the council an agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of the state. If no such designation is made, the council may serve or notify the applicant or pouring license holder at any address of the applicant or pouring license holder known to the council. 
i.  The council shall give notice in writing to the applicant of any decision to grant or deny an application. The notice shall give the reason(s) for the decision. 
j.  Whenever the council shall deny an application for a pouring license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of the denial to request a hearing before the council. The applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(10)  Delivery and sales of malt beverages and/or wines. 
a.  No pouring licensee shall sell or deliver any malt beverages and/or wine to any person except in said licensee's place of business. 
b.  No pouring licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any malt beverages or wine as follows: 
1.  At any times except between 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily, Monday through and including Saturday. 
2.  At any time in violation of state law, state rules or regulations, local ordinances or regulations of the governing authority. 
c.  No person knowingly and intentionally offer for sale, sell, barter, exchange, give, provide or furnish malt beverages or wine to any person who is confined in any jail, penal institution, correction facility, prison camp, penitentiary, or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is an inmate of the central state hospital, or is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said person. 
d.  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
e.  The holder of a pouring license to sell malt beverages and wine shall post in a conspicuous place in his establishment a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "Sale of malt beverages and wine to persons under 21 years strictly prohibited" and "Sale of malt beverages and wine on Sundays strictly prohibited." 
f.  The holder of a pouring license to sell malt beverages and wine shall require proof of age with each and every sale under the pouring license, without exception. 
(11)  Copy of section. All holders of a pouring license for the sale of malt beverages and wine shall keep a copy of this section in his premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and each pouring licensee, or his agents selling malt beverages and/or wine shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The pouring licensees shall be responsible for any acts of agents and employees which are in violation of this section or of the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioners. 
(12)  Inspections. The business premises of the holder of a malt beverages and wine pouring license for the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(13)  False statement. The making of any statement on an application for pouring license to sell malt beverages and wine which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of said pouring license. 
(14)  Gambling. There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machine, slot machines, pin-ball machines, lotteries, or tickets of chance therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any pouring licensee's place of business or any room adjoining the same, owned, leased, or controlled by the pouring licensee, with the exception of the participation in chapter 27 of title 50, the "Georgia Lottery for Education Act" as regulated by the board of directors of the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(15)  Display of pouring license. Pouring licenses under this section shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(16)  Reports. 
a.  Each pouring licensee under this section shall as a condition of maintaining such pouring license, provide for the clerk/treasurer's inspection within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter: 
1.  A sworn statement of the pouring licensee's sales during the preceding calendar quarter on forms approved by the city. The forms for such quarterly verified statements shall reflect the pouring licensee's gross dollar sales amount for total sales for the applicable calendar quarter, the gross dollar sales amount for malt beverages and wine for the applicable calendar quarter, and gross dollar sales amount for food items for the applicable calendar quarter. 
2.  Certified copies of the pouring licensee's state department of revenue sales and use tax monthly reports as filed with the state department of revenue for each month during the respective calendar quarter. 
b.  Any sale of a food or beverage containing any malt beverage and wine shall be deemed to be a sale solely of a malt beverage and wine; such sale shall not be included as "food sale" in the quarterly reports. The fact that the sale of food during any calendar quarter exceeds by three times the sales of malt beverages and wine shall not be conclusive that the pouring licensee is meeting the requirements of operating a restaurant as defined in this section. However, the failure of the food sales to so exceed by three times the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be prima facie evidence that the establishment is not meeting the definition of a restaurant. 
c.  The quarterly statements shall be confidential in nature and shall not be open for public inspection except as otherwise required by law. Said forms shall be used solely by the city for determination of whether or not the pouring licensee remains qualified to hold its pouring license. Failure to timely file such statements shall be a violation of a city ordinance punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 and cause for revocation of the pouring license granted under this section. 
(17)  Pouring license suspension and revocation. No person shall engage in the sale of malt beverages or wine in the city without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this section. Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this section shall be subject to revocation of his pouring license and punishment as prescribed by the governing authority. In addition to the rules and regulations hereinabove set out each pouring licensee doing business in the city under this section shall comply with all state laws, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale of distribution of malt beverages and wine in the state, and any violation of same shall subject the pouring licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his malt beverage and wine pouring license and also shall subject said pouring licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances and resolutions of the governing authority. Any action taken by the city council to suspend or revoke a pouring license issued under this chapter shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and/or ordinances of the city, the state and/or the United States. 
(18)  Due process. The granting or refusal and the suspension or revocation of the pouring licenses under the provisions of this section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
a.  The provisions of this section as same may be amended shall constitute ascertainable standards upon which all decisions pertaining to these pouring licenses shall be based; 
b.  All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking such pouring licenses shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant; and 
c.  Upon application in writing to the clerk/treasurer within 30 days of the adverse action, any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city council regarding a pouring license, shall be afforded, within 60 days thereafter, a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. The city council shall render a decision within 35 days thereafter. 
(19)  Pouring license nontransferable. No malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. In the event that pouring licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the new owner or occupant to apply for a pouring license which may or may not be granted. 
(20)  Sales to minors. 
a.  The term "minor" as used in this section shall mean any person under the age of 21 years, or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 or by other state laws. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase malt beverages and/or wine for a minor. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain malt beverages to and/or wine to which he is not legally entitled. 
d.  No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sale of malt beverages and/or wine to minors. 
e.  Any violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and the offender, upon being found guilty, shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor, and by possible forfeiture of pouring license. 
(21)  Exceptions on sales to minors. The prohibition contained in this section to individuals under the age of 21 shall not apply with respect to the possession of malt beverages, wine and/or any other alcoholic beverage for consumption in the following instances: 
a.  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; or 
b.  At a religious ceremony. 
(22)  Display of signs. Outside advertising is prohibited. No pouring licensee shall use signs, or any other visible means of advertising the sale of malt beverages or wines, on the outside of the building in which the business of a pouring licensee is located, or any other building. No pouring licensee shall use blinking signs to advertise the sale of malt beverages or wines within the premises. 
(23)  Posting of warnings. The pouring licensee shall also post in a conspicuous place in the pouring licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: 
"Warning: Drinking Alcoholic Beverages During Pregnancy Can Cause Birth Defects." 
(24)  Production of records. In conjunction with any pouring license application or any pouring license issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any pouring license or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this section, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the council shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or pouring licensee. Said subpoena right shall be had for the purposes of auditing the records of such applicant or pouring licensee, securing compliance by such pouring licensee with the provisions of this section, proving or disproving violation of any part of this section by any pouring licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or me like due hereunder. 
(25)  Delivery. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee to make delivery of any malt beverage and wine except inside of the premises or area licensed for the sale thereof. 
(26)  Criminal record. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee to knowingly allow any person with a criminal record for violence or disorder to frequent the premises or loiter on the premises. 
(27)  Prostitution. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee to knowingly allow any person to frequent the pouring licensee's premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. 
(28)  Police reports. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee to fail to report to the police at the earliest possible time known incidents of a criminal nature that happen on the pouring licensee's premises. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee to willfully withhold from the police (any information pertaining to any crime that may have happened on the premises. 
(29)  Police records. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee to employ on the premises any person who in the preceding ten years has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state or who has been convicted of a crime outside the state which would be a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state. It shall also be unlawful for any pouring licensee to knowingly allow any criminal act to be committed on the premises. No applicant or pouring licensee shall have been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to, within ten years of the date of application, a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any crime relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. If the applicant or pouring licensee is a partnership, all members of such partnership must meet this requirement. If the applicant or pouring licensee is a corporation, all stockholders and officers of the corporation must meet this requirement. 
(30)  Containers. It shall be unlawful for pouring licensees or their agents or employees to add to the contents of a container or to refill empty containers or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any malt beverage and wine. 
(31)  Conditions of premises. 
a.  All premises used for the sale or consumption of malt beverages and wine and/or for the storage of malt beverages and wine shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the regulations of the county health department. 
b.  All premises shall be subject to inspection by the county health department, the fire department, the building inspector, and any authorized law enforcement officers to determine if the premises are in compliance with all city, county and state rules, regulations, laws, and codes. 
(32)  Promotions. No pouring licensee or employee or agent of a pouring licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of malt beverages and wine: 
a.  The giving away of any ticket, token or any other item that can be exchanged for any malt beverage or wine upon the purchase of any other malt beverage or wine; 
b.  The sale of two or more malt beverages or wine for a single price, or the sale of one serving of malt beverage or wine with a ticket, token or any other items redeemable for a subsequent serving of malt beverage or wine. Also prohibited hereunder is the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(33)  Prohibited acts. No pouring licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring onto the premises one or more alcoholic beverages purchased elsewhere, nor shall any such pouring licensee authorize or permit any patron or customer to take out of the premises one or more alcoholic beverages. No pouring licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises except a law enforcement officer or other person authorized by federal or state law to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises, nor shall the pouring licensee act as a keeper, bailee or custodian of any kind of deadly weapon or firearm for any customer or patron. 
(34)  Pouring licenses. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, any business or restaurant or food service establishment in the city, which has purchased a pouring license as heretofore described under this section, may also purchase a pouring license for malt beverages and wine. All applicants must be persons who shall operate as the proposed pouring licensed place of business a "restaurant" as defined in this section. No lounges shall be permitted. The fee for the pouring license shall be $300.00 per year or any fraction of a year thereof, and the pouring license period shall run from January 1 to December 31. No establishment which shall sell groceries in the same room as the restaurant or have amusement devices shall be eligible for a pouring license. A restaurant or a food service establishment is must sell meals to customers. Sale of snack type foods or quick order type foods shall not qualify. The issuance of a pouring license shall be reasonably determined by the governing authority using the criteria and standards set forth hereinabove particularly in subsections (2), (3) and (9) hereinabove. The city shall look to the best interests of the general public. Under no circumstances may any holder of a wholesale or package license allow malt beverages or wine to be consumed on said licensee's premises without being granted said pouring license. 
All pouring licensees shall remove or cause to be removed from the area of the premises utilized by the customers or patrons all malt beverages and wine at least one-half hour before closing. 
A person holding a valid state pouring license for the sale of any beverage alcohol where such products are consumed on the premises and a valid package sales pouring license at locations where the premises of each place of business is contiguous to the other, may have a door between the place of business and the consumption on premises place of business subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Each place of business must hold a proper pouring license. 
b.  Each place of business must operate in compliance with all laws and regulations applicable to such business. 
c.  The door between the places of business must be closed and locked during days and hours when the operation of either place of business is prohibited. 
d.  Each place of business must have a separate entrance for the public and no common entrance shall be permitted. 
e.  Each place of business shall have a trade name which shall not be the same for both places of business. 
f.  Any storage room for the place of business shall be in compliance with all rules and regulations pertaining to such place of business. 
g.  A sale may not be consummated or delivery made of package beer or wine except in the place of business. 
h.  Only the pouring licensee of each place of business or his employees shall be permitted ingress and egress through the passage-way or door separating the two places of business, and all such persons must have a proper personnel statement on file with the department at all times. 
i.  A separate cash register shall be maintained in each place of business and all business transactions shall be kept separate. 
j.  The passage-way or door between the two places of business shall be located behind the bar or service counter of each place of business or otherwise so situated or maintained as to be accessible only to the pouring licensee or his employees and such passage-way or door shall not be used by customers, patrons, or any other persons not permitted by this regulation. Any connecting door or passage-way which is not located behind the bar or service counter of each place of business must be specially approved by the commissioner, and there shall be permanently affixed on or beside such door or passage-way a sign in letters at least two inches in height stating, "Employees Only May Use This Door—Revenue Regulations 560-2-3-.43". 
2.  It is the express intent of this regulation that if a package sales store is operated adjacent to an establishment which sells beer or wine for consumption on the premises as provided in section 1. of this regulation, with an inside connecting service door, such package sales store shall remain a distinct and separate business entity, and the package sales store is hereby declared to be a separate premise from the establishment which sells beer or wine for consumption on the premises. 
3.  An establishment pouring licensed to sell beer or wine for consumption on the premises in accordance with section 1. of this regulation may sell items commonly associated with such establishments including potato chips, prepared food, snacks, soft drinks, cigarettes, cigars, lighters and accessories, and similar items but shall not sell items not commonly associated with such establishments. It shall be a violation of this regulation for any pouring licensee to sell, offer to sell or keep for the purpose of sale any item not commonly associated with such establishment and such prohibited items shall include but is not limited to guns, ammunition, knives, weapons of any character, gambling paraphernalia including playing cards or dice, nonimmediately consumable items including groceries or any other items not commonly associated with the consumption of beverage alcohol or establishments pouring licensed for the sale of such beverage alcohol for consumption on the premises. 
(35)  Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall subject the offender to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation in addition to such violation being a cause for revocation or suspension of the offender's pouring license by the governing authority. 
(36)  Enforcement. By acceptance of any pouring license under this section the pouring licensee agrees that law enforcement officers of the city or any other enforcement agency which enforces the laws within the city municipality shall have the right to enter the premises of the pouring licensee for purposes of determining compliance with this section. 
(37)  Incorporation of state laws. The state laws and regulations relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages and wines in the state, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, and especially as relates to sale for consumption, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this section as if fully set out herein. 
(38)  Adult entertainment. Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city, the city council notes the conditions and occurrences generally associated with adult entertainment establishments. It is the finding of the city council that adult entertainment establishments, particularly those where alcoholic beverages are served, result in an increase in criminal behavior and create undesirable community conditions. An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, prostitution, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other counties and municipalities that permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly those in which alcoholic beverages are served. The city council also find that the increase in criminal behavior which accompanies adult entertainment establishments causes undesirable community conditions. Conditions experienced in other counties and municipalities are depression of property values in neighborhoods surrounding the adult entertainment establishment, community blight, an increased burden on and expenditure for law enforcement and an increase in the criminal case load in the judicial system due to a greater number of arrests because of the above mentioned crime problems. 
In addition to the prohibitions under state law at O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41, no alcoholic beverages may be sold in any restaurant which features performances by topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers whose performances involve erotic dancing including without limitation the simulation of sexual activities and/or erotic or lewd touching. No such adult entertainment may be located within 1,000 feet of any restaurant selling alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this subsection, distance shall be by direct measurement between property lines, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
(39)  Prostitution. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee to knowingly allow any person to frequent the pouring licensee's premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. 
(40)  "Brown bag" and "bring your own bottle" practices prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person to bring alcoholic beverages into any restaurant or similar eating facility within the city limits or for any person to permit such. 
(Amend. of 5-13-2008, § 1; Amend. of 10-14-2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-2. - Malt beverages and wine package sales. 
In accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia, it is necessary and expedient for City of Union Point, to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations in regard to the sale, tax and control of package sales of malt beverages and wine in said city. The following rules, regulations, licenses, taxes and standards shall be effective once passed, and until amended and modified thereafter: 
(1)  Definitions. See the definitions in section 6-1. 
(2)  Eligibility requirements for malt beverages and wine license. 
a.  No malt beverage and wine license shall be granted to any person unless such person is at least 25 years of age and has been a resident of the state, for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. In the event a corporation or LLC should be an applicant and said corporation or LLC has not been incorporated and/or allowed to do business by the secretary of state in Georgia for said one-year period, then the incorporator or organizer of said corporation or LLC and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock or membership percentage of said corporation or LLC shall all have been resident(s) of said state for one year prior to filing an application for such license. If a corporation or LLC shall be an applicant, the corporation or LLC must designate a person of the same qualifications who will be responsible for all matters regarding the operation of the business, and that person shall be at least 25 years of age. 
b.  No officials or employee of the city or member of its governing authority shall be eligible to receive a package sales malt beverage and wine license. 
c.  No retail package malt beverage and wine sales license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church, school building, school grounds, or college campus, any housing authority property or any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center. The 100 yards shall be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street, or highway, as provided by law. The governing authority may require each application for a package malt beverage and wine sales license to include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school, and a certificate of a registered survey or that such location complies with this chapter with reference to this section. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, the term "school building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. The term shall not apply to homes or buildings where home schooling is conducted. 
d.  A separate package malt beverage and wine sales license shall be required for each such place of business. 
e.  No retail package malt beverage and wine sales license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with all resolutions and ordinances of the city and regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval, when completed, by the city building inspector. Each applicant for a retail package malt beverage and wine sales license must furnish evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease, if the applicant is leasing the building. 
f.  No applicant for said license, including shareholders/members of corporations/LLC's, who has a conviction or has pled nolo contendere within the previous ten years of the date of his application to a felony, or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, shall be granted a license. 
g.  Minimum percentage of nonbeer and nonwine product sales required. No license shall be issued under this section to any public or private business or person unless such business or person derives at least 75 percent of its total annual gross sales income from the sale of products other than beer or wine. 
h.  Minimum amount of nonbeer and nonwine product sales required. No license shall be issued under this section to any public or private business or person unless such business or person has total annual gross sales income from the sale of products other than beer or wine in an amount exceeding $100,000.00 per calendar year (January 1 to December 31). 
i.  The governing authority, in its reasonable discretion, may consider any and all relevant circumstances which may reflect favorable or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business if in its reasonable judgment, circumstances are such that the granting, suspension or revocation of the license would or would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for the decision of the governing authority. The decision shall be made within 60 days. 
(3)  Applications. Application for a retail package sales malt beverage and wine license shall be made on forms furnished by the governing authority as follows: 
a.  A retail package malt beverage and wine sales license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during a subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year prior to December 15 of the preceding year. 
b.  In addition to the completion and submission of application form as required by the governing authority, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. 
c.  Before any retail package malt beverage and wine sales license is granted, the applicant must post with the governing authority, along with his application, a performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond is to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this section. Upon the violation of this section, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the governing authority. Said bond is to be approved by the governing authority and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $2,500.00 for a wholesale license and $500.00 for a package sales license. In lieu of the $500.00 bond required hereinabove, the city will accept a letter of credit or a certificate of deposit from a FDIC insured bank in the amount of $500.00. 
d.  All applications for a retail package malt beverage and wine sales license shall be presented in person. 
(4)  License fee for sales of malt beverages and wine. 
a.  The annual fee for a retail package malt beverage and wine package sales license shall be $500.00 per annum and shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license, said fee to accompany the application and shall be either in cash or bank certified check. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year they were granted. No license fee shall be prorated. No partial licenses either for malt beverage or for wine sales shall be issued, nor may they be assumed by any licensee because the potential licensee does not intend to sell one or the other. The issuance of license for either the sale of malt beverage or wine or both must be preceded by the payment of the full fee of $500.00 upon application for said license. 
b.  In addition to said annual malt beverage and wine liquor license fee required, there is also hereby levied an excise tax computed as prescribed in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-50, 3-5-60, 3-5-60 and 3-5-80 with the following addition: 
1.  Wine sales. Wine shall be taxed at the rate of $.22 per liter and proportionate taxes at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. 
2.  Beer sales. 
i.  Malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, shall be at a rate of $6.00 on each container sold, containing not more than 15½ gallons; and 
ii.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(5)  Wholesalers. 
a.  Any wholesale distributor in malt beverages and wine licensed by the state or the agent of such licensed wholesale distributor, may be granted a permit to distribute such malt beverages and wine in the city upon application of such permit to the clerk/treasurer of the city, upon the presentation of evidence satisfactory to said city that the applicant understands and will comply with all terms and conditions and provisions of the section governing the sale of malt beverages and wine in the city, as said section may be amended, including, but not limited to, those under which package sales licenses are issued, and upon payment of an annual fee of $2,500.00. 
b.  Permit fees and performance bonds required. All wholesale distributors doing business in the city shall also be required to provide with the aforesaid application, a performance bond in the amount of $2,500.00 in cash or with security satisfactory and payable to the city council. 
c.  Licensed package malt beverage and wine sellers cannot operate as wholesalers. No package seller shall keep any malt beverages or wine stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby malt beverages or wine ordered by him are warehoused or stored by any licensed wholesaler. A package seller shall keep no inventory or stock of malt beverages and wine at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business. 
(6)  Telephone. A package sales licensee shall maintain on the licensed premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
(7)  Sundays. On all Sundays, all package sales licensees shall fully cover with opaque material or put under lock and key all malt beverages and/or wine on the premises of the licensee. 
(8)  Transportation. 
a.  All malt beverages transported or delivered to a package sales licensee in the city shall be package in the following manner, to-wit: 7, 8 or 12 oz. sealed containers package 4, 6 or 12 per package; 16 oz. sealed containers package 6 per package; 24 oz. sealed containers package only by the full case; 32 oz. sealed containers package only by the case; and draft beer in sealed containers which contain ½ barrel (15 ½ gal.). One-quarter barrel (7-3/4 gal.) or any other size as draft beer is normally sold, transported and delivered in sealed containers within the state. 
b.  All wine transported or delivered to a package sales licensee in the city shall be package in containers specified in the standards of fill for wine prescribed by the Department of the Treasury of the United States for wines shipped in interstate commerce. The federal regulations relating to standards of fill for wine are adopted and incorporated by reference in this paragraph. Wines manufactured and produced in the state shall be exempt from the provisions of this paragraph to the extent that they are exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-6-28 as amended from time to time. 
(9)  Licensee qualifications. The following additional requirements shall be considered in all decisions pertaining to the issuance or denial of licenses hereunder: 
a.  All applicants must show financial responsibility. The council may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. The form of the application shall be set by the council, and must be fully completed by the applicant and filed by the applicant with the clerk/treasurer. 
b.  No officials or employees of the city shall be eligible to receive a pouring license. 
c.  All applicants must be the owner or lessee of the premises to be used for the sale of malt beverages and wine, and must provide evidence of ownership of the premises in the form of a fully executed deed in recordable form, or, if applicant is leasing the premises, the applicant must provide a copy of the lease. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  All applicants must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of good character. Furthermore, corporate or firm applicants shall also be of good business reputation. 
f.  A license may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
g.  The council, in its reasonable discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in the reasonable judgment of the council circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
h.  A corporate license applicant shall appoint and designate to the council an agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of the state. If no such designation is made, the council may serve or notify the applicant or license holder at any address of the applicant or license holder known to the council. 
i.  The council shall give notice in writing to the applicant of any decision to grant or deny an application. The notice shall give the reason(s) for the decision. 
j.  Whenever the council shall deny an application, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of the denial to request a hearing before the council. The applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(10)  Delivery and sales of malt beverages and/or wines. 
a.  No package sales licensee shall sell or deliver any malt beverages and/or wine to any person except in said package sales licensee's place of business. 
b.  No package sales licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any malt beverages or wine as follows: 
1.  At any times except between 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. daily, Monday through and including Saturday. 
2.  At any time in violation of state law, state rules or regulations, local ordinances or regulations of the governing authority. 
c.  No person knowingly and intentionally offer for sale, sell, barter, exchange, give, provide or furnish malt beverages or wine to any person who is confined in any jail, penal institution, correction facility, prison camp, penitentiary, or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is an inmate of the central state hospital, or is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said person. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  The holder of a license to sell malt beverages and wine shall post in a conspicuous place in his establishment a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "Sale of malt beverages and wine to persons under 21 years strictly prohibited" and "Sale of malt beverages and wine on Sundays strictly prohibited." 
f.  The holder of a license to sell malt beverages and wine shall require proof of age with each and every sale under the license, without exception. 
g.  As prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26, no package sales dealer shall knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the premises where sold. 
(11)  Copy of section. All holders of a license for the sale of malt beverages and wine shall keep a copy of this section in his premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee, or his agents selling malt beverages and/or wine shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensees shall be responsible for any acts of agents and employees which are in violation of this section or of the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioners. 
(12)  Inspections. The business premises of the holder of a package sales malt beverages and wine license for the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(13)  False statement. The making of any statement on an application for license to sell malt beverages and wine which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. 
(14)  Gambling. There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machine, slot machines, pin-ball machines, lotteries, or tickets of chance therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensed package seller's place of business or any room adjoining the same, owned, leased, or controlled by license, with the exception of the package seller's participation in chapter 27 of title 50, the "Georgia Lottery for Education Act" as regulated by the board of directors of the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(15)  Display of license. Licenses under this section shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(16)  Reports. 
a.  Each licensee under this section shall as a condition of maintaining such license, provide for the clerk/treasurer's inspection within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter: 
1.  A sworn statement of the licensee's sales during the preceding calendar quarter on forms approved by the city. The forms for such quarterly verified statements shall reflect the licensee's gross dollar sales amount for total sales for the applicable calendar quarter, the gross dollar sales amount for malt beverages and wine for the applicable calendar quarter, and gross dollar sales amount for nonbeer and wine items for the applicable calendar quarter. 
2.  Certified copies of the licensee's state department of revenue sales and use tax monthly reports as filed with the state department of revenue for each month during the respective calendar quarter. 
b.  Any sale of a food or beverage containing any malt beverage and wine shall be deemed to be a sale solely of a malt beverage and wine; such sale shall not be included as "nonbeer and wine sale" in the quarterly reports. The fact that the sale of nonbeer and wine items during any calendar quarter exceeds by three times the sales of malt beverages and wine shall not be conclusive that the licensee is meeting the requirements of operating a restaurant as defined in this section. However, the failure of the nonbeer and wine sales to so exceed by three times the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be prima facie evidence that the establishment is not meeting the requirements. 
c.  The quarterly statements shall be confidential in nature and shall not be open for public inspection except as otherwise required by law. Said forms shall be reviewed solely for determination of whether or not the licensee remains qualified to hold its license. Failure to timely file such statements shall be a violation of a city ordinance punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 and cause for revocation of the license granted under this section. 
(17)  License suspension and revocation. No person shall engage in the package sale of malt beverages and wine [in the] city, without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this section. Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this section shall be subject to revocation of his license and punishment as prescribed by the governing authority. In addition to the rules and regulations hereinabove set out each licensee doing business in the city, under this section shall comply with all state laws, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale of distribution of malt beverages and wine in the state, and any violation of same shall subject the licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his package malt beverage and wine sales license and also shall subject said licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances and resolutions of the governing authority. Any action taken by the city council to suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and/or ordinances of the city, the state and/or the United States. 
(18)  Due process. The granting or refusal and the suspension or revocation of the package sales and wholesale and pouring permits and licenses under the provisions of this section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
a.  The provisions of this section as same may be amended shall constitute ascertainable standards upon which all decisions pertaining to these licenses shall be based; 
b.  All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking such licenses shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant; and 
c.  Upon application in writing to the clerk/treasurer within 30 days of the adverse action, any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city council regarding a license shall be afforded, within 60 days thereafter, a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. The city council shall render a decision within 35 days thereafter. 
(19)  License nontransferable. No package malt beverage and wine sales license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. In the event that licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the new owner or occupant to apply for a license which may or may not be granted. 
(20)  Sales to minors. 
a.  The term "minor" as used in this section shall mean any person under the age of 21 years, or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 or by other state laws. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase malt beverages and/or wine for a minor. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain malt beverages to and/or wine to which he is not legally entitled. 
d.  No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sale of malt beverages and/or wine to minors. 
e.  Any violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and the offender, upon being found guilty, shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor, and by possible forfeiture of license. 
(21)  Exceptions on sales to minors. The prohibition contained in this section to individuals under the age of 21 shall not apply with respect to the possession of malt beverages, wine and/or any other alcoholic beverage for consumption in the following instances: 
a.  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; 
b.  At a religious ceremony; or 
c.  In the individual's home with parental consent. 
(22)  Display of signs. Outside advertising is prohibited. No licensee shall use signs, or any other visible means of advertising the sale of malt beverages or wines, on the outside of the building in which the business of licensee is located, or any other building. No licensee shall use blinking signs to advertise the sale of malt beverages or wines within the premises. 
(23)  Posting of warnings. The licensee shall also post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: 
"Warning: Drinking Alcoholic Beverages During Pregnancy Can Cause Birth Defects." 
(24)  Production of records. In conjunction with any license application or any license issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this section, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the council shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or licensee. Said subpoena right shall be had for the purposes of auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this section, proving or disproving violation of any part of this section by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or me like due hereunder. 
(25)  Delivery. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make delivery of any malt beverage and wine except inside of the premises or area licensed for the sale thereof. 
(26)  Criminal record. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person with a criminal record for violence or disorder to frequent the premises or loiter on the premises. 
(27)  Prostitution. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person to frequent the licensee's premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. 
(28)  Police reports. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report to the police at the earliest possible time known incidents of a criminal nature that happen on the licensee's premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to willfully withhold from the police (any information pertaining to any crime that may have happened on the premises. 
(29)  Police records. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ on the premises any person who in the preceding ten years has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state or who has been convicted of a crime outside the state which would be a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state. It shall also be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any criminal act to be committed on the premises. No applicant or licensee shall have been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to, within ten years of the date of application, a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any crime relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. If the applicant or licensee is a partnership, all members of such partnership must meet this requirement. If the applicant or licensee is a corporation, all stockholders and officers of the corporation must meet this requirement. 
(30)  Containers. It shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents or employees to add to the contents of a container or to refill empty containers or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any malt beverage and wine. 
(31)  Conditions of premises. 
a.  All premises used for the sale of malt beverages and wine and/or for the storage of malt beverages and wine shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the regulations of the county health department. 
b.  All premises shall be subject to inspection by the county health department, the fire department, the building inspector, and any authorized law enforcement officers to determine if the premises are in compliance with all city, county and state rules, regulations, laws, and codes. 
(32)  Promotions. No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of malt beverages and wine: 
a.  The giving away of any ticket, token or any other item that can be exchanged for any malt beverage or wine upon the purchase of any other malt beverage or wine; 
b.  The sale of two or more malt beverages or wine for a single price, or the sale of one serving of malt beverage or wine with a ticket, token or any other items redeemable for a subsequent serving of malt beverage or wine. 
(33)  Prohibited acts. No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to consume on the premises any alcoholic beverages. 
(34)  Pouring licenses. Malt beverages and/or wine sold pursuant to a license granted under this article will be for consumption only off the premises of the licensee. A pouring license is required for on premises consumption. 
A person holding a valid state license for the sale of any beverage alcohol where such products are consumed on the premises and a valid package sales license at locations where the premises of each place of business is contiguous to the other, may have a door between the retail place of business and the consumption on premises place of business subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Each place of business must hold a proper license; 
b.  Each place of business must operate in compliance with all laws and regulations applicable to such business; 
c.  The door between the places of business must be closed and locked during days and hours when the operation of either place of business is prohibited; 
d.  Each place of business must have a separate entrance for the public and no common entrance shall be permitted; 
e.  Each place of business shall have a trade name which shall not be the same for both places of business; 
f.  Any storage room for the retail place of business shall be in compliance with all rules and regulations pertaining to such retail place of business; 
g.  A sale may not be consummated or delivery made of package beer or wine except in the retail place of business; 
h.  Only the licensee of each place of business or his employees shall be permitted ingress and egress through the passage-way or door separating the two places of business, and all such persons must have a proper personnel statement on file with the department at all times; 
i.  A separate cash register shall be maintained in each place of business and all business transactions shall be kept separate; 
j.  The passage-way or door between the two places of business shall be located behind the bar or service counter of each place of business or otherwise so situated or maintained as to be accessible only to the licensee or his employees and such passage-way or door shall not be used by customers, patrons, or any other persons not permitted by this regulation. Any connecting door or passage-way which is not located behind the bar or service counter of each place of business must be specially approved by the commissioner, and there shall be permanently affixed on or beside such door or passage-way a sign in letters at least two inches in height stating, "Employees Only May Use This Door—Revenue Regulations 560-2-3-.43". 
2.  It is the express intent of this regulation that if a package sales store is operated adjacent to an establishment which sells beer or wine for consumption on the premises as provided in section 1. of this regulation, with an inside connecting service door, such package sales store shall remain a distinct and separate business entity, and the package sales store is hereby declared to be a separate premise from the establishment which sells beer or wine for consumption on the premises. 
3.  An establishment licensed to sell beer or wine for consumption on the premises in accordance with section 1. of this regulation may sell items commonly associated with such establishments including potato chips, prepared food, snacks, soft drinks, cigarettes, cigars, lighters and accessories, and similar items but shall not sell items not commonly associated with such establishments. It shall be a violation of this regulation for any licensee to sell, offer to sell or keep for the purpose of sale any item not commonly associated with such establishment and such prohibited items shall include but is not limited to guns, ammunition, knives, weapons of any character, gambling paraphernalia including playing cards or dice, nonimmediately consumable items including groceries or any other items not commonly associated with the consumption of beverage alcohol or establishments licensed for the sale of such beverage alcohol for consumption on the premises. 
(35)  Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall subject the offender to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation in addition to such violation being a cause for revocation or suspension of the offender's license by the governing authority. 
(36)  Enforcement. By acceptance of any license under this section the licensee agrees that law enforcement officers of the city or any other enforcement agency which enforces the laws within the city municipality shall have the right to enter the premises of the licensee for purposes of determining compliance with this section. 
(37)  Incorporation of state laws. The state laws and regulations relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages and wines in the state, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, and especially as relates to package sales, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this section as if fully set out herein. 
(38)  Adult entertainment. Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city, the city council notes the conditions and occurrences generally associated with adult entertainment establishments. It is the finding of the city council that adult entertainment establishments, particularly those where alcoholic beverages are served, result in an increase in criminal behavior and create undesirable community conditions. An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, prostitution, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other counties and municipalities that permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly those in which alcoholic beverages are served. The city council also find that the increase in criminal behavior which accompanies adult entertainment establishments causes undesirable community conditions. Conditions experienced in other counties and municipalities are depression of property values in neighborhoods surrounding the adult entertainment establishment, community blight, an increased burden on and expenditure for law enforcement, and an increase in the criminal case load in the judicial system due to a greater number of arrests because of the above mentioned crime problems. 
In addition to the prohibitions under state law at O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41, no alcoholic beverages may be sold in any restaurant which features performances by topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers whose performances involve erotic dancing including without limitation the simulation of sexual activities and/or erotic or lewd touching. No such adult entertainment may be located within 1,000 feet of any restaurant selling alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this subsection, distance shall be by direct measurement between property lines, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
(39)  Prostitution. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person to frequent the licensee's premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. 
(Amend. of 5-13-2008, § 1) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Aug. 8, 2006, amended and repealed the former Ch. 14, Arts. I, II, §§ 14-1—14-12, 14-31—14-47, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, §§ 15-201—15-212; Code 1982, §§ 15-101—15-117; Ord. of Jan. 10, 1995, §§ 1, 2(5). 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shall mean any livestock, fowl, dogs or cats. 
Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property, and is unattended or uncared for. 
Animal control officer means an employee assigned to the Animal Control Department of the Greene County Board of Commissioners duly deputized under the legal authority of the county to enforce the rules and regulations of this article. 
Animal control department means the division of animal control within the Greene County Government responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
Feral animal means an animal existing in a wild or untamed state, or having returned to an untamed state from domestication. 
Fowl shall mean chickens, quail, doves, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, ostriches, and similar fowl. 
Guard or watch dog means any dog trained by a recognized training facility for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. A recognized training facility shall be deemed to mean any person holding a state kennel license and a business license for either of the purposes described in this definition. 
Housing shall mean any building, shed, cage, pen, coop or other structure used for housing animals. Housing shall also mean any open area where animals are kept or stay. 
Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law. 
Livestock means horses, cows, goats, pigs or any other four legged animals, excluding dogs and cats, used for pleasure or profit. 
Owner means any person who owns, harbors, keeps, feeds, maintains, has lawful possession of, or knowingly causes or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises; provided, however, this shall not include a person hired or acting as custodian of the animal for his owner. 
Police officer means any City of Union Point law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests and authorized to issue citations in the City of Union Point or any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests and authorized to issue citations in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Vicious or dangerous animal means any animal that attacks, bites or injures human beings, pets, companion animals or livestock or which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure human beings, pets, companion animals or livestock, provided that the pets, companion animals, or livestock are within the property limits of the respective owner. No animal may be declared dangerous if a threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. The definition shall not be construed to include dogs that are part of a governmental organization or a trained guard dog in performance of its duties. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-2. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Cruelty shall mean and include every act whereby unnecessary or unjustified pain, suffering or death is caused, permitted or allowed to continue where there is reasonable remedy or relief. Acts of cruelty shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Whoever willfully or maliciously kills, abuses, maims, or disfigures any animal or willfully or maliciously administers poison to any animal or exposes any poisonous substance with intent that the poisonous substance shall be taken and swallowed by such animal shall be in violation of this article. Persons engaged in the practice of hunting, fishing, or trapping animals in a manner that conforms to the laws of the State of Georgia are not in violation of this subsection. 
(2)  Whoever overloads, overdoses, tortures, torments, or deprives an animal of its necessary sustenance or shelter; beats, mutilates or kills any animal or causes the same to be done; or carries in or upon vehicles or otherwise any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner shall be deemed in violation if this article. 
(3)  Whoever confines any animal and fails to supply it with sufficient quantities of wholesome food and water; who keeps any animals in any enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air; or abandons any animal to die shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(4)  No person shall: 
a.  Own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting. 
b.  Build, make, maintain, or keep a pit on premises owned by him or occupied by him or allow a pit to be built, made, maintained or kept on such premises for the purposes of an exhibition of animal fighting. 
c.  In any manner encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an exhibition of animal fighting or intentional combat. 
d.  Charge admission, be an assistant, umpire or participate or be present as a spectator to any exhibition of animal fighting or combat. 
(5)  Any animal control officer, or other officer empowered to act by law, may impound any animal found to be cruelly treated. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition all structures, pens, yards, and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-3. - Definitions—Dangerous and vicious dogs. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dangerous dog control law is as contained in O.C.G.A. 4-8-20 et seq., as amended in 2012 and thereafter, which is incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Under control means: 
(1)  Confined by fence, pen, cage, or secure enclosure to the premises of its owner; 
(2)  Secured by a leash, chain or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from the premises of the owner; or 
(3)  Located under the immediate physical control of a responsible person, provided, however, that if a dog consistently heeds its owner's verbal commands, it need not be leashed to be deemed under control, so long as it is within sight of its owner and remains responsive to its owner's verbal commands. 
Vicious animal means any animal, other than a dog, that attacks or attempts to attack without provocation a human being or domestic animal. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Amend. of 12-11-2012) 
Editor's note— An amendment of December 11, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former § 14-3 and adding new §§ 14-3 and 14-3A. Former § 14-3 pertained to vicious animals, dogs and cats, and derived from an ordinance of August 8, 2006. 
Sec. 14-3A. - Dangerous and vicious dog control. 
(a)  Animal control officer. The governing authority of each local government shall designate an individual as dog control officer to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the animal control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. Each animal control officer is authorized to make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous and vicious dogs and their owners. A law enforcement officer or dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(2)  When an animal control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the animal control officer shall per state law notify the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such. Such notice shall be dated and deemed complete upon its mailing. 
(3)  A person carrying out the duties of an animal control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests unless the person is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  As applied to the owners of dangerous and vicious dogs, the procedures provided for in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this article. 
(2)  When a dangerous dog or a vicious dog is classified as such, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such in writing mailed within 72 hours. 
(3)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
b.  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog; 
c.  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or vicious dog; 
d.  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the governing body; 
e.  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
f.  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the governing body and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the agency. 
(4)  When the governing body receives a request for a hearing as provided in this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The governing body shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the governing body shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing body may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(5)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the governing body shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided for hereinabove, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012, shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
(c)  Requirements. 
(1)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city, a dangerous dog or vicious dog without a registered dog certification issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. In addition to the requirements otherwise specified, no owner may keep a dangerous or vicious dog within 200 yards of any structure or manmade improvement that is an aquatic center, church, convenience store, day care, grocery store, hospital, humane society, library, nursing home, park, playground, restaurant, school, skilled nursing unit, or walking trail, due in part to these areas being frequented by children and senior citizens, and in some cases, having food present. No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: a serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1 or a felony of dog-fighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or a felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1, from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(2)  The animal control officer shall issue a registered dog license to a qualified owner of such dog if the owner presents to the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
a.  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous or vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dog from leaving such property; and 
b.  The posting of all entrances to the premises where the dangerous dog or vicious dog is located with clearly visible signs warning that there is a dangerous or vicious dog on the property and containing a symbol designed to inform children of the presence of a dangerous or vicious dog. 
c.  In addition to the requirements otherwise specified by section and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27, a certificate of registration for a dangerous or vicious dog shall be issued only if the dog control officer determines that the dog has been both sterilized and micro-chipped. 
(3)  In addition to the above requirements, the owner of a vicious dog shall present to the animal control officer evidence of a policy of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage inflicted by the dangerous dog. 
(4)  The owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, or has died. If a dangerous dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog who moves into the city shall register the dog within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(5)  An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
(6)  All owners of dogs shall be required to obtain an annual dog license per animal as set forth in the schedule of fees. All owners of dangerous dogs or vicious dogs shall pay an additional annual fee as established in the schedule of fees. Certificates of registration of dangerous dogs or vicious dogs shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation. 
(d)  Restraint. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a dangerous dog to be unattended with minors or the owner of such to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash not longer than six feet, and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary, or the dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate, or the dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog, subject to the limitations below. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a vicious dog to be unattended with minors or the owner of such to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate or is muzzled and is restrained by a substantial chain or leash not longer than six feet, and is under the restraint of a responsible person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person, but will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration. 
(3)  A proper enclosure must keep a dangerous dog or vicious dog securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure designed to prevent the dog from escaping and suitable to prevent the entry of young children. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured as to prevent the dog's escape. Any such enclosure shall be at least 25 feet from any water or gas meter point to protect the meter reader. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
(4)  Training, hunting, herding exemption from dangerous dog restraint/leash requirement: In addition to the requirements otherwise specified by this section and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29(a)(3), the person training the dog(s) must be the owner thereof, and doing so per all DNR requirements including without limitation a valid hunting license. Training, hunting, herding and/or predator control cannot take place off the property of the owner thereof, unless with the express written permission and acknowledgement of dangerousness of the dog granted by the owner of the land being used, and only with a dog that will instantly respond to the verbal commands of the dog's owner, including without limitation a command to immediately heel and/or return to the owner. 
(e)  Confiscation. 
(1)  A dangerous or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer in the case of any violation of this article. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(2)  Any dog that has been confiscated shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with this section within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(f)  Violations. 
(1)  The owner of a vicious dog who violates this section or whose vicious dog is subject to confiscation under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for the second conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed. 
(2)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violates this section or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $250.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $400.00 shall be imposed. 
(3)  If an owner who has a previous conviction for a violation of this section knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this section, such owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature if the owner's dog attacks or bites a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this section. The owner of a dog who is convicted for a violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(4)  An owner who knowingly and willfully fails to comply with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature if the owner's dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being under circumstances constituting a violation of this section. The owner of a dog who is convicted for a violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one year or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(5)  In addition to the penalties for violations under this section, the dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the animal control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health, and, thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(6)  No owner of a dog shall be held criminally liable under this section for injuries inflicted by said owner's dog to any human being willfully trespassing on the owner's property. 
(g)  Exceptions. A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or vicious dog within the meaning of this section. A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog within the meaning of this section if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(h)  Previously classified. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a potentially dangerous dog in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a dangerous dog or vicious dog in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. The owner of any dog referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2013. 
(Amend. of 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 14-4. - Biting dogs and cats. 
(a)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health, all dogs and cats known to have bitten a person shall be confined to the animal control shelter or veterinarian's hospital for a period of ten days. All expenses incurred shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animal. A dog or cat may be declared to be a vicious animal once proven that it has bitten a person and the owner shall be required to comply with section 14-3 of this chapter. 
(b)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of public health, all pets or wild animals, other than a dog or cat, known to have bitten a person, or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-5. - Restraint. 
(a)  Duty of all animal owners to be responsible owners. It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this article are complied with. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for the presence of any animal on the streets or public places of the city or allow the animal to run on the premises of another at any time, unless the animal is under restraint and control at all times. 
(c)  Guard or watch dogs. 
(1)  Owners or custodians of any guard or watch dog must confine all such dogs within a perimeter fence and meet the following conditions: 
a.  The fence shall be sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times. 
b.  A "beware of dog" sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure (minimum of two) as well as a sign on each ingress and egress point to the enclosure. Signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
c.  The owner or custodian shall, prior to placing dogs on property, obtain from the animal control department a registration number and distinctive identification collar for each dog. There shall be a fee for each dog for the first year and any part thereof and a renewal fee for each dog every year thereafter as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The renewal fee shall be paid by January 30 of each year. 
d.  The registration number shall be tattooed at the owner's expense on the inside of the right hind leg or inside the upper lip of the dog. The collar provided shall be worn at all times. 
e.  The owner or custodian shall report to the animal control department within 24 hours of any of the following: 
1.  Escape of the dog. 
2.  An attack on a human or animal by the dog. 
3.  Transfer of ownership of the dog. 
4.  Death of the dog. 
(2)  Any enforcement officer shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of subsection (c)(1)d. 
(d)  Failure to keep guard or watch dogs under restraint. Failure to keep any guard or watch dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-6. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon any domesticated animal within the city. Each person who does abandon, or knowingly and willfully permits such abandonment, or aids in the abandonment of any domesticated animal shall be in violation of this article and may be punished as provide in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-7. - Housing of animals. 
Sanitary enclosures required. 
(1)  All premises, enclosures or structures wherein said animals or fowl are kept shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from all obnoxious smells or substances. 
(2)  The presence of numerous flies or the presence of fly larvae in the vicinity of any such premises, enclosures or structures shall be evidence of a lack of sanitary maintenance of the premises. 
(3)  Any unnecessary accumulation of debris, refuse, manure or other removable material upon any surface within any such enclosed area or premises, or within any structure used or intended to be used for the housing of such animals or fowl, shall be evidence of a lack of sanitary maintenance of the premises. 
(4)  Any obnoxious odor or allergen arising from any condition existing within the enclosure or within any structure used or intended to be used for the housing of such animals or fowl shall be evidence of a lack of sanitary maintenance of the premises. 
(5)  All premises, enclosures or structures used or intended to be used for the keeping or housing of any such animals or fowl shall be thoroughly cleaned and all debris, refuse, manure or other removable material removed there from as often as may be necessary to effect satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this section. Enclosures housing small animals shall be cleaned of all debris, refuse, offal, manure, and filth on a daily basis. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-8. - Bees. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any bees or beehives containing bees within the city. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-9. - Vehicles containing livestock. 
It shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle containing livestock any place in the city for a period longer than three minutes, except for loading and unloading. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-10. - Bird and wild fowl sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is and is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to shoot, or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property, in the opinion of the animal control officer, those birds may be destroyed in such numbers, and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the animal control officer. 
Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalties, as noted in section 14-12. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-11. - Dead animals. 
Officers of the animal control department are authorized to remove dead animals from public property including public schools, parks and roadways. Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal or property owner or possessor in accordance with the O.C.G.A. Title 4 Chapter 5. Any dog, cat or small animal carcass to be picked up for disposal by the animal control center from a private residence must first be contained in a plastic bag and delivered to the right-of-way of the road or street for disposal. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner/possessor in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-12. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Unless otherwise stated, penalties for violation of this chapter may be imposed in the manner provided for in chapter 1, section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-13. - Wildlife. 
All complaints and matters concerning wild animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting shall be forwarded to the state department of natural resources, game and fish division, or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Law Enforcement Division, for proper disposition, i.e. compliance, apprehension, controlling and/or enforcement as may be necessary as provided by state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-14. - Public nuisance animal. 
(a)  A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal or animals that: 
(1)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner. 
(2)  Is vicious. 
(3)  Attacks without provocation. 
(4)  Excessively makes disturbing noises including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept. 
(5)  Soils or defecates on public roads, walks, or recreation areas, or on private property other than the owners', unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner. 
(6)  An animal which is not being kept in conformity with city zoning regulations. 
(7)  An animal which chases vehicles on public roads. 
(8)  An animal which molests or attacks persons on public property or private property other than that of the animal's owner, or which molests or attacks other domestic animals on private property other than that of the animal's owner. 
(b)  Any such public nuisance animal may be impounded and the owner and possessor charged for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-15. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal control department or its designee may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after five days or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to the animal control department by the owner of the animal, the animal may be offered for adoption immediately. All persons adopting animals shall be over 18 years of age and shall provide proper and humane care, feeding, shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary treatment as required. All persons adopting a fertile dog or cat shall cause to have a female spayed or a male neutered within 30 days of the date of adoption or by the maximum age of six months for a female and nine months for a male, whichever is longer. Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for breeding, exhibition or profit and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research. The frequency with which animals may be adopted and placed in any household may be restricted. 
(b)  Adoption fees in an amount stated in the schedule of fees and charges may include all or part of the costs of an examination and rabies inoculation and all or part of the costs associated with neutering or spaying dogs and cats. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-16. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal, dog or cat, seized or impounded by an animal control officer, or any officer empowered to act by law shall be detained at the animal control shelter. The officers of the animal control department shall notify the owner of such animal, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the animal has been impounded. The owner of any animal impounded may, within five days after the receipt of the notice, reclaim the animal by the payment of an impoundment fee plus boarding fee for each day the animal was impounded; and the cost of rabies vaccination of the animal if the animal has not been vaccinated within the prescribed time period. These fees, as applicable, shall also apply to biting animals held for rabies observation at the animal control shelter. 
(b)  If any animal seized or impounded by the animal control department evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the animal control department shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat the animal or euthanize; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the animal control officer shall confer with a superior on duty, in addition to writing a complete report on the reason for euthanization. This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. Every attempt will be made to stabilize an owned animal to afford the owner the opportunity to pick up the animal. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-17. - Humane disposition. 
(a)  If a dog or cat is not claimed by the owner within five days of notice to the owner, or a dog or cat of unknown ownership is not adopted within five days of impoundment, then it shall be the duty of the animal control department to euthanize the animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible. An animal deemed to be highly desirable for adoption may be kept beyond the five-day limitation, provided that the animal does not evidence any apparent signs of illness, injury, contagious or infectious diseases and that space is available to house the animal, at the discretion of the director of the division of animal control. Animals may be released by the local humane society to approved foster homes authorized to accept animals if not claimed or adopted as provided. Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes. 
(b)  Any animal which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to the period of confinement as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be destroyed by officers of the animal control department in as humane a manner as possible. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of a supervisor of the animal control department, a diseased or injured animal, taken into custody, is in need of immediate treatment so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, he shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purposes of administering necessary treatment. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-18. - Livestock. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to house livestock on a lot that is less than three acres. 
(b)  It also shall be unlawful to house more than one animal per one acre. 
(c)  All livestock shall be properly housed with an adequate food and water supply and confined within a fenced enclosure. The fenced enclosure shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any average livestock animal, for which the enclosure is designed, from escaping the enclosed compound and causing damage, accidents or injury to any person or property owners of such livestock shall be liable for any damage, accidents or injuries provided that a pattern of neglect has been determined. 
(d)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the city or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place. Such animal shall also be tied so as not to cross any property limits or boundaries without the express permission of the property owners. 
(e)  Owners or possessors of livestock or animals, other than dogs and cats impounded for violation of this article or any state and/or federal laws, will be charged in accordance with actual costs of impoundment plus impounding and boarding fees. 
(f)  Impounded livestock shall be held for a period of 21 days. If such impounded animals are not claimed by the owner during that period of time, the animal may be given to persons willing to accept them, at the discretion of the department of police services. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-19. - Required distances from other properties. 
Each person maintaining or housing livestock or fowl within the corporate limits of the city shall keep them at least 300 feet from any adjoining property line, except the property of the person maintaining or housing the livestock or fowl. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-20. - Collar, vaccination, and rabies vaccination tag. 
It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner or possessor to abide by state rules and regulations regarding identification of pets, vaccinations, and evidence of vaccinations. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-21. - Summons. 
(a)  The animal control officer or police officer at his discretion may not impound a dog or other animal found in violation of any section of this chapter, but return the animal to its owner or possessor and issue or cause to be issued a summons directing the owner or possessor of the dog to appear before the municipal court on a certain day to stand trial for the violations of this article. 
(b)  If a violation of this article has not been personally witnessed by the animal control supervisor or his authorized representative or other employee of the city, a subpoena may be issued to the person complaining to be and appear on the day and time set for trail, then and there, to testify on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-22. - Liability of the city, county, animal control department, officers and employees. 
The city, county, the animal control department and its officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries, or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at the animal control shelter. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Sec. 14-23. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the city or county vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control shelter or impounding area. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2006) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; smoking in city buildings, § 46-31 et seq.; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.; water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

Sec. 18-31. - Adoption by reference. 
(a)  The following technical building and construction codes are adopted by reference and may be amended for later editions as required by Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(1)  Standard Building Code (SBCCI); 
(2)  National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association; 
(3)  Standard Gas Code (SBCCI); 
(4)  Standard Mechanical Code (SBCCI); 
(5)  Georgia State Plumbing Code or the Standard Plumbing Code (SBCCI); 
(6)  Council of American Building Officials One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, with the exception of Part V - Plumbing (Chapters 20—25) of such code; 
(7)  Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings as adopted by the state building administrative board pursuant to 1978 Ga. Laws, page 2212; 
(8)  Standard Fire Prevention Code (SBCCI); 
(9)  Standard Housing Code (SBCCI); 
(10)  Standard Amusement Device Code (SBCCI); 
(11)  Excavation and Grading Code (SBCCI); 
(12)  Standard Existing Buildings Code (SBCCI); 
(13)  Standard Swimming Pool Code (SBCCI); and 
(14)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code (SBCCI). 
(b)  The edition of such codes as currently adopted by the state department of community affairs shall be used and enforced, except where a subsequently published edition of any such code has been adopted by the state department of community affairs, with approval of its board, or such code has been amended or revised as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23. 
(Code 1982, §§ 21-101—21-104) 
Secs. 18-32—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-62. - Residential construction restrictions. 
On or after April 1, 1992, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 2) 
Sec. 18-63. - Commercial construction restrictions. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections 18-62(1) through (5). 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 3) 
Sec. 18-64. - Repair, renovation or addition. 
The requirements of section 18-62 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 4) 
Sec. 18-65. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-62, 18-63 and 18-64 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this ordinance were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee as determined from time to time by the city council shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 5) 
Sec. 18-66. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 6) 
Secs. 18-67—18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The amendment of June 12, 2007, § 1, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 18-91—18-93, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to unsafe buildings and derived from the Ord. of 9-8-1987, §§ 1—3. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38. 

Sec. 18-91. - Purpose and authority. 
This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1, et seq. for the purpose of maintaining the health and cleanliness of the city, and to ensure safe and sanitary conditions in private property by establishing a method for enforcing minimum standards. This section is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing. Causing a dwelling, building, structure or property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures. Any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term does not include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest. Persons in possession of such property and all persons and entities who have any interest in such dwelling, building or structure, or the property on which it is situated, based on a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia, and any party who has filed a notice per O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9. 
Public authority. Any housing authority officer or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the city, county or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
Public officer. The building inspector, health department officer, the city clerk/treasurer, or any other city representative approved by the city council, who are authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this section, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other officer or officers appointed by the city council for purposes of this section. 
Repair. Altering or improving a dwelling, building, structure or property to bring it into compliance with the applicable regulations and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
Vacancy. The use of a structure or property is discontinued in excess of 30 consecutive days. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-93. - Findings and applicability. 
(a)  It is found and declared that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, structures, and properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses and not in compliance with the applicable standard codes or optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes adopted by the city; or in violation of general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. It is further found and declared that where there is a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use. This city should exercise its police power to repair, close or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings or structures and/or cause the repair of such conditions or the cessation of such use in the manner provided in this section. 
(b)  All the provisions hereof may also be applied to private property where there is an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this section. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Sec. 18-94. - Unlawful to own. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property in the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with this section and all applicable codes in force in the city including such regulations which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner, whether directly or through an agent, to own any structure or property which is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or is otherwise in violation of this section. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-95. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  When a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use or when it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists the following described action shall be taken. 
The officer shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, structure or property summons and a complaint containing a notice that a hearing will be held in municipal court not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or by attorney, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. 
The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(b)  If, after the hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result or unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, structure, or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, structure, or property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  If the court finds there is a condition or use of real estate other than addressed above, which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation and the court further finds that such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use, the court may order the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure, and the order may require the abatement of the public health hazard or general nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety. 
For the purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. 
The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in [O.C.G.A.] chapter 39A of title 43, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
(c)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, improve or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or property, or to abate the nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, structure, or property to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Time during any court stay on abatement shall not count toward said 270 days. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, structure, or property a placard with the following words: 
"This building, dwelling, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building, dwelling, structure, or property is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)  The amount of the cost of any repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax collector, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which cost was incurred. Credit for salvage material sold, per subsection (e) below, shall be given. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order in the office of the clerk of the county superior court and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this section. 
The [county] clerk shall record and index such order in the deed records and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing the order with the [county] clerk, and within 90 days of the repair, demolition or closure, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final settlement of costs to the tax collector. 
It shall be the duty of the tax collector to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. chapter 4 of Title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. 
The tax collector shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(e)  If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage and sell reusable materials at private or public sale, and the proceeds of such sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Such sale shall be made without public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city shall have no liability related to such sale, including due to defects. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(f)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(g)  The redemption amount shall be the full amount of costs as determined above, plus interest, penalties and costs incurred by the city and the tax collector and the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien shall be per O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80, 48-4-81. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
State Law reference— Abatement procedures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 18-96. - Standards for determination by public officer. 
The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions if he finds that conditions exist in or on such building, dwelling, structure, or property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or of other residents. Such conditions may include without limitation: 
(1)  Dilapidation and noncompliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(3)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(4)  Other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, structures, or property unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of such municipality such as: 
a.  Disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness; 
b.  The interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle so that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity of the structural members falls outside of its base so as to create a hazardous condition to the occupants of the structure or the population of the surrounding area; 
c.  Due to their unsafe condition the supporting structure and/or nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls must be replaced; 
d.  The floors or roofs have improperly distributed loads or oversized loads or are so weakened as to be unsafe for their present or intended use; 
e.  The structure has been damaged by wind, fire or other causes so as to imperil the safety or the health of the structure's occupants or of the people of the city; 
f.  There are abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations, abandoned refrigerators or motor vehicles, or any structurally unsound fences or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation, or any condition which may cause lack of safe ingress or egress to the structure(s). 
(5)  Vacant dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed; 
(6)  There exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, 41-2-10. 
Sec. 18-97. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this section, including, among others granted herein, the power to: 
(1)  Investigate the conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures, or property therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes, or are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or endanger the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
(2)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(3)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section; and 
(4)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
Sec. 18-98. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this section shall be served in the following manner. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall also be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the hearing, the public officer shall send the complaint and summons via certified mail, return receipt requested, or statutory overnight delivery to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. For any owner or party in interest whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(2)  Copies of the petition shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any. 
(b)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the county superior court at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and affect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceeding. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
Sec. 18-99. - Authority to use revenues, grants and donations to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
The city may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out this section. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-15. 
Sec. 18-100. - Deteriorated structures and premises as nuisances. 
(a)  All structures and/or the surrounding property of the structures which are determined to be in violation of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. In those instances where there is an imminent threat to life or safety, the public officer shall be authorized to immediately post the structure as "unsafe for human habitation." 
(b)  If such finding of the public officer is contested by the occupants of the structure, then the public officer shall request an immediate hearing before the judge of the magistrate court in order to secure an order requiring any occupants of the unsafe structures to vacate. The public officer shall then proceed as set forth in this section. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-101. - Construction of this section with charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of the charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred herein shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
(Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-102. - Blighted property. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known as the "Blighted Property" article. 
(b)  Purpose. Blighted real property increases the burden of government services, including social services, public safety, and code enforcement. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this burden. 
In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city and in recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and to encourage private property owners to maintain their property in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is established as authorized by article IX, section II, paragraph VII(d) of the state constitution. 
(c)  Definitions. 
Blighted property, blight or blighted means any developed property which: 
(1)  Constitutes endangerment to public health or safety and presents one or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structure; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm to life or property from fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe declared a state of emergency under state law or certified for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site per 42 U.S.C. section 9601, et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; or 
(2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service for redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or through local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
Governing authority means the city council of Union Point, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, established for financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
Person means such individual(s), entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for taxes on the property. 
Public officer means such officer or employee of the city designated by the city to perform the duties and responsibilities in this section. 
(d)  Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property 
(1)  There is hereby levied on all real property in the city which has been officially identified as blighted an increased ad valorem tax at a three times higher millage rate than generally applied; provided, however, real property on which there is an occupied dwelling house as a primary residence shall not be subject to identification as in a blighted condition or increased taxation. 
(2)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(e)  Identification of blighted property. 
(1)  For property to be officially designated as blighted, the following steps must be completed: 
a.  An inspection must be performed on the property as follows: 
1.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property using the criteria in this section, or 
2.  The public officer may use a survey of existing housing conditions to identify any parcels in a blighted condition and for which an inspection should be conducted. 
b.  A written inspection report shall be submitted to the public officer. Photos of the conditions on the property shall be made part of the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector with the qualifications to determine code compliance. 
c.  Following the report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is blighted, as defined by this section and is subject to increased taxation. 
d.  The public officer shall cause the determination that the property is blighted to be served on the person(s) shown on the tax digest as responsible for payment of taxes; provided, however, where through reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that property has been conveyed since the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service per O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 as follows shall be sufficient notice to the owner or person chargeable with the payment of taxes: the public officer shall mail copies of the determination by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the determination shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of the determination. For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, the determination shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks. 
(2)  The written notice shall be the aforementioned public officer's determination that the property is blighted. The recipient shall have 30 days from receipt in which to file with the public officer a request for hearing before the mayor and council. If there is no timely request for hearing, a copy of such determination shall be delivered to the tax commissioner, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill. 
(3)  Within 30 days of a receipt of a timely request for hearing, the clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and give at least 14 days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the person who performed the inspection. Notice of hearings shall be published as a legal ad in the designated legal organ in the county, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the mayor and council upon request, for good cause. 
(4)  At the hearing, the public officer shall demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is blighted. The municipal clerk shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, and after allowing cross examination of all witnesses, the mayor and council shall make a written ruling affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. Copies shall be served on the parties by certified mail. A copy of a ruling affirming the determination shall be served upon the tax commissioner, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill. 
(5)  Persons aggrieved by a ruling affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Greene County superior court for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the ruling. 
(f)  Remediation. 
(1)  A property owner or person(s) chargeable with payment of taxes on property designated as blighted may petition the public officer to lift the designation, on proof of the following: 
a.  Completion of remedial action approved by the mayor and council which eliminates the blight, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
b.  Completion of work required under a court order which eliminates the blight, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes. 
(2)  The public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by inspection report, shall certify if all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, per the specifications of the remedial action or court order. On finding required work to be thus performed the public officer shall issue a determination that the real property is no longer blighted. Copies of this shall be mailed to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and the tax commissioner. 
(3)  Plans for remedial action shall be signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the city clerk, and meet the following: 
a.  Be consistent with all laws and ordinances governing the property; 
b.  Set forth the requirements for repair or demolition per applicable codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include debris removal, stabilization and landscaping; 
c.  Contain verifiable funding for its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
d.  A timetable for completion of required work; and 
e.  All outstanding ad valorem taxes and governmental liens must be satisfied in full. 
(g)  Decrease of tax rate. 
(1)  Property which has had its blighted designation removed shall receive a tax decrease to 1/2 the millage rate generally applied; such shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill following removal of blighted designation. The decreased rate may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended for remediation, with every $10,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes more than two successive years. 
(2)  To claim entitlement for a decreased tax, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(h)  Notice to tax commissioner. The public officer shall notify the tax commissioner in writing as to designation or removal of designation of blighted property, to identify the property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number. The public officer shall work with the tax commissioner to ensure accurate billing. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2014; Ord. of 5-12-2015) 
Secs. 18-103—18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 18-121. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of Union Point is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The city council of hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2005, § I) 
Sec. 18-122. - Definitions. 
Building means a building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the City Council of Union Point as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 18-124(b) of this article. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council of as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 18-124(c) of this article. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object means an object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means a site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a structure is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2005, § II; Amend. of 11-10-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-123. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission: There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Union Point Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city and county governments: The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Union Point. 
(c)  Commission members: Number, appointment, terms and compensation: The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council of Union Point. All members shall be residents of Union Point and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
Members shall serve three-year terms and be reelected if they choose. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power: 
(1)  The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
a.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Union Point having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.  Recommend to the City Council of Union Point and the specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
d.  Recommend to the City Council of Union Point that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
e.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Union Point; 
f.  Promote the acquisition by the City of Union Point of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A., Section 44-10.1 though 5); 
g.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located in the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts. 
i.  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the City of Union Point concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
k.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the City of Union Point historic preservation program; 
l.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the City of Union Point without prior consent. 
m.  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
n.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consents of the City Council of Union Point, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards: 
(1)  The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest: 
(1)  The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statues. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources: 
(1)  The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings: A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2005, § III) 
Sec. 18-124. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission: 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources: The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City of Union Point. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the City Council of Union Point for designation: The commission shall present to the City Council of Union Point recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation: Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the City Council of Union Point for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district: 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts: A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character of special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district: Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Union Point. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts: Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Noncontributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property: 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties: A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the Nation, the City of Union Point, or the State of Georgia for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Union Point, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties: 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts of property: Designations may be proposed by the City Council of Union Point, the commission, or 
a.  For historic districts—A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties—A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance: Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district of describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the Official Zoning Maps of the City of Union Point and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings: The Commission and the City Council of Union Point shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city or county tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division: No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations: A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the City Council of Union Point. 
(6)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation: Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this ordinance. 
(7)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending: If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2005, § IV; Amend. of 11-10-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-125. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties: After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission: An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations: In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice: The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  (1)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard: The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper of local circulation in the city or county and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
(2)  At least seven days prior to reviewing a design review application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the application and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. The commission shall also post notice in the form of a sign in a conspicuous place on the property in question. 
(3)  The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness: Commission action: The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation: The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
b.  Relocation: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, tress judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city/county. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship: When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The Commission and the City Council of Union Point shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced: A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness: The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and or all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property: The commission may, where such action is authorized by the City Council of Union Point and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals: Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the City Council of Union Point. Any such appeal must be filed with the City Council of Union Point within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (h)(1) or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection 18-125(h)(2) of this article. Appeals for properties within the City of Union Point shall be made to the City Council of Union Point. The City Council of Union Point may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, it the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the City Council of Union Point may be taken to the Superior Court of Greene County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Union Point ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2005, § V; Amend. of 11-10-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-126. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair: Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair: Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a buildings structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 18-127 of this article and, at the direction of the City Council of Union Point, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes: Nothing in this article shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2005, § VI) 
Sec. 18-127. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted Ordinances of the City of Union Point. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2005, § VII) 
Secs. 18-128—18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Amend. of 10-12-2010, exh. A, deleted the former Art. VI, §§ 18-131—18-136, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to flood damage prevention and derived from the Amend. of 5-11-2010. 

Sec. 18-131. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose, objectives. 
(a)  Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council, of Union Point does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Union Point, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated and/or floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Amend. of 10-12-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 18-132. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Union Point, Georgia. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its current flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps dated December 17, 2010, and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for (Greene County) are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Union Point City Hall and/or Greene County Commissioners Office. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations as determined by the state EPD. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 per day, per violation or imprisoned for not more than zero days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Amend. of 10-12-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 18-133. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The county planning department is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the county planning department on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of [subsection 18-134(b)(2)] of this article; 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The county planning department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the county planning department shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 18-132(b) of this article, then the county planning department shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of section 18-134 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the county planning department shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection (b)(1)c. of this section and subsection 18-134(b)(2) or 18-134(d)(2) of this article. 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the county planning department shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the county planning department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Amend. of 10-12-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 18-134. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
[1]  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4), "elevated buildings" of this section. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 18-133(c)(6) of this article. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection (a)(6) of this section) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (b)(3)a—c. of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 18-132(b) of this article, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (b)(4)a. of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 18-132(b) of this article where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 18-132(b) of this article, then the county planning department shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this section. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) "elevated buildings", of this section. 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The county planning department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 18-132(b) of this article, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification shall be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 18-132(b) of this article, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4), "elevated buildings", of this section. 
The county planning department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 18-133(b)(1)c. and subsection [18-133(b)(2)] of this article. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
For subdivisions and/or developments greater than either 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(g)  Standards for critical facilities. Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Amend. of 10-12-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 18-135. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The city mayor and council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the county planning department in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision to the county superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor and council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The county planning department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the county planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Amend. of 10-12-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 18-136. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the county planning department's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in subsection 18-132(b) of this article. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
a.  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
b.  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
c.  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
*Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 17, 2010. 
*Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 11, 2010. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard are defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
2.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
*New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after December 17, 2010 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 11, 2010 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
*New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 11, 2010. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance require ments) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Amend. of 10-12-2010, Exh. A) 
Secs. 18-137—18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADDRESS DISPLAY AND STREET NAME AND NUMBERING 

Sec. 18-151. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Address Display and Street Name and Numbering Code" of the city and may be cited as such. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-152. - Purpose and scope. 
This chapter is to provide minimum standards, provisions and requirements for street names and address numbering to assist fire department, EMS, law enforcement, utility department and the public in quickly finding addresses. All homes plus non-residential buildings shall be required to display an address number. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-153. - General requirements. 
Each property owner, lessee, and/or occupant of each residence, apartment building, business, or industry shall post and maintain address numbers. Addresses are to be displayed without obstructions and legible from the traveled roadway. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-154. - Numbers shall be on structures plus mailbox. 
(a)  The address numbering shall not be obstructed by landscaping, other mailboxes or newspaper delivery boxes. 
(b)  Numbers at least three inches in height, with contrasting color to the background, shall be clearly and legibly affixed and maintained on the side of structures facing the road in the following instances: 
(c)  When a cluster mail box is used; for businesses and industries located within 50 feet of the road or with multiple buildings per business or industry; for multiple residential and/or places of business that share a common single private roadway. 
(d)  If there is a mailbox, the address shall also be clearly and legibly displayed on the mailbox in numbers at least three inches in height. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-155. - Additional requirements for address numbers. 
Structures more than 50 feet from the road shall display the address on a post, fence, wall or other permanent structure no more than ten feet back from the edge of the road. The numbers shall be not less than three inches in height and are encouraged to be reflective numbers on a contrasting background and be greater than 18 inches above the ground. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-156. - Residential curb address numbers. 
On any street where a curb exists, the owner of a residential property may at the owner's discretion paint the owner's legal address on the curb; provided however, that the numbers must be no less than three inches high and that the numbers shall be black on a white background. Curb numbers may be used only as an additional address display, and not as a substitute for the display requirements set forth hereinabove. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-157. - Uniform system of assigning street address names. 
There is hereby established an official system of street names in the city to be shown on a map dated May 12, 2015 produced by the county E-911 service, which is hereby formally adopted by the city. A uniform system of numbering properties and buildings as described by a map and material filed in the office of the city fire department is hereby adopted. The map and system description, as filed, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. The names of streets and roads in the city shall remain as shown on such map unless officially changed by ordinance. No new streets or roads shall be accepted by the city, and no city improvements shall be made therein, until such street or roads have been named. If they are extensions of existing streets or roads, the existing names shall be continued. If not an extension, names recorded may not duplicate or closely approximate street or road names already assigned. Any name assigned to a private street or road which is used for address or house number purposes must be approved by the city fire department to avoid duplication and confusion. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-158. - Maintenance, changes and revisions to street address names and numbers. 
The city fire department shall be responsible for the maintenance of the system of street and road names and numbers. Its designee shall maintain a copy of the map and shall record thereon all changes made by ordinance or new assignments accepted by subdivision platting or other legal means. Such designee shall cause to be made revisions to the official map to include all official changes made up to the date of revision which is also to be clearly recorded thereon. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-159. - Number assignments and display. 
All numbers will be assigned by the city fire department and will be assigned to any new subdivision by lot or tract by such department. Each address shall bear the number assigned to it by the city fire department as provided in this section and where more than one business or family dwelling unit occupies a single structure, the structure shall bear, in addition to the basic number assigned to the structure, the supplementary numerals or letters assigned to them. No person, agency or business shall adopt, assign, display or cite any number other than that assigned, as provided in this section for the purpose of property identification or for the purpose of designating location of property. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 18-160. - Method and administration of number assignment. 
This section is not retroactive. The numbering system in the future shall, to the extent practical, generally start at the southern city limits, on each street or road, with numbers increasing as the distance from the city limits increases. Numbers are to be assigned to or reserved for approximately each 20 feet of distance. In the future, to the extent practical, properties on the south of east-west streets and east of north-south streets shall generally be assigned even numbers, and properties on the north of east-west streets and west of north-south streets shall generally be assigned odd numbers. The city fire department shall be responsible for implementing and maintaining the numbering system, as adopted by this article, including any modifications which are duly enacted. The city fire department shall assign and maintain a record of all property numbers for the city. The city fire department may make available to public agencies such as those responsible for emergency services, tax officials, and post office, such part of the records of property number assignments as may be required to accomplish a public purpose. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; financial institutions business license tax, § 70-91 et seq.; commercial district, app. A, § 7.2; special provisions of home occupation, app. A, § 9.5. 
State Law reference— Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.; Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; deceptive trade practices by health spas, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-393.2; duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; persons deemed professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50; state roadside market incentive program, O.C.G.A. § 2-10-130 et seq.; tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; evidence of state license as prerequisite to local business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; exemption from local licensing of disabled veterans and blind persons, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq.; use of rooms in roadhouses, public dance halls, etc., for immoral purposes, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-61; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; Georgia Physical Therapy Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-33-1 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.; Used Car Dealers' Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq.; auctioneers, O.C.G.A. § 43-6-1 et seq.; certain persons prohibited from engaging in bail bond business, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-8; business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; amount of tax due from businesses commenced on or after July 1, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22; registration of nonresident contractors with state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-31; local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; ; local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-31. - Occupation tax required. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk/treasurer or his officer's, deputies or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. The owner of the business, his spouse, or any relative, whether receiving direct compensation or not, shall be considered to be an employee of the business if they spend any amount of time working with the business. The number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full time position equivalents. 
Location or office mean any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person means sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioners of professions and occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-33. - Administrative fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $5.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 22-34. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Tax levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: The number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule; number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city council: 

 
(c)  Limitation and exceptions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(3)  When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the business or occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee required in section 22-33 shall not be reduced. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 22-35. - Occupation tax for business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 22-36. - Line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city and that line of business being noted by the city upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 6) 
Sec. 22-37. - Number of businesses considered to be operating. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 7) 
Sec. 22-38. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 8) 
Sec. 22-39. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 9) 
Sec. 22-40. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 10) 
Sec. 22-41. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to ten percent penalty and interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month for delinquency. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty and interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month imposed. The tax registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city clerk/treasurer and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the city's judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, either or both in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the city may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 11) 
Sec. 22-42. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city, only employees who work at the location in the city shall be counted for taxing purposes. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 12) 
Sec. 22-43. - Exemption on grounds business is operated for charitable purpose. 
(a)  No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 100 percent or more of the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose. 
(b)  Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization shall be exempt from such business registration fee and occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 13) 
Sec. 22-44. - Evidence of state registration required; display. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 14) 
Sec. 22-45. - Evidence of qualification required. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 15) 
Sec. 22-46. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 16) 
Sec. 22-47. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 90 days, either or both, in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 17) 
Sec. 22-48. - City clerk/treasurer; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 18) 
Sec. 22-49. - Businesses not covered by article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 19) 
Sec. 22-50. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city at the office of the treasurer, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before March 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 20) 
Sec. 22-51. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 21) 
Sec. 22-52. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, such business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 22) 
Sec. 22-53. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city clerk/treasurers office, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The city clerk/treasurer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city clerk/treasurer such books or records shall be submitted for inspection to a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk/treasurer at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of 1.5 percent per month interest times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 23) 
Sec. 22-54. - Enforcement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk/treasurer and police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the this article to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk/treasurer, chief of police, members of the police department and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted under such registration. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 24) 
Sec. 22-55. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
(a)  After January 1, 1996, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater that revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city council shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 25) 
Sec. 22-56. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 26) 
Secs. 22-57—22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAWNSHOPS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The Amendment of May 13, 2008, § 1, repealed Art. III, which pertained to licensing and regulation and derived from the Code of 1982, ch. 17, art. II; Code of 1982, §§ 17-101—17-109, §§ 17-111—17-113; Ord. of 1-11-1994, § 1, Ord. of 12-13-1994, § 1; Ord. of 12-12-1995, §§ 1, 2. 

Sec. 22-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Employee means any person who works in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received. 
Pawnbroker means any person who works in a pawnshop, as a manager or owner or both. 
Pawnshop means any business that takes or receives by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any kind as security for any debt or engagement redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale or default. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-130 et seq. 
Sec. 22-82. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The city police department shall see that the provisions hereof are observed and enforced. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 22-83. - Employees. 
No person shall be an employee of a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been fingerprinted by the public safety department and has been issued an annual permit authorizing such person to be employed by a pawnshop. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to assure that there is compliance with the provision of this section. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 22-84. - Character of person connected with pawn business. 
No owner, employee, pawnbroker, or any person connected with a pawnshop for which a license or permit is sought, shall have been convicted of a crime involving "moral turpitude" or shall have been convicted of any crime involving felony, burglary, robbery, or a violation of the Family Violence Act. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 22-85. - Annual permit. 
Before operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop, any person must first file an application with the city police department for a permit to operate or be employed in the pawnshop. 
(1)  The application shall be made on an annual basis. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, is paid to the city. 
(3)  The application shall state the address of the pawnshop. 
(4)  The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and social security number of any employee or pawnbroker. The application may contain, as prescribed by the city council, any additional information that will be pertinent to the pawnshop and/or pawnbroker. 
(5)  The chief of police or any other officer of the city designated by the city council shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report to the city council whether such applicant has been convicted of a criminal offense as indicated in this section. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 22-86. - Records of transactions. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop can and will be accessible to the city police department upon the request of the city police department and/or city council within a 72-hour time period. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of property. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale. 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other state issued identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other identifying number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought. 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned. 
(7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn. 
(b)  In the event of receipt of a firearm for pledge, trade or sale, it will be the responsibility of the pawnbroker or any employee of the pawnshop to: 
(1)  Contact the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent within a 24-hour time period of such pledge, trade or sale. 
(2)  Provide the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent with any and all markings of the firearm (e.g., serial and model numbers, style, brand name, caliber, and any other markings of said firearm. 
(3)  Provide a picture of firearm being pledged traded or sold to the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
State Law reference— Permanent records—Required; content, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132; permanent records—Manner of recording entry; corrections; inspection, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-133. 
Sec. 22-87. - Waiting period for disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop who makes a loan on pledged goods, or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Non-pledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on advertising; disclosure tickets or statements, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-138. 
Sec. 22-88. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under eighteen years of age. Any such attempt by any person under the age of eighteen to pawn, trade, purchase or sell shall be immediately reported to the city police department for further investigation. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
State Law reference— Prohibited acts; penalties; presumption as to pledgor; replacement of lost or damaged goods, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-137. 
Sec. 22-89. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or employed by a pawnbroker's license or permit to report to the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent any article or goods sold or pawned to him/her if he/she shall have a reason to believe that the article(s) or goods were stolen or lost when presented by seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his/her employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent shall be done upon demand. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 22-90. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to violate any of the provisions of this article. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city council for conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall upon conviction, have the license to conduct business revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to: 
(1)  Make any false statements in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law while acting as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop. 
(4)  Fail to provide documentation requested by the chief of police and/or city council. 
(5)  Fail to present any items or documentation of sold items requested by the chief of police and/or city council. 
(6)  Persons who violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amend. of 12-13-2011) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 44-12-137. 
Secs. 22-91—22-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITS AND LICENSES 

Sec. 22-100. - Yard sales. 
(a)  Permit required; number of permits limited. Any person desiring to sell used merchandise or personal property of such person's own, or of another person, on such person's own premises or at other locations within the city, shall obtain a permit from the city for such sale. Upon request, any one family unit shall be issued a permit for a period of two days; however, no family unit will receive more than two permits in any one-year period. The permit shall be displayed for the duration of the sale. 
(b)  Signs. Signs advertising the garage/yard sale are permitted. These signs may be placed on the public right-of-way no sooner than 24 hours before the first permit day. These signs must be removed from the public right-of-way within 24 hours of the last permit day. 
(c)  Exemptions. Sales and display at carnivals, festivals, DDA sponsored city-wide yard sales and bazaars are not regulated hereunder. 
(Amend. of 9-11-2007, § 1) 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; special provisions of cemeteries, app. A, § 9.8. 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-20 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Management and supervision. 
(a)  The responsibility for the management, operation, maintenance, and general supervision of the municipal cemeteries shall be vested in the city clerk/treasurer, subject to the authority and power of the municipal cemetery committee of the city council. 
(b)  The city clerk/treasurer, in supervising the affairs of the municipal cemeteries, shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To look after and take proper care of all municipal cemeteries and see that no lot in any cemetery is used or occupied in violation of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated by the municipal cemetery committee; 
(2)  To keep full and detailed accounts of the receipts and expenditures on account of the municipal cemeteries; and 
(3)  To see to the digging of graves and to the proper interring of the dead when called upon to do so. 
(Code 1982, § 14-101) 
Sec. 26-2. - Purchase and conveyance of lots. 
(a)  Lot valuation. The municipal cemetery committee of the city council shall place a value upon all unsold lots in the Greenlawn Cemetery and shall record such valuations on an official plan or map of such cemetery. Such map or plan of the Greenlawn Cemetery shall be kept on file in the city clerk/treasurer's office. 
(b)  Method of purchase. Any person desiring to purchase an easement in particular lots, for the purpose for which they are intended, shall be permitted to do so upon payment of the fixed price for such lots according to the rules and regulations that may be established by the municipal cemetery committee. Burial lots shall be sold only in multiples of two. There shall be no discrimination in the sale of lots on any basis. 
(c)  Manner of conveying. Conveyances of burial lots shall be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and have affixed thereto the seal of the city. Such conveyance shall not convey fee simple title, but shall convey to the purchaser of the burial site an easement for the exclusive right of interment and sepulcher in such lots; and, by reference therein made, shall convey such lots subject to all of the provisions of this chapter as fully as if set out in each such conveyance. 
(d)  Recordation of deed. At the time the city conveys any burial lots, the city clerk/treasurer, in addition to collecting the purchase price thereof shall collect from the purchaser an amount sufficient to have such conveyance recorded in the clerk/treasurer's office, county superior court, and shall have such conveyance so recorded before delivery thereof to the purchaser. No sale or transfer of any such burial lot or lots or any right therein shall be valid unless approved in writing by the municipal cemetery committee or until the deed of transfer and such written approval are recorded in the clerk/treasurer's office, county superior court. 
(e)  Records of ownership. The city clerk/treasurer shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all lot easements in the cemetery; of the location of each grave; of the names and ages and other vital statistics of the persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be used; the date of burial of each; and the names of persons responsible for maintenance of such lot, if other than the record owner. 
(f)  Sale or transfer by owner. Owners of lots shall not be permitted to sell or transfer lots without the written consent of the municipal cemetery committee. 
(g)  Rules for interment. No person shall be interred in any municipal cemetery until a permit has been issued by the city clerk/treasurer. Such permit shall be issued upon application providing proof that: 
(1)  The lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for; 
(2)  The person arranging for such burial has the right to such use; 
(3)  Such lot is not used beyond its capacity; and 
(4)  Proper record is made of the deceased, the location of the grave, and the owner of the lot or those otherwise responsible for maintenance, in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(h)  Annual maintenance fee. Owners of lots, their successors in interest, or their designee, shall be responsible for the payment of an annual maintenance fee to the municipal cemetery committee in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be set by such committee. 
(Code 1982, § 14-102) 
Sec. 26-3. - Restrictions on use. 
(a)  Enclosures. No curbing, fencing, or enclosure of any sort shall be erected on, in, or around any burial lot in the cemetery, but the city reserves the right to erect curbing along the walks and driveways, if it so desires. 
(b)  Plantings. The planting of flowers and shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within the municipal cemetery shall be done only after the plans for such work have been submitted to the municipal cemetery committee and approved by that committee. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the decoration or adornment of any grave site with potted or cut flowers or plants. 
(c)  Stones and monuments. Owners of cemetery lot easements numbers 1 through 262 shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking the burial site, except that no slab shall be set except in a horizontal position and flush with the ground. 
(1)  Headstones shall not exceed two feet in height above the ground and 18 inches in width and shall be set in a solid concrete foundation. 
(2)  Monuments of cut stone or marble shall not exceed ten feet in height and the erection of the monuments must be authorized and supervised by the municipal cemetery committee. 
(Code 1982, § 14-103; Ord. of 4-9-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 26-4. - General regulations. 
(a)  Trees and shrubs. No tree or shrub shall be planted, removed, cut down, or destroyed within the borders of any burial lot, walks, or lawn spaces, without the consent of the municipal cemetery committee. 
(b)  Injury to monuments. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or in any manner injure any monument, headstone, or ornament thereof within the municipal cemetery. 
(c)  Discharging firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any gun, pistol, or other firearm within the municipal cemetery except at a funeral ceremony. 
(d)  Depositing offensive matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any part of the cemetery or any land adjoining it any dead carcass or any putrid or offensive matter whatever. 
(e)  Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner within the perimeter of the municipal cemetery. 
(f)  Entering cemeteries at night. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the municipal cemetery or walk upon or across the cemetery between sunset and sunrise without the written consent of the municipal cemetery committee. 
(g)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertisement or sign, or to solicit any work in the municipal cemetery. 
(h)  Unauthorized interments. It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of the municipal cemetery without the express authorization of the municipal cemetery committee. 
(i)  Disinterment. Disinterments shall be made only when authorized by the municipal cemetery committee and the county board of health. 
(j)  Maintenance. Notwithstanding section 26-2 (h) above, the owner of each burial plot shall have the ultimate obligation to maintain it in a neat and attractive condition at the owner's sole expense, to include without limitation: flower beds weeded, old flowers removed, and grass clippings, gravel and any other debris removed from the grave plot. 
(Code 1982, § 14-104; Amend. of 6-12-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 26-5. - Authority of the city to regulate. 
(a)  The city council reserves to themselves and their successors in office the right to alter, amend, modify, or add to the rules, regulations, conditions, and restrictions set forth in this chapter at any time it is deemed advisable to do so in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  There shall be no liability whatsoever, either tort or contractual, on the part of the city, or its officials or officers (or their successors in office), or its agents or employees, to any purchases of any lots in the municipal cemetery, or to any person holding under them, or to the family or relatives of any person buried in the cemetery, or to any person or the family of such person who has erected any monument, marker, or mausoleum therein, by reason of any act or acts, omission, negligence, or otherwise relating to the municipal cemetery. In accepting any conveyance of any burial lot, each purchaser agrees that all provisions of this chapter are valid, and that he and his heirs and assigns shall hold such lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter and subject to all amendments hereto made by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 14-105) 
Sec. 26-6. - Depth of burial; general regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, or corporation to bury any dead body within the city limits the city in violation of the following stipulated requirements: 
(1)  An excavation or grave within the city in which a dead body is buried, must be covered with soil of not less than 18 inches on top of vault or burial casing in which body is placed and up to the ground level around such excavation or grave. 
(2)  This section is a health measure and will be strictly enforced. 
(3)  Violators of this section shall be subject to fine or punishment as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 14-106) 
Sec. 26-7. - Grave liners. 
(a)  Any excavation or grave within the city, in which a dead body is buried, must also include a steel or concrete grave liner (vault). 
(b)  Violators of this section shall be subject to fine or punishment as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 5-11-1999) 
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to a letter of promulgation dated May 20, 1994, the Greene County Emergency Operations Plan was approved by city and county officials. It will be activated by the county emergency management director when directed by the chairman of the board of commissioners or when an emergency is declared by the governor of the state. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEVERE WEATHER WARNING 

Sec. 30-31. - Implementation of severe weather warning. 
The following described warning signal shall be implemented to inform the populace to take protective action when the weather bureau has advised of the danger of tornadoes in the vicinity: 
(1)  All available sirens will give a three-minute signal of blasts. This refers specifically to the Union Point and Greensboro Fire Station sirens. Industrial organizations are requested to reinforce this signal by three minutes of short blasts on their whistles or similar devices. Any available loudspeakers should be used to give the warning message verbally. 
(2)  The warning of an approaching tornado may be received from the weather bureau by telephone or radio by the city hall and/or the sheriff's office in Greensboro. Each of these offices shall be responsible for ensuring that the other and the Greensboro city hall are immediately informed of such danger. A radio or telephone warning or an authoritative and unmistakable statement concerning the county over commercial radio shall be proper authority and basis to give the signal. 
(Code 1982, § 21-106) 
Chapter 34 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

Sec. 34-31. - Qualifications of judge. 
In addition to the qualifications provided for in Section 4.11 of the municipal charter, the judge of the municipal court shall be a resident of the judicial circuit in which the court is located. 
(Code 1982, § 5-101) 
Sec. 34-32. - Meetings of municipal court. 
The municipal court shall be held on the second Monday night of each month at 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1982, § 5-102) 
Sec. 34-33. - Compensation. 
The judge of the municipal court shall be compensated in an amount as determined from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 5-103) 
Sec. 34-34. - City court. 
The city court of the city shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided in the charter or by this Code or laws of Georgia, to collect add on fees for software and administration costs and other costs, to subpoena witnesses, to punish witnesses for non-attendance, and try all offenses occurring within the territorial limits of the city including traffic cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are now and hereinafter placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. The presiding officer of such court shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the council and shall be known as the judge of the city court. The court shall be convened at the city hall or such other place within the city as designated by the judge of the city court, with the approval of the city. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-35. - Judge. 
The judge of the city court shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, shall be at least 25 years of age, and shall have practiced law for at least three years. The council shall provide for the compensation of the judge. The council shall have authority to appoint standby associate judges to serve in the absence of the city judge. Any standby associate judge shall possess the qualifications [set forth above] for the judge of the city court and have the same powers granted to the judge of the city court. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-36. - Sessions of court. 
A regular session of the city court shall be held at a fixed hour of a fixed day determined by the judge; provided, that any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. The city court may hold special sessions when, in the judge's opinion, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for trial before the next regularly scheduled session of court. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-37. - Clerk of court. 
There shall be a clerk of court who shall be appointed or removed by the council. The clerk of court shall: prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket thereof that will show the name of the person on whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued and to whom it was delivered; be the custodian of the seal of the court and have authority to certify copies of all official records of the court and to maintain the proper books of accounts, including receipts and disbursements, which the court may maintain; and perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him/her by the judge. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-38. - Practice. 
The city shall have the opening and conclusion of each case, unless the defendant introduces no evidence. The city shall announce first whether ready for trial and, if not ready, shall be held to as strict a showing for a continuance as the defendant. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-39. - Persons charged with offense; summons and trial. 
Any person charged with an offense shall be informed by summons in writing served on him of the nature and cause of his accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his behalf; shall have a speedy trial; shall be confronted with the witnesses against him and have the privilege of cross examination as in the superior courts of the state. The same rules as to examination of witnesses and the evidence adduced as obtained in such courts, as far as they are applicable to examining courts, shall be applicable to cases before the city court. The party accused shall have the privilege of defending himself, by counsel or by himself, or both, whichever shall seem proper to him. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-40. - Form and execution of summons. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of court in all cases where complaint is made or information given of any violation over which the city court has jurisdiction, whether the party be confined in jail or not, to issue a summons directed to the accused requiring such person to appear in city court to answer such charge, which summons shall set forth the offense, and the time and place of trial, bear the name of the judge of the city court, be signed by the clerk of court, and directed to the sheriff of the county or the police department, to be executed, which office shall execute the same by serving a copy on the accused or leaving it at his place of residence. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-41. - Witness—Subpoena. 
When the attendance of any witness may be required before the court, the clerk of court shall issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, and bear the name of the judge of city court, which subpoena shall be served as other summons. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-42. - Witness—Defaulting. 
If any person so summoned as a witness shall fail, neglect, or refuse to attend a trial, or render at the time a sufficient excuse in the judgment of the court, the defaulting witness shall be liable to a fine not to exceed $50.00 and, if the cause shall be continued on account of the witness's absence, the court may issue an attachment against such witness requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. Any law enforcement officer, by virtue of such attachment, shall arrest and confine the person, so as to have him before the court at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-43. - Continuances. 
Where the ends of justice require it, cases may be continued. All continuances shall be addressed to the sound legal discretion of the court. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-44. - Plea of guilty in absence of defendant. 
Any party against whom any complaint is lodged may plead guilty under such regulations and upon such terms as the court may prescribe and, if such party cannot attend the trial, the court may pass such order or sentence in the case in compliance with Georgia law as if the party were personally present. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-45. - Persons implicated to be tried. 
If, on the trial of any cause before the city court, it appears that any other person besides the one on trial has committed a violation within the jurisdiction of the city court, he may then and there be tried if present and if due process permits such, unless the case is continued for legal cause. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-46. - Docket. 
A docket shall be kept in the office of clerk of court on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged with a violation of this Code or any city ordinances, or of any other offense over which the city court has jurisdiction and, at the trial of all cases in the city court, the city court judge shall record opposite the statement of the case any sentence pronounced and the date; and the clerk of court shall enter, under the city court judge's sentence, the final disposition of the case, that is, whether the fine, if any, was collected and the date of such collection, and when and to whom such amounts were turned over by the clerk of court. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-47. - Enforcement of penalties against corporations. 
Whenever a corporation shall commit any violation over which the city court has jurisdiction, a warrant shall issue against such corporation for violating such provisions, and the clerk of court shall issue a copy of such warrant, which shall be served as any other summons, upon any officer of the corporation in the city; and the officer serving such copy shall at the time notify such person upon whom such service is made of the time and place of trial, and shall make an entry of such service upon the warrant, showing the time of service and upon whom the service was made, and return the same to the city court, and docket the case, which case shall stand for trial in the order which other cases against individuals are tried. If, on the trial, the defendant corporation fails to appear, or appearing fails to plead, the judge of the city court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty, and either issue a bench warrant or trial shall proceed as though the defendant has appeared and pleaded. Upon conviction of any corporation, there shall be rendered judgment against it for the fine imposed by the presiding officer, together with all costs of prosecution, upon which judgment the clerk of court shall issue an execution against the defendant, which shall be levied and collected by the county sheriff or his designee or a representative of the police department, of said city as tax executions in favor of the city are now allowed by law to be levied and collected. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-48. - Appearance bond—Security requirement, maximum amount. 
The city court judge, the sheriff, or his deputy or a representative of the police department may, consistent with the city charter, take bond, with security or without security, at their discretion, in a sum not exceeding $300.00 for the appearance of any party accused of a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or any other offense over which the city court has jurisdiction, to stand to and abide by his trial before the city court, and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in such court. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-49. - Appearance bond—Failure to give, subsequent confinement or guard. 
If either party or witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required of them, or either of them, such person so failing or refusing may be confined to the jail of the county for up to ten days, or other place as may be directed by the city court judge, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Sec. 34-50. - Appearance bond—Forfeiture for failure to appear, service of rule. 
All bail taken under this chapter shall be special bail, and the power of the security over the principal shall be the same as in the special bail. Upon the failure of any principal to appear in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or of any other offense over which city court has jurisdiction, or by a witness to appear and testify, the presiding officer shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond to show cause on a day therein named not to be less than ten days from the passage of such rule, why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. A copy of such rule shall be served upon the principal and security or securities in the same manner as a summons, at least five days before the time therein set for hearing the same. 
(Amend. of 6-8-2010, Exh. A) 
Chapter 36 - DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE PREVENTION 

Sec. 36-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Drug and Alcohol Abuse Prevention" and may be cited as such. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-2. - Purpose. 
The city is dedicated to providing a healthy, safe working environment. In meeting these goals, it city policy to: 
(1)  Assure that employees are not impaired in their ability to perform assigned duties in a safe, productive, and healthy manner; 
(2)  Create a workplace environment free from the adverse effects of drug abuse and alcohol misuse; 
(3)  Prohibit the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of controlled substances; and 
(4)  Encourage employees to seek professional assistance when alcohol or drug dependency adversely affects performance of assigned duties. 
The purpose of this chapter is to assure worker fitness for duty and to protect city employees and the public from the risks posed by the misuse of alcohol and use of prohibited drugs. This chapter is also intended to comply with all applicable federal regulations governing workplace anti-drug and alcohol programs in the transit industry. The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) of the U.S. Department of Transportation has published 49 CFR 655, as amended, that mandates urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing for safety-sensitive positions and prohibits performance of safety-sensitive functions when there is a positive test result. The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) has also published 49 CFR Part 40, as amended, that sets standards for the collection and testing of urine and breath specimens. In addition, the federal government published 49 CFR Part 29, "The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988," which requires the establishment of drug-free workplace policies and the reporting of certain drug-related offenses to the FTA. This chapter incorporates those requirements for all employees, including without limitation those performing safety-sensitive functions. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter applies to all city employees, including without limitation those who perform safety-sensitive functions. This chapter applies to off-site lunch periods or breaks when an employee is scheduled to return to work. Visitors, vendors, and contractor employees are governed by this chapter while on city premises, and will not be permitted to conduct city business if found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  A safety-sensitive function is any duty related to the safe operation of mass transit service including the operation of a revenue service vehicle (whether or not the vehicle is in revenue service), dispatch, maintenance of a revenue service vehicle or equipment used in revenue service, security personnel who carry firearms, and any other employees who hold a commercial driver's license. 
(c)  All employees, including without limitation those who perform safety-sensitive functions, are hereafter described as covered employees. Covered employees of the city include without limitation fire department employees, heavy equipment operators, any building inspector and any employees who hold a commercial driver's license. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-4. - Education and training. 
(a)  Every covered employee will receive a copy of this chapter and will have ready access to the corresponding federal regulations including 49 CFR parts 653, 654 and 40. In addition, all covered employees will undergo a minimum of 60 minutes of training on the signs and symptoms of drug use including the effects and consequences of drug use on personal health, safety, and the work environment. The training also includes manifestations and behavioral cues that may indicate prohibited drug use. 
(b)  All supervisory personnel who are in a position to determine employee fitness for duty will receive 60 minutes of reasonable suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, and performance indicators of probable drug use and 60 minutes of additional reasonable suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance indicators of probable alcohol misuse. Supervisory personnel will also be trained on how to intervene constructively, and how to effectively integrate an employee back into his/her work group following intervention and/or treatment. 
(c)  Information on signs, symptoms, health effects, and consequences of alcohol misuse is presented in attachment B at the end of this chapter. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-5. - Prohibited substances. 
Prohibited substances addressed by this chapter include the following: 
(1)  Illegally used controlled substances or drugs. The use of any illegal drug or any substance identified in schedules I through V of section 202 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. 812), as further defined by 21 CFR 1300.11 through 1300.15, is prohibited at all times, unless a legal prescription has been written for the substance. This includes, but is not limited to: marijuana, amphetamines, opiates, phencyclidine (PCP), and cocaine, as well as any drug not approved for medical use by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration or the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Illegal use includes use of any illegal drug, misuse of legal prescribed drugs, and use of illegally obtained prescription drugs. 
(2)  Legal Drugs. The appropriate use of legally prescribed drugs and non-prescription medications is not prohibited. However, the use of any substance which carries a warning label that indicates mental functioning, motor skills, or judgment may be adversely affected must be reported by the covered employee to his/her supervisor. In addition, covered employees must obtain a written release from the attending physician releasing the person to perform their job duties any time they obtain a performance altering prescription. 
A legally prescribed drug means that an individual has a prescription or other written approval from a physician for the use of a drug in the course of medical treatment. It must include the patient's name, the name of the substance, quantity to be taken, and the period of authorization. The misuse or abuse of legal drugs while on duty is prohibited. 
(3)  Alcohol. The use of beverages containing alcohol or substances, including any medication, mouthwash, food, candy, or any other substance such that alcohol is present in the body, is prohibited. The concentration of alcohol is expressed in terms of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as measured by an evidential breath testing device. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-6. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Manufacture, trafficking, possession, and use. Covered employees are prohibited from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of illegal drugs on city premises, in city vehicles, in uniform or while on city business. Covered employees who violate this provision will be subject to disciplinary action under the city personnel ordinance. Law enforcement shall be notified when criminal activity is reasonably suspected. 
(b)  Intoxication/under the influence. Any covered employee who is reasonably suspected of being intoxicated, impaired, under the influence of a prohibited substance, or not fit for duty shall be temporarily suspended pending an investigation and verification of condition. Covered employees found to be under the influence of a prohibited substance or who fail to pass a drug or alcohol test shall be immediately removed from duty and be subject to disciplinary action. A drug or alcohol test is considered positive if the individual is found to have a quantifiable presence of a prohibited substance in the body above the minimum thresholds defined in 49 CFR part 40. 
(c)  Alcohol use and/or possession. No covered employee may report for duty or remain on duty when his/her ability to perform duties is adversely affected by alcohol or when his/her breath alcohol concentration is 0.4 or greater. No covered employee may use or possess alcohol while performing job duties, or just before or just after performing a job duty. Covered employees shall not use alcohol within four hours before reporting for duty, or during the hours they are on call. Violation of these provisions is prohibited and punishable by disciplinary action, pursuant to the city personnel policies. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-7. - Compliance with testing requirements. 
(a)  All covered employees will be subject to urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing as a condition of employment. All testing shall be performed in compliance with all applicable federal requirements. Any covered employee who refuses to comply with a request for testing shall be immediately removed from duty. Refusal includes failure to provide a sufficient urine specimen, saliva sample, or breathe sample without a valid medical explanation, as well as a verbal declaration, obstructive behavior, dilution of a specimen, or physical absence resulting in the inability to conduct the test. Any covered employee who is suspected of providing false information in connection with a test, or who is suspected of falsifying test results (including dilution) will be required to undergo an observed collection. When the laboratory reports that a specimen is dilute, the MRO shall report to the DER that the specimen, in addition to being negative or positive, is dilute. The MRO shall check the "dilute" box (step 6) on copy 2 of the CCF. When the MRO reports a dilute specimen to the DER, the MRO must explain to the DER the employer's obligations and choices under 49 CFR § 40.197, to include the requirement for an immediate recollection if the creatinine concentration of a negative-dilute specimen was greater than or equal to two mg/dL but less than or equal to five mg/dL. Any of the above violations will be cause for immediate removal from duty, and shall also be cause for disciplinary action pursuant to the city personnel policies. 
(b)  The following are also considered a refusal to test if the employee: 
(1)  Fails to appear for a test within a reasonable time, determined by the employer, after being directed to do so by the employer; 
(2)  Fails to remain at the testing site until the testing process is complete; 
(3)  Fails to provide a urine or breath specimen for any drug test required by this part or DOT agency regulations; 
(4)  In the case of a directly observed or monitored collection in a drug test, fails to permit the observation or monitoring of the provision of a specimen; 
(5)  Fails to provide a sufficient amount of urine or breath when directed, and it has been determined, through a required medical evaluation, that there was no adequate medical explanation for the failure; 
(6)  Fails or declines to take a second test the employer or collector has directed the employee to take; 
(7)  Fails to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by the MRO as part of the verification process, or as directed by the DER as part of the "shy bladder" or "shy lung" procedures; 
(8)  Fails to cooperate with any part of the testing process (e.g., refuses to empty pockets when so directed by the collector, or behaves in a confrontational way that disrupts the collection process); 
(9)  Adulterates or substitutes test results, as verified by the MRO. 
(10)  Drug tests can be performed any time a safety sensitive employee is on duty. An alcohol test can be performed when the safety sensitive employee is actually performing a safety sensitive duty, just before, or just after the performance of a safety sensitive duty. 
(c)  Treatment requirements. All employees should use the available resources for treatment of alcohol misuse and drug abuse problems. The employee or their insurance provider will pay the cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services. Employees who make self-referrals (i.e., no management intervention or positive test results) will be allowed to take accumulated sick leave and vacation leave to participate in the prescribed rehabilitation program. Employees that test positive will be referred to the substance abuse professional designated by the city for assessment. Treatment may be required for those who test positive. The employee shall pay for any treatment obtained. 
(d)  Notice of criminal drug conviction. All covered employees must notify the city system of any criminal drug conviction. The notice must be given in writing within five days after such conviction. Failure to comply with this provision shall be cause for disciplinary action pursuant to the city personnel policies. 
(e)  Proper application of this chapter. The city is dedicated to assuring fair and equitable application of this chapter. Therefore, all aspects of this chapter shall be enforced in an unbiased and impartial manner, and in compliance with all applicable federal regulations. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-8. - Testing procedures. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Alcohol and drug testing shall be conducted in a manner to assure a high degree of accuracy and reliability and using techniques, equipment, and laboratory facilities which have been approved by the U. S. Department of Health and Human Service (DHHS). All testing will be conducted in compliance with the requirements set forth in 49 CFR part 40, as amended. The city recognizes its employees' privacy rights, and testing will be done in conformity with privacy requirements. Immediately prior to testing employees shall be told the test is required by federal regulations. 
(2)  The drugs that will be tested for include marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. An initial drug screen will be conducted on each urine specimen. For those specimens that are positive, a confirmatory gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) test will be performed. The test will be considered positive if the amounts present are above the minimum thresholds established in 49 CFR part 40, as amended. 
(3)  Tests for breath alcohol concentration will be conducted utilizing a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)-approved testing device operated by a trained technician. If the initial test indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater, a second test will be performed to confirm the results of the initial test. The confirmatory test will be performed using a NHTSA-approved evidential breath testing device (EBT) operated by a trained breath alcohol technician (BAT). A covered employee who has a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater but less than 0.04 will be removed from his/her position for 24 hours, unless a retest results in a concentration measure of less than 0.02. An alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater is a positive alcohol test and in violation of this chapter and the requirements set forth in 49 CFR part 655 for covered employees. 
(4)  The drugs that will be tested for include marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. Urine specimens will be collected using the split specimen collection method described in 49 CFR Part 40. Each specimen will be accompanied by a DOT chain of custody and control form and identified using a unique identification number that attributes the specimen to the correct individual. An initial drug screen will be conducted on the primary urine specimen. For those specimens that are not negative, appear to be substitute, or adulterated, a confirmatory gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) test will be performed. The test will be considered positive if the amounts present are above the minimum thresholds established in 49 CFR part 40, as amended. Attachment C, located at the end of this chapter, lists the minimum thresholds established for each drug and/or its metabolites. The test results from the laboratory will be reported to a medical review officer. A medical review officer (MRO) is a licensed physician with detailed knowledge of substance abuse disorders and drug testing. The MRO will review the test results to ensure the scientific validity of the test and to determine whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for a confirmed positive test result, substitution or adulteration. The MRO will contact the employee, notify employee of the positive, substitute, or adulterated laboratory result, and provide employee with an opportunity to explain the confirmed test result. The MRO will then review the employee's medical history/medical records to determine whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for a positive, substitute or adulterated laboratory result. If no legitimate medical explanation is found, the test will be verified positive, substitute, or adulterated and reported to the company program manager. If a legitimate explanation is found, the MRO will report the test result as negative. 
(5)  The split specimen will be stored at the initial laboratory until the analysis of the primary specimen is completed. If the primary specimen is negative, the split will be discarded. If the primary is positive, the split will be retained for testing if so requested by the employee through the medical review officer. The city reserves the right to test for additional drugs. 
(b)  Observed collections. 
(1)  Per 49 CFR part 40 collection under direct observation (by a person of same gender) with no advance notice will occur if: 
a.  The laboratory reports to the MRO that a specimen is invalid, and the MRO reports to program manager (city manager) that there was not an adequate medical explanation for the result; or 
b.  The MRO reports to the program manager that the original positive, adulterated, or substituted test result had to be cancelled because the test of the split specimen could not be performed. Program manager may direct a collection under direct observation of employee if the drug test is a return-to-duty test or a follow-up test. 
(2)  The collector must immediately conduct a collection under direct observation if they are directed by the program manager to do so, or if: 
a.  The collector observes materials brought to the collection site or the employee's conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a specimen; or 
b.  The temperature on the original specimen was out of range; or 
c.  The original specimen appeared to have been tampered with. 
(c)  Employee requested testing. 
(1)  Any employee who questions the results of a required drug test hereunder may request that the split sample be tested. This test must be conducted at a different DHHS-certified laboratory. The test must be conducted on the split sample that was provided by the employee at the same time as the original sample. The split sample test will occur regardless of up-front payment, but the city reserves the right to seek reimbursement from the employee. The method of collecting, storing, and testing the split sample will be consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 CFR part 40, as amended. The employee's request for a split sample test must be made to the medical review officer within 72 hours of notice of the original sample verified test result. Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted if the delay was due to documentable facts that were beyond the control of the employee. 
(2)  Any covered employee that has a confirmed positive drug or alcohol test will be immediately removed from all duties, informed of educational and rehabilitation programs available, and referred to a substance abuse professional (SAP) for assessment. A positive drug and/or alcohol test is cause for disciplinary action pursuant to the city personnel policies. 
(d)  Pre-employment testing. 
(1)  All candidates shall undergo urine drug testing immediately following the offer of employment or transfer into a new position. A negative drug test result is required prior to employment. Failure of a pre-employment drug test will disqualify an applicant for employment for 120 days. A substance abuse professional's certification of the absence of drug dependency that meets with the approval of the city, and negative pre-employment drug tests, will be required prior to further consideration for employment. The cost for assessment and any subsequent treatment will be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(2)  In addition, FTA requires all safety sensitive employees who have been off duty for 90 or more days for any reason are required to successfully pass a pre-employment drug test prior to the performance of a safety-sensitive function. A pre-employment/pre-transfer test will also be performed anytime an employee's status changes from an inactive status in a safety-sensitive position to an active status in a safety-sensitive position (i.e., return from worker's comp. or leave of absence). 
(e)  Reasonable suspicion testing. 
(1)  All covered employees may be subject to urine and/or breath testing when there are reasons to suspect drug or alcohol use is adversely affecting job performance. A determination of reasonable suspicion for drug or alcohol testing must be based on specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations of appearance, speech, behavior and/or odors of the covered employee. Further evidence of reasonable suspicion includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Physical signs and symptoms consistent with prohibited substance use or alcohol misuse. 
b.  Evidence of the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of controlled substances, drugs, alcohol, or other prohibited substances. 
c.  Occurrence of a serious or potentially serious accident that may have been caused by prohibited substance abuse or alcohol misuse. 
d.  Fights, assaults, and violations of established safety, security, or other operating procedures. 
(2)  Reasonable suspicion referrals must be made in writing by a supervisor who has received at least 60 minutes of training to detect the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use, and who reasonably concludes that an employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his/her work performance due to possible prohibited drug or alcohol use. Alcohol testing must be accomplished within eight hours of a reasonable suspicion determination. If testing is not done within eight hours, test attempts shall cease, and a written report explaining the failure to test shall be made. Drug testing may be done any time a covered employee is on duty. 
(f)  Post-accident testing. 
(1)  All covered employees must undergo urine and breath testing if they are involved in an accident. Covered employees whose performance could have contributed to the accident must be tested. A post-accident test will be conducted unless the employee's actions can be completely ruled out as a contributing factor to the accident. 
(2)  Following an accident, the covered employees will be tested as soon as possible, but no later than eight hours after the accident for alcohol testing and 32 hours after the accident for drug testing. After such times have elapsed, no further testing shall be attempted and the reasons for any failures to test shall be recorded. Any covered employee involved in an accident must refrain from alcohol use for eight hours following the accident or until he/she undergoes a post-accident alcohol test. Any covered employee who leaves the scene of the accident without justifiable explanation prior to submission to drug and alcohol testing will be considered to have refused the test and shall be subject to discipline under the city personnel policies. 
(g)  Random testing. Covered employees will be subject to random, unannounced testing. The selection of covered employees for random alcohol testing will be made using a scientifically valid method that ensures each covered employee of an equal chance of being selected each time selections are made. The random tests will be unannounced and spread throughout the year. Ten percent of covered employees will be tested each year for alcohol, and 50 percent of covered employees will be tested each year for drugs. Random drug tests may be conducted any time a covered employee is on duty. 
(h)  Return to duty and follow-up testing. A negative drug and alcohol test is a requirement for return to duty. All covered employees who have returned to duty after removal for alcohol or drug use will be required to undergo frequent, unannounced random urine and/or breath testing. The testing will be performed for a period of one to five years, with a minimum of six tests to be performed the first year. Such testing shall also be performed after a substance abuse professional determines a covered employee needs help resolving drug or alcohol problems. Random alcohol tests and drug tests may be conducted any time a covered employee is on duty. 
(i)  Employee requested testing. Any employee who questions the results of a required drug test may request that the split sample be tested. This test must be conducted at a different DHHS-certified laboratory. The test must be conducted on the split sample that was provided by the employee at the same time as the original sample. The employee pays all cost for such testing unless the result of the split sample test invalidates the results of the original test. The method of collecting, storing, and testing the split sample will be in compliance with the requirements of 49 CFR part 40, as amended. The employee's request for a split sample test must be made to the medical review officer within 72 hours of notice of the original sample verified test result. Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted if the delay was due to documentable facts that were beyond the control of the employee. The medical review officer (MRO) is Dr. Mark G. Catlin and Dr. Jennifer A. Collins, 402 W. County Road D, St. Paul, MN 55112, tel. 651-636-7466, 800-832-3244; the drug testing for all DOT employees will be performed by J&B Professional Drug and Alcohol Testing Service, John Copeland and Beverly Copeland, 178 Elks Club Road, Covington, Ga. 30014, 770-787-0762. 
(j)  Random testing. Random alcohol and drug tests may be done any time a covered employee is on duty. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-9. - Professional evaluation; discipline; proper application of the policy. 
(a)  Any covered employee who tests positive for the presence of illegal drugs or alcohol above the minimum thresholds set forth in 49 CFR part 40, as amended, will be referred for evaluation by a substance abuse professional (SAP). An SAP is a licensed or certified physician, psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol-related disorders. The SAP will evaluate each employee to determine what assistance, if any, the employee needs in resolving problems associated with prohibited drug use or alcohol misuse. 
(b)  Evaluation by an SAP or participation in the city's employee assistance program does not shield an employee from disciplinary action or guarantee employment or reinstatement with the city. The city will not permit any covered employee to perform or continue to perform safety-sensitive functions if it has actual knowledge that the employee is using alcohol or illegal drugs. The employee can be placed on administrative leave pending disciplinary action. An employee who refuses an instruction to submit to a drug/alcohol test shall not be permitted to finish his or her shift and shall be terminated. A covered employee can be relieved of his/her responsibilities and subject to discipline for not fulfilling his/her responsibilities. Per city authority, violation of this substance abuse policy can result in termination of employment and/or exclusion from hire. 
(c)  However, in the rare event an employee is reinstated with court order or other action beyond the control of the city, the employee must complete the return-to-duty process prior to the performance of safety-sensitive functions. All covered employees who previously tested positive on a drug or alcohol test or refused a test, must test negative for drugs and alcohol (below 0.02 for alcohol) and be evaluated and released by the substance abuse professional before returning to work. For an initial positive drug test a return-to-duty drug test is required and an alcohol test is allowed. For an initial positive alcohol test a return-to-duty alcohol test is required and a drug test is allowed. Following the initial assessment, the SAP will recommend a course of rehabilitation unique to the individual. The SAP will recommend the return-to-duty test only when the employee has successfully completed the treatment requirement and is known to be drug and alcohol-free and there are no objective concerns for public safety. 
(d)  Covered employees that have returned to duty following a positive or refused test will be required to undergo frequent, unannounced drug and/or alcohol testing following the return-to-duty test. The follow-up testing will be performed for one to five years with a minimum of six tests to be performed the first year. The frequency and duration of the follow-up testing, tests (beyond the minimums), will be determined by the substance abuse professional (SAP) reflecting the SAP's assessment of the employee's unique situation and recovery progress. All follow-up urine drug collections will be conducted as directly observed collections in accordance with 49 CFR part 40.67, as amended. Follow-up testing should be frequent enough to deter and/or detect a relapse. Follow-up testing is separate and in addition to the random, post-accident, reasonable suspicion and return-to-duty testing. 
(e)  The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be paid directly by the employee or their insurance provider. Employees will be allowed to take accumulated sick leave and vacation leave to participate in the prescribed rehabilitation program. 
(f)  City is dedicated to assuring fair and equitable application of this substance abuse policy. Therefore, supervisors/managers are required to use and apply all aspects of this policy in an unbiased and impartial manner. Any supervisor/manager who knowingly disregards the requirements of this policy, or who is found to deliberately misuse the policy in regard to subordinates, shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-10. - Drug and alcohol abuse prevention contact persons. 
Any questions regarding this chapter should be directed to Doug White, the city program manager. 
The entity with knowledge of and experience in diagnosis and treatment of drug and alcohol abuse is designated by the city as the substance abuse professional (SAP), Donnie R. Harris, 2358 Wall Street, Conyers, GA 30015, 678-668-5295. 
Alcohol testing will be performed by J&B Professional Drug and Alcohol Testing Service, John Copeland and Beverly Copeland, 178 Elks Club Road, Covington, Ga. 30014, 770-787-0762, a qualified and approved laboratory that has agreed to comply with all applicable local, state and federal requirements for alcohol testing. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-11. - Employee assistance program. 
City shall provide educational materials to employees before alcohol and drug testing is started under this chapter, in conformity with 40 CFR § 199.239. Employee organizations will be given written notice of these materials. Such materials will include this chapter and may include information about the effect of alcohol misuse and signs of an alcohol problem. Education shall also include intervention, evaluation and resolution of alcohol problems. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-12. - Disclosure of information. 
(a)  The city will securely maintain all testing information, including results and other related records, and shall not disclose that information except as required by law. Test results will not be placed in personnel files, unless required by law. 
(b)  The city shall release information regarding a covered employee's record as directed by specific, written consent from the employee authorizing release of the information to an identified person. 
(c)  A covered employee is entitled, upon written request, to obtain copies of any records pertaining to his/her use of prohibited substances, including any records pertaining to test results. 
(d)  The city may disclose information that is required to be maintained to the decision maker in a lawsuit, grievance, or other proceeding initiated by or on behalf of the employee tested. 
(e)  When requested by the national transportation safety board as part of an accident investigation, the city shall disclose information related to its administration of drug and alcohol tests following the accident investigation. 
(d)  Records shall be made available to subsequent employers upon receipt of written request from the covered employee. 
(e)  The city shall disclose data for its drug and alcohol testing program and any other information pertaining to its anti-drug program, when requested by the secretary of transportation or any DOT agency with regulatory authority over the city. 
(f)  Attached as "Attachment B" at the end of this chapter is information about the adverse consequences of alcohol use. 
(g)  To be considered for employment, all applicants will be asked to consent to a background check of the applicant's previous DOT covered employer over the past two years. The information requested will include: 
(1)  Alcohol test results of 0.04 or higher alcohol concentration. 
(2)  Verified positive drug tests. 
(3)  Refusals to be tested (including verified adulterated or substituted drug test results.) 
(4)  Other violations of DOT agency drug and alcohol testing regulations. 
(5)  With respect to any employee who violated a DOT drug and alcohol regulation, documentation of the employee's successful completion of DOT return-to-duty requirements (including follow-up tests). 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-13. - Record maintenance. 
The city and the laboratory performing the testing will maintain the following testing records: 
(1)  Records related to the testing process, including calibration documentation, documentation of training, documents generated in connection with decisions to administer reasonable suspicion tests, documents generated in connection with decisions to administer post-accident tests, and documents verifying existence of a medical explanation for the inability of covered employees to provide adequate breath or saliva for testing; 
(2)  Records related to test results, including copy of test forms, the results of the tests, documents related to the refusal of any covered employee to submit to a required test, and documents presented by a covered employee to dispute test results; 
(3)  Records related to other violations outlined in this chapter, and records of procedures to be followed if a test shows alcohol concentration of 0.02 or more or use of an illegal drug; 
(4)  Records related to referrals and evaluations, including, but not limited to, determinations by an SAP of an employee's need for assistance, and records of an employee's compliance with an SAP's recommendation if the city requires the employee to follow said recommendations; 
(5)  Records related to annual testing data and "missed test" information. The city shall submit testing data and "missed test" information as required by federal law; 
(6)  Records related to education and training, including, material on alcohol and drug abuse awareness, a copy of this chapter, documentation of compliance with requirements regarding information disclosure, documentation of training regarding reasonable suspicion determinations, and certification that training per this chapter complies with the requirements of the CFR. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 36-14. - Record retention. 
(a)  The following records will be retained for a minimum period of five years: records of positive drug tests and alcohol tests with results of 0.02 or greater, documentation of refusals to take required tests, calibration documentation, including records of the results of external calibration checks, employee referrals and evaluations, management information system (MIS) annual report data, and documents pertaining to "missed tests"; 
(b)  The following records will be retained for a minimum period of two years: records related to the collection process, training records, inspection and maintenance records of all equipment used in employee testing, documentation of compliance with the quality assurance procedure for all equipment used for testing, and training and proficiency testing records of each technician used in employee testing; 
(c)  The following records will be retained for a minimum period of one year: records of employee alcohol test results showing an alcohol concentration below 0.02 grams, and negative drug test results. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Attachment A 

 

 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Attachment B: Alcohol Fact Sheet 
Alcohol is a socially acceptable drug that has been consumed throughout the world for centuries. It is considered a recreational beverage when consumed in moderation for enjoyment and relaxation during social gatherings. However, when consumed primarily for its physical and mood-altering effects, it is a substance of abuse. As a depressant, it slows down physical responses and progressively impairs mental functions. 
Signs and symptoms of use: dulled mental processes, lack of coordination, odor of alcohol on breath, possible constricted pupils, sleepy or stuporous condition, slowed reaction rate, slurred speech. (Note: except for the odor, these are general signs and symptoms of any depressant substance.) 
Health effects: the chronic consumption of alcohol (average of three servings per day of beer (12 ounces), whiskey (one ounce), or wine (six-ounce glass)) over time may result in the following health hazards: decreased sexual functioning, dependency (up to ten percent of all people who drink alcohol become physically and/or mentally dependent on alcohol and can be termed "alcoholic," fatal liver diseases, increased cancers of the mouth, tongue, pharynx, esophagus, rectum, breast, and malignant melanoma, kidney disease, pancreatitis, spontaneous abortion and neonatal mortality, ulcers, birth defects (up to 54 percent of all birth defects are alcohol related). 
Social issues: two-thirds of all homicides are committed by people who drink prior to the crime. Two to three percent of the driving population is legally drunk at any one time. This rate is doubled at night and on weekends. Two-thirds of all Americans will be involved in an alcohol-related vehicle accident during their lifetimes. The rate of separation and divorce in families with alcohol dependency problems is seven times the average. Forty percent of family court cases are alcohol problem related. Alcoholics are 15 times more likely to commit suicide than are other segments of the population. More than 60 percent of burns, 40 percent of falls, 69 percent of boating accidents, and 76 percent of private aircraft accidents are alcohol related. 
The annual toll: 24,000 people will die on the highway due to the legally impaired driver. 12,000 more will die on the highway due to the alcohol-affected driver. 15,800 will die in non-highway accidents. 30,000 will die due to alcohol-caused liver disease. 10,000 will die due to alcohol-induced brain disease or suicide. Up to another 125,000 will die due to alcohol-related conditions or accidents. 
Workplace issues: it takes one hour for the average person (150 pounds) to process one serving of an alcoholic beverage from the body. Impairment in coordination and judgment can be objectively measured with as little as two drinks in the body. A person who is legally intoxicated is six times more likely to have an accident than a sober person. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Attachment C: Minimum Thresholds 

 
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid. 
Benzoylecgonine 
Specimen must also contain amphetamine at a concentration greater than or equal to 200 ng/ml. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; unsafe buildings, § 18-91 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment of November 8, 2016, amended the Code by repealing former art. II, §§ 38-31—38-39, and adding a new art. II. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of June 12, 2001; and an ordinance of April 13, 2004. 
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9. 

Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, unless otherwise stated: 
Best management practices means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the land area immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the county soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sediment control plan ("plan") means a plan for control of soil erosion and sediment from land-disturbing activity. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means final grade or elevation and contour of ground after cutting or filling and conforming to proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of the ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in this Code. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator means the party or parties with: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities necessary to ensure compliance with a storm-water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the storm-water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under this section. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, entity, joint venture, public or private corporation, LLC, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the county soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Structural erosion and sediment control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout water are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sediment control measures means measures for stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any areas adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency or duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Sec. 38-32. - Reserved. 
Sec. 38-33. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in nominal soil erosion. 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum standards as set forth in section 7-003.4 of this Code. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to title 12, chapter 5, article 2 of the O.C.G.A., entitled the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of this Code and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
(5)  Agricultural operations defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include the raising, harvesting, or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for livestock, including but not limited to cattle, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsection 38-34(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Project under technical supervision of natural resources conservation service of the state department of agriculture. 
(8)  Any project involving one acre or less which is not part of a land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of more than one acre; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves one acre or less, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), or (10) of subsection (a). 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in subsection 38-34(b) and (c) of this Code; provided further that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1 except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development of sale under the state general permit in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holder. 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(b)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 38-34 hereof, the issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Sec. 38-34. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. and of subsections (b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and in this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event and in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with construction of single-family homes not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to this section governing land-disturbing activities shall require, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be made to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not adversely affect adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed channels so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts, except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any such case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 38-34(b)(2) of this Code; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided, however, that buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. A stream buffer of 25 feet in width shall be maintained in addition to the 25-foot state waters buffer. The following requirements apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality or aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" per article 2, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirements for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented; 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 12, chapter 5, article 2, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," unless a variance for such activity is granted by the director, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 38-34(b) and (c) of this Code. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Sec. 38-35. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineer shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, flood prevention ordinance, this Code, and all other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party eligible for a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 38-35(c). Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 38-34. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  A fee of $700.00 for non-residential development and $90.00 per lot or unit for residential development shall be charged. 
a.  In addition to the above specified local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph 5, subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23. Provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 38-34(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the council to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits of this section or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, (as amended) within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the council may deny the permit application. 
b.  The permit applicant shall post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance, regulation or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the council with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 38-34. Conformance with the minimum requirements shall be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide, and shall conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. "The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this section. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, ordinances and regulations of the city, and state laws and regulations. 
(2)  Data required for site plan: 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sediment controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated start and completion dates, which must include the statement in bold letters, that "installation of erosion control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Storm water and sediment management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetation plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
j.  Maintenance statement: "erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sediment control measures will be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection or if the existing measures do not provide effective erosion and sediment control." 
(3)  Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and featured areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected shall be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineation of required 50-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineation of the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sediment control measures and practices, using coding symbols from the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the council unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the council has affirmatively determined the plan is in compliance with this section, any variances required by subsections 38-34(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements per subsection 38-35(b)(5) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect in the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the council, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or its successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or its successor in title is in violation of this section. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the county tax commissioner and the clerk and/or their designees, certifying that all ad valorem taxes against the property have been paid. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Sec. 38-36. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city building inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined in this section has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with all provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  The building inspector may conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The district or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the council for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The division may periodically review the actions of the council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of the city's ordinances and regulations and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the council. If such review indicates that the council has not administered or enforced its ordinances or regulations or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the council in writing. The council shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the council does not take necessary correction action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the council as an issuing authority. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Sec. 38-37. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this section without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the city. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provision of this section. The director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or water of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city, by the director, or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the city or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 38-35(d)(2). The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, any person who violates any provision of this section, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Code, notwithstanding any provision in the City Charter to the contrary, the city court shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violation of city ordinances or regulations, any magistrate court or any other court of jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this section under city ordinances or regulations approved under this section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)  The following penalties shall apply to land-disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this section, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section; 
a.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; and 
b.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land-disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection a. hereinbefore. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Sec. 38-38. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies . The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the council upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city, shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the council within 30 days after receipt by the city clerk of a written notice of appeal. Notice of appeal must be submitted within 30 days of the city giving the holder notice of the decision. 
(b)  Judicial review . Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the council, after exhausting its administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the superior courts of either Greene County, Georgia, or Newton County, Georgia, as the case may be. The appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision of the council. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Sec. 38-39. - Liability. 
Neither the approval of a plan under this section, nor the compliance with this section, shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. No provisions of this section shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any water of the state as defined thereby. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Sec. 38-40. - Education and certification. 
After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Amend. of 11-8-2016) 
Secs. 38-41—38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c); nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 38-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience, or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would an ordinary reasonable man; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one of a few individuals. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Code 1982, § 18-101) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-62. - Proceedings to abate generally. 
Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of this city, except for a nuisance excepted in this article, shall be abated in the manner set forth in this article. 
(1)  Initiation. Proceedings to abate a nuisance, whether public or private, shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the city clerk/treasurer, which complaint shall state the nature and location of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant or complainants. In the case of a private nuisance, the complaint shall be filed by the person or persons injured by the nuisance; in the case of a public nuisance, the complaint shall be filed on behalf of the public by a city official or by a citizen specifically injured by the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice of hearing. Upon the filing of a complaint as provided in subsection (1) of this section, the city clerk/treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the nuisance is a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the city clerk/treasurer, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed by the city council. Such notice shall be served at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing by any authorized officer of the city, and shall be made either personally or by leaving a copy at the party's most well-known place of abode. A copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the complainant or complainants. 
(3)  Order of abatement. If after hearing all the evidence the city council should decide that the activity complained of is a nuisance, the city council shall issue an order directed to the chief of police or any member of the police force, commanding that the nuisance be abated. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the party or parties maintaining the nuisance. 
(4)  Effect of noncompliance. In the event of a refusal to comply with the order of abatement issued by the city council, the person or persons maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to arrest for violation of state law. 
(Code 1982, § 18-102) 
Sec. 38-63. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in section 38-62 shall prevent the city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1982, § 18-103) 
Secs. 38-64—38-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 38-91. - Findings; objectives. 
(a)  It is essential that the quality of the city's public drinking water be insured. It is therefore necessary to protect the subsurface water resource the city and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. Groundwater resources are contained within groundwaters, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These groundwaters are replenished by infiltration of stormwater runoff in zones of the surface know as groundwater recharge areas. 
(b)  Groundwaters are susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is therefore necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge zones in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(c)  The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect the groundwater by prohibiting land uses that generate dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect the groundwater by limiting density of development; and 
(3)  Protect the groundwater by ensuring that the development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1)) 
Sec. 38-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to, and reasonably related to, a main building on the same lot or to the primary use of the property. The accessory building shall be of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal. Signs and fences are not to be considered as accessory buildings. A "detached" accessory building shall be one that does not have a common wall with the main building on the same lot. 
Development permit means building permits, rezone applications, preliminary and final subdivision plat applications, conditional use permit applications, and variance applications. 
Groundwater means any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Groundwater recharge area means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an groundwater. 
Groundwater recharge area district means all land within the city which are indicated as "most significant groundwater recharge areas" on the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas Number 20. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an Groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, or other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility map means maps prepared by the state department of natural resources that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater recharge areas to pollution. The pollution susceptibility map categorizes the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium, and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 20 (1992 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical natural and form of the rock), soil type, and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst' topography (sinkholes, caves, and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-93. - Establishment of an groundwater recharge area district. 
An groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the city that are mapped as most significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20 (1992 edition). 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 2) 
Sec. 38-94. - Determination of pollution susceptibility. 
Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20. Such map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 3) 
Sec. 38-95. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
(a)  No building permit, rezoning request, or subdivision plan will be approved by the city council unless the permit, request or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in sections 38-101 through 38-105. 
(b)  The city council, its agent, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city council deems necessary. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure by the city council. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), §§ 4(intro), 4.1) 
Sec. 38-96. - Permit review and site plan requirement. 
Application for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan, with the exception of certain exempted activities identified in section 38-97. The following information is required for all site plans: 
(1)  A map shall, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways; water, wastewater, and stormwater facilities; and utility installations. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 4.2) 
Sec. 38-97. - Exemptions to site plan requirements. 
The following activities and development are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings constructed within a subdivision of fewer than four parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of accessory buildings, such as sheds, or additions to single-family residences. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 4.3) 
Sec. 38-98. - Activities to comply with site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of such site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of city council. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 4.4) 
Sec. 38-99. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(c)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 4.5) 
Sec. 38-100. - Review procedures. 
The application shall be filed with the building inspector or other person so designated by the city council. The city council shall review and vote on the permit application. The city council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Within seven days of its decision, the city council shall notify the applicant. If the city council fails to act on the application within 30 days of its submission to the city council, the application is deemed to have been approved. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 4.6) 
Sec. 38-101. - Significant groundwater recharge area protection standards. 
New waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 5.1) 
Sec. 38-102. - Land disposal of hazardous waste prohibited. 
No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 5.2) 
Sec. 38-103. - Use of impervious surfaces for certain facilities. 
New facilities that handle hazardous materials, of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks, and in amounts of 10,000 pounds on any one day or more, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire code requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 5.3) 
Sec. 38-104. - Storage tanks; secondary containment. 
New above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons must have secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. Tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt it they comply with all federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 5.4) 
Sec. 38-105. - Agricultural waste impoundment sites. 
New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed or compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 5.5) 
Sec. 38-106. - Minimum lot sizes and septic systems. 
No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems and section 38-107. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 6) 
Sec. 38-107. - New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system. 
(a)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimum set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections of A—F) of the DHR Manual (110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area as defined by the Hydrologic Atlas Number 20). 
(b)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum lot size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimum set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections of A-F) of the DHR Manual (110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area as defined by the Hydrologic Atlas Number 20). 
TABLE MT-1  MINIMUM LOT SIZES, MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS  AND MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SEWAGE FLOW  FOR THE TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 

 
Source: DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems 
1 "Nonpublic" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
2 "GPAD" means gallons per acre per day or gallons/acre/day. 
(1)  The minimum lot sizes in Table MT-1 are for the typical size home (three or four bedroom) with basic appurtenances such as: driveway, minimum number of trees, and water supply line. If larger homes, swimming pools, tennis courts or outbuildings, etc., are proposed to be constructed or if trees would interfere with installation of an on-site sewage management system, the county health department will require larger lots to assure useable soil area. 
(2)  The county health department may also require larger lot sizes when physical factors indicate the need to do so. These factors include, but are not limited to, the availability of sufficient unobstructed land areas for an approved on-site sewage management system and approved replacement system, slope greater than five percent, percolation rates higher than 45 minutes per inch, need for subsurface drainage or adverse topographic features. 
(3)  Lots shall be a minimum of 100 feet or 150 feet measured within the area where an approved on-site sewage management system and replacement system are to be located when served by a public water supply system or nonpublic water supply system, respectively. 
(4)  The following land areas are not considered as a part of a lot when calculating the required minimum lot size: rights-of-way or roads, easements (such as power line or pipeline) that exclude installation of an on-site sewage management system, bodies of water, land within 50 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetland or other bodies of water and similar limiting factors. 
(5)  There must be an unobstructed area on each lot for installation of an approved on-site sewage management system and an area equal in size for a conventional system or larger area, as appropriate, for an approved replacement system; this will include sufficient area for necessary site modifications for installation of both the initial system and a replacement system. All pertinent zoning setbacks and other space requirements must also be met. 
(6)  The maximum daily sewage flow for each lot or parcel of land shall not exceed 600 gpad when served by nonpublic or individual water supply system or 1,200 gpad when served by public water system. When sewage flows exceed these quantities (600 or 1,200 gpad as indicated) for a given dwelling structure, the minimum lot size or parcel of land shall be increased proportionally. Example: Assume a public water supply exists (1,200 gpad maximum sewage flow allowed per minimum required land area of 21,780 square feet), and there is a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd. To determine X = the square footage of the lot needed, use the following formula: 

 
Similarly, for a nonpublic (individual) water supply, to determine Y = the square footage of the lot needed for a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd, use the following formula: 

 
Lot sizing requirements are as follows for multifamily residential dwellings, all other non-single-family dwellings and commercial structures, and mobile homes located in commercial mobile home parks. Subsection (d)(1) through (6) of this section also apply to Table MT-2. 
TABLE MT-2  MINIMUM LOT SIZES, MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS  AND MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SEWAGE FLOW  FOR THE TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 

 
Source: DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems 
1 "Nonpublic" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
2 "GPAD" means gallons per acre per day or gallons/acre/day. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), §§ 6.1, 6.2; Ord. of 3-13-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 38-108. - Judicial review alternative actions. 
Based on any proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the city council may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 7) 
Sec. 38-109. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of this article in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), § 8) 
Sec. 38-110. - Soil groupings for use with minimum lot size tables. 
Soil groupings for use with minimum lot size tables shall be as follows: 
GROUP 1 (Well drained to excessively drained soils with percolation rates from <5 to 10 min./in.) 
Well drained (5-10 min./in. Percolation) 
Alley 
Americus 
Blaney 
Bonneau 
Chipola 
Chisolm 
Eddings 
Fuquay (Norfolk and Tifton thick surface; Lakeland shallow) 
Louisburg 
Lucy 
Valdosta 
Wagram 
Wateree 
Wicksburg 
Excessively Drained (<5 min./in. Percolation) 
Blanton 
Bonifay 
Cainhoy (Galestown, Palm Beach) 
Eustis 
Flomation 
Foxworth 
Fripp 
Kershaw (Lakewood) 
Kureb 
Lakeland (Huckabee) 
Molena 
Paula Troup 
GROUP 2 (Well drained to moderately well drained soils with percolation rates from 5 to 30 min./in.) 
Allen 
Bodine 
Brevard 
Brookshire 
Cahaba 
Centenary 
Chandler 
Chestnut 
Citico 
Clarendon 
Cowee 
Dekalb 
Edneyville 
Etowah (Nolichuncky) 
Euharlee 
Eunola 
Evard 
Faceville 
Goldsboro 
Haywood 
Irvington 
Izagora 
Jefferson 
Johns 
Kalmia 
Leesburg 
Linker 
Lockhart 
Louisa 
Lowndes 
Maxton 
Nella 
Norfolk 
Orangeburg 
Porters 
Red Bay (Ruston) 
Rion 
Sequatchie 
Sipsey 
Stilson 
Tallant 
Tifton 
Tusquitee 
Wedowee 
Wickham 
GROUP 3 (Well drained to moderately well drained soils with percolation rates from 30 to 60 min./in. Also includes somewhat poorly drained soils with percolation rates from 5 to 30 min./in.) 
Well drained to moderately well drained soils with slow percolation rates (30 to 60 min./in.) 
Alcovy 
Braddock 
Bradson 
Brasstown 
Capshaw 
Carnegie 
Clifton 
Decatur 
Dillard 
Dothan 
Durham 
Edneytown 
Fannin 
Freemanville 
Fullerton 
Greenville (Magnolia) 
Henceville 
Holston 
Hornsville 
Junaluska 
Kolomoki 
Locust 
Madison 
Minvale 
Mountview 
Nantahala 
Nauvoo 
Pacolet (Habersham) 
Rome 
Saunook 
Seneca 
Shack (Clarksville) 
Shelocta 
Shouns 
Suffolk 
Swafford 
Tate 
Tatum 
Tellico 
Thurmont 
Tidings 
Varina 
Waynesboro 
Somewhat poorly drained soils with rapid to moderate percolation rates (5 to 30 min./in.) 
Albany 
Ardilla 
Barth 
Chipley 
Coosaw 
Echaw 
Kanapana 
Leefield (Klej shallow, Lynchburg thick surface) 
Lynchburg Ocilla 
Olustee (Ona) 
Pottsburg 
Ridgeland 
Rigdon 
Scranton 
GROUP 4 (Well drained soils to moderately well drained soils with percolation rates from 60 to 90 min./in. Also poorly drained soils with moderate percolation rates from 10 to 15 min./in.) 
Well drained to moderately well drained soils with slow percolation rates (60-90 min./in.) 
Albertville 
Chestatee 
Cowarts 
Cunningham 
Cuthbert 
Davidson 
Dewey (Muse) 
Docena 
Dogue 
Duplin 
Dyke 
Enders 
Farragut 
Georgevilie 
Gilead 
Gritney 
Grover 
Hayesvilie 
Herndon 
Hulett 
Litz 
Marlboro 
Masada 
Nankin 
Nason 
Rabun 
Sawyer 
Sequoia 
Shubuta 
Steekee 
Poorly drained with moderate percolation rates (10-15 min./in.) 
Leon 
Mascotte 
Sapelo 
St. Johns 
GROUP 5 (Poorly drained soils that have a water table very near the surface with percolation rates from 5 to 10 min/in.) 
Alpaha 
Ogeechee 
Pasquotank 
Pelham 
Plummer 
Riceboro 
GROUP 6. Soils unsuitable due to the following reasons: 
Excess wetness (frequent flooding or ponding) 
Altavista 
Angie 
Augusta 
Bayboro 
Bethera 
Bibb 
Boehicket 
Brookman 
Capers 
Cartecay 
Cedarbluff 
Chastain 
Chatuge 
Chenneby 
Chewacla (Philo, Stendai) 
Coxville 
Dasher 
Dowellton (Purdy) 
Egam 
Ellabelle 
Enon 
Flint 
French 
Gayesville 
Grady 
Guthrie 
Hamblen 
Hatboro 
Iredell 
Isles 
Istapoga 
Iuka 
Johnston 
Ketona 
Kingsland 
Kinston 
Leaf 
Levy 
Lumbee 
Lynn Haven 
Masontown 
Meggett 
Muckalee 
Myatt 
Oakboro 
Pelion 
Persanti 
Pickney 
Panzer 
Pooler 
Portsmouth 
Rembert 
Rigolette 
Roanoke (Robertville) 
Rollen 
Rutledge 
Satilla 
Shellbluff 
Surrency 
Tanyard, Tsali 
Tawcaw 
Wahaee 
Wax (Captina, Monogahela, Landisburg) 
Wehadkee (Atkins, Melvin) 
Whitwell 
Wolfever 
Shallow bedrock (there are some areas of these soils that have adequate depths) 
Apison 
Ashe 
Ashlar (Edgemont) 
Burton 
Cataska 
Chandler 
Fletcher 
Gilpin 
Goldston 
Gorgas 
Hartseiis (Lehew) 
Hector 
Lily 
Lyerty 
Manteo 
Montevailo (Klinesville) 
Mountainburg 
Musella 
Poindexter 
Ramsey 
Ranger 
Saluda 
Soco 
Sunlight 
Sweetapple 
Sylco 
Talladega 
Tallapossa 
Tsali 
Wilkes 
Zion 
Percolation rate (more than 90 min./in.) 
Angie 
Appling (Thurmont, Halewood) 
Aragon (Christian) 
Armuchee 
Arundel 
Barfield 
Bayboro 
Binnsville 
Bladen 
Boehicket 
Boswell (Oktiboeha, Sumter) 
Brookman 
Capers 
Cecil 
Chastain 
Colbert 
Conasauga 
Coxville 
Craven 
Dowellton (Purdy) 
Dunbar (Eulonia, Fairhope, Flint) 
Egam 
Esto 
Eutaw 
Grady 
Gwinnett (Lloyd) 
Heiena 
Henderson 
Hiwasee 
Hoffman 
Iredell 
Leadvale 
Leaf 
Lyerly 
Mecklenburg 
Meggett 
Orange 
Persanti 
Pooler 
Roanoke (Robertville) 
Rollen 
Sawyer 
Sunsweet 
Susquehanna 
Talbott 
Telfair 
Townley (Rarden) 
Tupelo 
Tyler 
Vance 
Vaucluse 
Wahee 
FLOODING (Flooding is infrequent and if protected from flooding they may be suitable) 
Arkaque 
Bigbee 
Buncombe 
Colvard 
Congaree 
Duckston 
Emory 
Ennis 
Huntington 
Ocelockonee 
Ousley 
Riverview 
Sequatchie 
Starr 
Staser 
Stato 
Subligna 
Suches 
Sullivan 
Toccoa 
Toxaway 
Transylvania 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(1), app.) 
Secs. 38-111—38-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 38-141. - Findings of fact. 
In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation which threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicant, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 1.1) 
Sec. 38-142. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the city; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This article shall apply to the portions of the following watershed, which occurs within the jurisdiction of the city and is herein identified as water supply watershed: Sherrills Creek Reservoir. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 1.2) 
Sec. 38-143. - Establishment of a water supply watershed district. 
(a)  Generally. The Sherrills Creek Reservoir Water Supply Watershed District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to Sherrills Creek Reservoir from the ridge line of the watershed. The boundary of the watershed district is defined by the ridge line of the watershed or by the political boundaries of the city where those boundaries occur within the watershed. The boundary shall be set at places readily identifiable on the watershed district map. 
(b)  Water quality critical area. The water quality critical area is established for land that lies adjacent to the reservoir boundary and the banks of streams extending upstream to a radius of seven miles from the public water intake and extending to the ridge line boundary of the watershed. The boundary of the water quality critical area shall be set at places readily identifiable on the watershed district map. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 2) 
Sec. 38-144. - Permit requirements. 
Within the water supply watershed district, no land-disturbing activity, construction or other development, other than certain exempted activities identified within, may be conducted without a permit from the city council and must be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not permissible as of right or as special permit uses shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 3.1) 
Sec. 38-145. - Temporary emergency permit. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this district or any other law to the contrary, the city council may issue a temporary emergency permit through oral or written authorization, provided a written permit is accomplished within five days, if it deems that an unacceptable threat to life or severe loss of property will occur if a temporary emergency permit is not granted. The temporary emergency permit may be terminated at any time without process upon a determination by the city council that the action was not or is no longer necessary to protect human health or the environment. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 3.2) 
Sec. 38-146. - Exemptions. 
The following land use activities are exempted from the permit and site plan requirements of this article: 
Agriculture and forestry. Normal agricultural activities involving planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to best management practices established by the state department of agriculture. Silvicultural activities must conform to best management practices established by the state forestry commission. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 3.3) 
Sec. 38-147. - Enforcement. 
The city council, its agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city council deems necessary. 
(1)  The city council is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement authority for this article. 
(2)  The city council shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits under this article; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(3)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the city council in enforcement of this article. 
(4)  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or 12 months for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(5)  The city council shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in section 38-161. 
(6)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
(7)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 3.4) 
Sec. 38-148. - Permit review; contents of application. 
(a)  Applications for a development permit within the watershed district shall include the following: 
(1)  Site plans required. Except for the exemptions listed in this section, all forms of development within the watershed district shall be required to have a site plan prepared and approved according to this article before any building permits or other development related permits may be issued or any land-disturbing activity may take place. 
(2)  Information required. Each site plan submitted under this article shall include the following: 
a.  A site plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways; water, wastewater and stormwater facilities; and utility installations. 
b.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
c.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
d.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
e.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
f.  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. 
(b)  A stormwater prevention plan submitted to the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, may meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), §§ 4.1, 4.2) 
Sec. 38-149. - Activities to comply with site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of such site plan. Significant changes to the site plan, that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the city council. Minor changes, such as realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions, are exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 4.3) 
Sec. 38-150. - Exemptions from site plan requirement. 
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than four parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of accessory buildings or additions to single-family residences. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 4.4) 
Sec. 38-151. - Pre-application conference. 
A pre-application conference is strongly encouraged between the applicant and the city council and can be scheduled at the request of the applicant. The purpose of the meeting is to review local land use restrictions, site plan requirements and the permitting process. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 4.5) 
Sec. 38-152. - Filing fee. 
At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the city council. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment and mitigation measures as deemed necessary by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 4.6) 
Sec. 38-153. - Review procedures. 
The city council shall review and vote on the permit application. The city council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Within seven days of its decision, the city council shall notify the applicant. If the city council fails to act on the application within 30 days of its submission to the city council, the application is deemed to have been approved. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 4.7) 
Sec. 38-154. - Denial. 
If the permit is denied by the city council, then the same permit application cannot be considered until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the permit by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 4.8) 
Sec. 38-155. - Appeals. 
Decisions on permit applications made by the city council may be appealed to the city council. The appeal must be made within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 4.9) 
Sec. 38-156. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. In cases of permit expiration due to abandonment or suspension of work, the landowner shall be required to restore topography to its original contours and restore vegetation as far as practicable. 
(c)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the city council no later than 30 days prior to expiration. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 4.10) 
Sec. 38-157. - Land use restrictions. 
(a)  Within the water quality critical area. The following limitations on permissible uses shall apply to the water quality critical area, in addition to the limitations on land use prescribed by the underlying zoning district. 
(1)  New hazardous waste handling facilities. New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(2)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities. New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(3)  New sanitary landfills. New sanitary landfills are permitted only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(4)  Agricultural land use. The application of animal waste on land must be accomplished in according to the agricultural best management practices. 
(b)  Reservoir management plan. The Sherrills Creek Reservoir Management Plan is incorporated by reference as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 5) 
Sec. 38-158. - Limitations. 
The following limitations on permissible uses shall apply in the water quality critical area. 
(1)  Impervious surface limitations. No more than 25 percent of the land area in the watershed may be covered by impervious surface within the Sherrills Creek Reservoir Watershed. 
(2)  Impervious surface setbacks. For all perennial streams within the water quality critical area, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(3)  Vegetative buffers. 
a.  Undisturbed stream buffers within water quality critical area. For all perennial streams within the water quality critical area, an undisturbed vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.  Silvicultural BMPs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, forestry practices, in accordance with a forest management plan that incorporates best management practices (BMPs) approved by the state forestry commission, shall be permissible in the buffer areas. 
c.  Agricultural BMPs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the continued cultivation of agricultural crops and the occasional pasturing of livestock shall be permissible within the buffer area, provided that the best management practices of the state department of agriculture are followed. 
(4)  Septic tank drainfield restrictions. Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the setback area established in subsection 38-158(b)(1). 
(5)  Street runoff and drainage. New streets constructed within the water quality critical area shall not require any curb and gutter improvements additional to those required in the zoning ordinance for the city and chapter 66 of this Code regarding subdivisions. New streets that cross perennial streams within the water quality critical area shall be designed in such a way as to avoid direct runoff from the paved surface into the streams they cross. Such design features shall be shown on the site plan. 
(6)  New hazardous waste handling facilities. New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(7)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control. All developments and land disturbing activity within the water supply watershed district shall comply fully with article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 6) 
Sec. 38-159. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Previous uses preserved generally. The lawful use of any building, structure or land use existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this article, except that the nonconforming structures or use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Increased in intensity of use; 
(3)  Re-established after discontinuance for two years; 
(4)  Extended except in conformity with this article; or 
(5)  Structurally altered, except for repairs necessary for the continuation of the existing use. 
(b)  Replacement of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming building, structure or improvement which is hereafter damaged or destroyed to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the reasonable estimated replacement cost of the structure, building or improvement, as determined by the city council, may not be reconstructed or restored to the same nonconforming use except upon written approval of the city council. 
(c)  Application to projects partially complete. For any development that has received, before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, either preliminary plat approval, site plan approval, building permit or other relevant permits provided by city council and for which substantial work has been completed or substantial investment made in reliance upon such a permit, any future work included in such plat or plan may be completed without being subject to the additional regulations imposed in this article. Any significant additions, expansions or phases that deviate significantly from such plat or plan or that have not yet received a permit shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 7) 
Sec. 38-160. - Variances. 
(a)  When issued. The city council or its staff may authorize, upon appeal in individual cases, variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest. Variances will only be issued in cases where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. Such variance may be granted in individual cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship only upon a finding by the city council that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)  The application of this article to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the water quality of Sherrills Creek Reservoir or impair the purposes and intent of this article; 
(4)  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; 
(5)  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings or structures that is not permissible in the district involved; and 
(6)  The variance will not result in an increase of the impervious surface of the development beyond that prescribed according to section 38-158. 
(b)  Conditions. The city council may, as a condition of the variance to certain provisions of this article, require that alternative measures be taken by the applicant such that the purposes of this article may be achieved through alternative means. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 8) 
Sec. 38-161. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city council concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a special permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the city council may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 9) 
Sec. 38-162. - Amendments. 
These regulations and the watershed district map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 10) 
Sec. 38-163. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 11) 
Sec. 38-164. - Separability and abrogation. 
(a)  All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article. 
(b)  All ordinances and regulations in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 12) 
Sec. 38-165. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically described in this section, all words in this article shall have their usual and customary meanings. The use of the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the present tense includes the future; the use of shall means the action is mandatory; and the use of may or should means the action is optional. 
Accessory building means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to, and reasonably related to, a main building on the same lot or to the primary use of the property. The accessory building shall be of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal. Signs and fences are not to be considered as accessory buildings. A "detached" accessory building shall be one that does not have a common wall with the main building on the same lot. 
Buffer, undisturbed means a natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to a reservoir or perennial stream within a water supply watershed. 
Conservation easement means a portion of land set aside in its natural state and preserved as open space in perpetuity. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Development or single development mean any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. 
Hazardous Material means any "contaminant" as defined in this article, and any hazardous chemical for which a material safety data sheet must be filed under 42 USC 11021 and 11022. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency according to federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261.3. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools and patios. 
Land-disturbing activity means any operation that involves excavation or filling of land, clearing of vegetation or construction, rebuilding or alteration of an existing structure. Land-disturbing activity does not include ordinary maintenance and landscaping activities, yard and grounds maintenance, individual home gardens, repairs or minor modifications to a single-family residence or the cuffing of firewood for personal use. 
Large quantity generator of hazardous waste means any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity defined as a "large quantity generator" by the state department of natural resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. and regulated by the state under that section. To qualify as a large quantity generator, the legal entity must generate at least 2,200 pounds of hazardous waste per year. 
Limited development area means the portion of the water supply watershed not included in the water quality critical area. 
Natural vegetated area means an undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include: 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife. 
(2)  Outdoor recreational activities, including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, skeet and trap shooting. 
(3)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(4)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures and utilities used in the service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the pervious nature of the land shall be minimized. 
(5)  Limited excavating, filling and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the permissible uses. 
Nonconforming use means a land use activity, building or structure legally established prior to adoption of this article or subsequent amendment to it, that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this article. 
Overlay district means a district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land use category. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the year, as indicated by a solid blue line on United States Geological Survey (USGS;) seven-minute topographic series maps (scale of 1/24,000). 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a reservoir, defined by its normal pool level. 
Setback means the distance that defines the width of a protective buffer, measured from the boundary of the feature of the landscape (e.g., a wetland or stream bank) that the buffer is designed to protect. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads. 
Water quality critical area means the portion of the water supply watershed nearest the public water intake, where the most stringent land use limitations of this article apply. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the drainage area (watershed) of lands upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(2), § 13) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 38-166—38-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 38-201. - Findings, purpose. 
(a)  The wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. The wetlands provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(b)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over, time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)  It is therefore necessary for the city to ensure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities that may adversely affect wetlands. 
(d)  The purpose of this article is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this article is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3)) 
Sec. 38-202. - Definitions.[4] 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Functions means the beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including: storage, conveyance and attenuation of floodwater and stormwater; protection of water quantity and quality and reduction of erosion; habit for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wildlife and fisheries; educational, historical and archeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic and recreational amenities. 
Generalized wetland map means wetlands identified on the U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, National Wetlands Inventory Maps. 
Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soil conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the soil conservation service. 
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions. 
Jurisdictional determination means an official, written statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or, in the case of coastal marshlands, the state department of natural resources. 
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the united states excepting those activities exempted in section 38-205 and exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Silviculture means the art of producing, reproducing and growing a forest of distinctive stands of trees. 
Temporary emergency permit means a temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified in section 38-207. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Wetland protection district [5] means wetlands within the city which are indicated on the generalized wetland map. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The generalized wetland map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the land owner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Where other terms or words require definition, please refer to the 1987 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Manual or call the District Corps office in Savannah, at 1-800-448-2402. 
 --- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The source wetlands map is the Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps. The city should consider the limitations of available map resources used to compile the generalized wetland map. To varying degrees, all maps contain systematic distortion and inaccuracy. Generally, inaccuracy grows larger with decreasing map scale. Commonly used wetland maps, such as the National Wetland Inventory (NWI) Maps, are drawn at a scale of 1:24,000. This means that one inch on the map represents 24,000 inches on the ground, or 2,000 feet (approximately two-fifths of a mile). Maps of this scale cannot define wetland boundaries in a legally defensible way. In addition, many small and isolated wetlands may not be shown on these maps. For these reasons, the generalized wetland map adopted by city can only be regarded as a general reference document, which may serve a variety of functions, such as indicating the need for seeking advice or a wetland determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. A Generalized Wetland Map at a scale of 1:24,000, cannot be used to delineate, in a legally defensible manner, the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands. Formal delineation of wetlands that are protected by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, is vested with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The Soil Conservation Service (SCS) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture is the lead agency for making wetland delineations on agricultural lands. 

Sec. 38-203. - Relationship to zoning. 
The wetland protection district shall comprise an overlay zone that supplements and is indicated on the city zoning map. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 2) 
Sec. 38-204. - Local development permit requirements. 
No regulated activity will be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the city council in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not identified in section 38-205 shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development is located within 200 feet of the wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the city or authorized designee using the generalized wetland map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site and that a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following issuance of the Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 3) 
Sec. 38-205. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided in this article. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit [6] 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. [7] 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. [8] 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 4) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— The activities listed in section 38-205 are exempted from Section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances. 
 --- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, Section 404 does list some required performance standards and 15 specific road construction best management practices (BMPs) that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption. 
 --- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Under Section 404, normal on-going agricultural activities are exempted from 404 regulations and do not require a permit. Normal agricultural activities include planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Under provisions of the Food Securities Act of 1985 (the so-called "Swampbuster Provisions") eligibility for all U.S. Department of Agriculture programs is denied to farms that convert wetlands to croplands. These programs include USDA price and income supports, disaster payments, crop insurance, Farmers Home Administration loans, Commodity Credit Corporation storage payments, farm storage facility loans, Conservation Reserve Program payments, and other programs under which payments are made to the farmer with respect to commodities produced. 

Sec. 38-206. - Prohibited use. 
The following uses are prohibited in the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 4A) 
Sec. 38-207. - Temporary emergency permit. 
A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the city council for the following reasons: 
(1)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to the city council and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(2)  Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations, provided that they are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
(3)  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of section 38-205. 
(4)  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 5) 
Sec. 38-208. - Site plans. 
Applications for a local development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 6) 
Sec. 38-209. - Activities to comply with site plan. 
(a)  All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of such site plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the city council. The city council may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this article. 
(b)  The city may require a bond up to the larger of $5,000.00 or $1,000.00 per acre of project area and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of condition of any such bond, the city or its designee may collect such bond or institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the action to judgement and execution. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 7) 
Sec. 38-210. - Permit; application. 
Application shall be made to the building inspector or other person so designated by the city council. The applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city council. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determinations as deemed necessary by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 8.1) 
Sec. 38-211. - Duration of permit. 
(a)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(c)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 8.2) 
Sec. 38-212. - Penalties. 
(a)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the city council. 
(b)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  If the city council discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city council shall issue written notification of the violation to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 8.3) 
Sec. 38-213. - Suspension, revocation. 
The city council may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The city council shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 8.4) 
Sec. 38-214. - Judicial review; alternative actions. 
Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the city council may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 9) 
Sec. 38-215. - Map amendment. 
These regulations and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar to wetlands becomes available. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 10) 
Sec. 38-216. - Relief assessment. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2000(3), § 11) 
Secs. 38-217—38-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL 

Sec. 38-241. - Emissions of gases, vapors, and odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors, or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant, or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. 
(b)  All persons within the city limits of the city shall, before entering upon any activity which may cause any form of pollutants, gases, vapors, or odors, to affect the air quality of the city; observe and obey all state and federal laws on air quality control, and shall follow the rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, Chapter 391-3-1. 
(Code 1982, § 9-101) 
Sec. 38-242. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of this article is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, notwithstanding any action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Nothing in this article shall limit any person who has been injured by an open burning from pursuing any available remedy at law or equity to which he may be entitled. 
(Code 1982, § 9-103) 
Sec. 38-243. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the mayor and the fire chief and such other officials as may be designated. Extinguishment of an illegal fire upon notice of an enforcing official as required in section 42-32 shall not be a bar to the further prosecution of any violator. 
(Code 1982, § 9-104) 
Secs. 38-244—38-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NOISE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 38-271. - Noise regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing within the city limits. 
(Code 1982, § 9-201) 
Sec. 38-272. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices; 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; and 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(Code 1982, § 9-202) 
Sec. 38-273. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 9-203) 
Secs. 38-274—38-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - WATER USE RULES 

Sec. 38-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address means the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
Even-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. 
Odd-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2004(2), § I) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-302. - Applicability of article. 
This article applies to all of the water consumers of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2004(2), § II) 
Sec. 38-303. - Outdoor water use schedule during nondrought periods. 
Outdoor water use, other than exempted activities, shall occur only as follows: 
(1)  Odd-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Even-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2004(2), § III) 
Sec. 38-304. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
(a)  Drought declarations shall be made by the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources and/or by the city council. 
(b)  During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use other than activities exempted in section 38-305 shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(c)  Declared Drought Response Level One — Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(3)  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(d)  Declared Drought Response Level Two — Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(e)  Declared Drought Response Level Three — Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 am. 
(1)  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
(2)  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
c.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. 
d.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
e.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
f.  Noncommercial fundraisers, such as car washes. 
g.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(f)  Declared Drought Response Level Four — No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in section 38-305, or as the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources may order. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2004(2), § IV) 
Sec. 38-305. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This rule shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(c)  Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
(1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during Drought Response Level Four. 
(2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of nondrought and Declared Drought Response Level One. 
(3)  Irrigation of tees during times of nondrought and Declared Drought Response Levels One, Two and Three. 
(4)  Irrigation of greens. 
(e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: 
(1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(2)  Irrigation contractors: during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
(3)  Sod producers. 
(4)  Ornamental growers. 
(5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
(6)  Retail garden centers. 
(7)  Hydro-seeding. 
(8)  Power-washing. 
(9)  Construction sites. 
(10)  Producers of food and fiber. 
(11)  Car washes. 
(12)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(13)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2004(2), § V) 
Sec. 38-306. - Enforcement. 
(a)  City departments responsible. Enforcement shall be the city police department personnel and the city utilities department personnel. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  First violation. Water consumers shall be given written notice of the violation by the city police department personnel or the city utilities department personnel. 
(2)  Second violation. Water consumers shall pay a surcharge as fixed from time by time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(3)  Third and subsequent violations. Water consumers shall pay a surcharge as fixed from time by time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer and have the water supply terminated. Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the surcharge and a reconnection fee as fixed from time by time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2004(2), § VI) 
Secs. 38-307—38-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - REGULATION OF PLACEMENT, ABANDONMENT, LEAVING, KEEPING OR STORAGE OF JUNK AND SALVAGE MATERIALS OUT-OF-DOORS UPON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE LAND 

Sec. 38-331. - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the City of Union Point, Georgia to permit the accumulation on such property, any junk, debris or trash. The term junk, debris or trash shall be defined as including any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scraped, ruined or junked personal property, including but not limited to motor vehicles, wheels, discarded furniture, mattresses, clothing, appliances, machinery, equipment and/or parts thereof. For purposes of this article, a motor vehicle shall be deemed to be discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scraped, ruined or junked personal property if it is not operational or exhibits any of the following characteristics; flat tires, no tires or wheels, parts missing from the body of the vehicle, no current tag. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(1), § 1) 
Sec. 38-332. - Enforcement. 
Whenever it shall appear to the code enforcement officer or any other authorized member or representative of the City of Union Point, Georgia that section 38-331 of this article is being violated, the officer shall in writing, notify the owner and occupant or tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate such violation by removing the material or materials into an enclosed garage or other storage building within 15 days of the mailing of the notice. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(1), § 2) 
Sec. 38-333. - Abatement penalties. 
If the owner or tenant of the premises on which the violation exists fails to abate the violation within the required time after notice, then the code enforcement officer or authorized member or representative of City of Union Point, Georgia, shall abate the violation, charge the cost thereof to the legal owner of the premises, and the legal owner of the premises shall be required by law, to pay the cost of such abatement to the city. 
(1)  Each day such violation exists 30 days after receipt of notice of initial violation, shall be considered a separate offense of violation of this article. 
(2)  Daily inspections of the premise in question will begin within 15 days of the mailing of the notice. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 38-334. - Routine and random inspections. 
Routine and random inspections of each and every premise within the City of Union Point, Georgia will be conducted year round by the code enforcement officer or authorized member or representative of City of Union Point, Georgia. Any premise found to be in violation of this article shall require abatement pursuant to section 38-332. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(1), § 4) 
Sec. 38-335. - Penalties. 
A violation of this article is an infraction, and shall be treated as a misdemeanor. The minimum fines for the first offense shall be no less than $100.00 and no more than $500.00 for the second offense. Violations shall be heard in the Municipal Court of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(1), § 5) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 2-93; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 26; distance from street corners and fire hydrants, § 82-10. 
State Law reference— Impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; the Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Open burning of litter, § 58-66. 

Sec. 42-31. - General regulations. 
Except as provided in section 42-32, no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this article shall be promptly extinguished by the person responsible for such fire upon notice by the fire chief, his designee, or other city official. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the mayor, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled; notwithstanding any provision of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 9-102(1)) 
Sec. 42-32. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Open burning is permitted upon applying to the fire chief for a permit, paying the $20.00 permit fee and securing such permit by meeting the following conditions: 
(1)  No practical alternative exists for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
(2)  No hazardous condition will be created by such burning; 
(3)  No salvage operation by open burning will be conducted; 
(4)  No leaves will be burned in those areas where leaf collection is provided by the city; 
(5)  No excessive smoke will be created; and 
(6)  Property and the health, safety, and comfort of persons are protected from the effects of such burning. 
(b)  Open burning may be done without a permit as follows: 
(1)  Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any public officer for the protection of the public safety and health; 
(2)  Open fires may be set where permitted for the cooking of food, or for recreational purposes, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created; and 
(3)  Fires may be set in connection with agricultural operations provided no nuisance is created. 
(Code 1982, § 9-102(2)) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for the purpose of preserving public health, safety and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 46-2. - Weeds and grass. 
(a)  Maximum height of certain vegetation; cutting; expenses. For the purposes of preventing the spread of diseases, the breeding of mosquitoes, other insects, rodents, snakes and other pests, and for the protection of the health of the citizens and residents of the city, it shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant or both, in possession of any land in the city limits to allow weeds, grass or other vegetation except vegetation commonly classified as growing crops, trees or ornamental or other shrubbery or nursery plants, to grow on the land at any time above the average height of 12 inches. Upon the weeds, grass, or other vegetation subject to this section reaching an average height of 12 inches, the owner or tenant in possession, or both, shall be required to cause the vegetation to be cut down at the expense of such owner or tenant, or both. 
(b)  Nuisance; abatement by city. In any case where the owner or tenant of land in the city limits, or both, fail to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) above, then such failure to comply is hereby deemed a nuisance and the city judge may issue an order directing the nuisance to be abated. The city clerk/treasurer in such case, may cause the vegetation to be cut and the land to be brought into compliance with subsection (a) above, and shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner or tenant in possession as for city revenues. 
(Amend. of 7-10-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 46-3. - Junked motor vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Junked motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed an unexpired license plate, and which is discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked. 
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle which is designed to travel along the ground and shall include but is not limited to automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers. 
(b)  Public nuisance. No person shall have a junked motor vehicle within the city limits for more than 72 hours. Violation is declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. This section shall not apply to any vehicle which is kept or used in a work area which is screened from public view by foliage or fencing, or totally enclosed within a building on private property, or held in connection with a business enterprise lawfully licensed by the city which is properly operated in the appropriate condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, or retained for legitimate antique collection purposes. 
(c)  Notice to owner. If a violation exists, notice in writing shall be served upon the violator or his/her agent requesting removal of the junked motor vehicle within seven days of receipt of notice. The notice shall advise that upon failure to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal, with the cost of removal to be levied against the violator. 
(d)  Responsibility for removal. Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the violator shall remove the junked motor vehicle. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the violator shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(e)  Hearing. A violator who disagrees with the notice may within six days of receipt thereof file a written request for hearing before the city council. The hearing shall be held within 90 days after the filing of the request. The violator shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance. At any such hearing the city and the violator may call and examine witnesses and present evidence, after which the city council shall make a decision regarding the notice of violation. 
(f)  Removal of vehicle. If the violation has not been remedied within the seven day period for compliance, or if the notice of violation is affirmed by the city council, the may cause the junked motor vehicle to be removed from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with such removal. Within 48 hours of the removal of such vehicle, written notice shall be given to the violator and anyone else known to the who has an ownership interest in the junked motor vehicle, that the vehicle has been impounded and stored. The notice shall give the location of the vehicle and the costs incurred by the city for removal. 
(g)  Sale of vehicle. Upon removing a vehicle the city may cause the junked motor vehicle to be sold in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 9-13-140 et seq. The notice of the sale shall state: 
(1)  That the sale is of a junked motor vehicle in the possession of the city; 
(2)  A description of the vehicle, including make, model and license number; 
(3)  The terms of the sale; 
(4)  The date, time and place of the sale; and 
(5)  Any other information required by state law. 
The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of payment, the city shall cause to be executed a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original for the purchaser, with the copy for the tax commissioner. Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the city's liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price. 
(h)  Redemption of vehicle. The owner of any vehicle seized hereunder may redeem such vehicle prior to its sale or destruction upon proof of ownership and payment to the city of expenses of removal plus any advertising, all of such sums not to exceed $500.00 plus $10.00 per day storage. 
(i)  Penalty for violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Amend. of 7-10-2007, § 1) 
Secs. 46-4—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING IN CITY BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2. 

Sec. 46-31. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to protect city employees and the public from the annoyance, nuisance and threats to health caused by breathing air polluted by smoking. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 46-32. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
City building means any building operated by the city for office use or other use, whether or not the public ordinarily enters the building. 
Designated areas means areas designated by the mayor as areas where smoking is permitted. 
Employee means an officer or employee of the city. 
Smoke or smoking means the act of burning any tobacco product, weed, filler or plant or any kind in a cigarette, cigar, pipe, hooka or water pipe, or in any other manner. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-33. - Smoking prohibited except in designated areas. 
No person shall smoke in any city building except designated areas. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 46-34. - Smoke-free areas. 
The following must be smoke-free areas and cannot be designated areas where smoking is permitted: 
(1)  Any room or space that members of the public must visit or pass through on business. 
(2)  Any restroom, unless another restroom for the same sex is readily available and is not designated for smoking. 
(3)  Any room in which gasoline or other flammable substance is stored. 
(4)  Any room in which any nonsmoking employee works or regularly enters in the course of his duties. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 46-35. - Designated areas. 
Subject to the restrictions in this article, the mayor shall designate areas where smoking is permitted. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 46-36. - Disputes, interpretation. 
Any disputes in the interpretation or application of this article shall be resolved in favor of protecting employees and the public from unwanted exposure to smoking. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 6) 
Sec. 46-37. - Signs. 
The mayor shall cause signs to be posted, giving notice to employees and to the public of where smoking is permitted and where it is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 7) 
Sec. 46-38. - Penalty. 
Any city officer or employee violating any provision of this article may be subject to disciplinary proceedings. Any person, whether a city employee or a member of the public, smoking in an area where smoking is prohibited under authority of this article, and continuing to smoke after a warning to stop, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1995, § 8) 
Secs. 46-39—46-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 46-49. - Conditions declared nuisances; enumeration. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on a premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon a premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  Any garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin or any other refuse of any kind, except temporarily in covered garbage cans; 
(4)  Junk being allowed to become scattered or blown off any premises; 
(5)  Combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the premises, or any other conditions which constitute a fire hazard; 
(6)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(7)  Burning of junk or debris other than tree limbs and leaves pursuant to a burn permit; 
(8)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(9)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(10)  Storage of junk: tractors, equipment, farm implements, trailers, motorcycles, barbecue grills, and other debris; 
(11)  Dumping of fuel or oil; 
(12)  Storage of fuel or oil other than in approved closed containers; 
(13)  Sand blasting and any other unreasonably loud mechanical work in a residential area; 
(14)  Unreasonably loud automotive, truck, lawnmower, chainsaw, motorcycle or other exhaust noise; 
(15)  Obstruction of a public street, highway, sidewalk, or path of travel regularly used by the public, without a permit; 
(16)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or single- family or multiple-family areas such as loud music and other loud activities; 
(17)  All listing, unsafe, rotten, deteriorated or otherwise unstable walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(18)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(19)  Exterior storage of iceboxes, refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, stoves; 
(20)  Exterior storage of mattresses, box springs, furniture or other items which would attract or could provide a home for rodents, insects, animals and other pests; 
(21)  Toilets or sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers in bad repair; 
(22)  Conditions conducive to the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects; 
(23)  Conditions conducive to a harboring of colonies of bats, such as bat-accessible attics; 
(24)  Any animal that excessively and continuously makes disturbing noises, defined as ongoing howling, barking or crying or causing unreasonable annoyance continuously for a period of one-half hour or more; 
(25)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(26)  Any other continuous or regularly repetitious acts or conditions constituting a nuisance under state law, namely, anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another or which tends to annoy the community, injure the health of the citizens in general, or corrupt the public morals. 
Any person or entity found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000.00, or be imprisoned in jail for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the violation of this section shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or a temporary or permanent injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Nothing in this section shall be construed as an election of remedies and it is hereby provided that the city may seek both the criminal penalties and the injunctive relief contemplated by this section for any violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Amend. of 3-11-2008, § 1) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

Sec. 50-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39, disorderly conduct is prohibited and per state law is defined as follows: a person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words;" or 
(4)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(b)  Fights, brawls, etc. prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another, or to endanger the lawful pursuits of another. 
(c)  Conduct in a crowd regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to assemble with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; or jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; or collecting in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by the ordinances or regulations of the city and the state laws; or intending to engage in gaming. 
(d)  Fraudulent schemes illegal. It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent any public place in the city with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; or to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick, to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person, or to aid or abet therein. 
(e)  Patronizing illegal gaming and alcoholic beverage places prohibited. It shall be unlawful to frequent any place where illegal gaming activities or illegal sales of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs are allowed or tolerated. 
(Code 1982, § 16-101; Amend. of 3-11-2008; § 1; Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-2. - Discharging firearms, air guns. etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm in the city or to discharge any air gun, BB gun, or other toy gun which projects lead or any other missile. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1982, § 16-102) 
Sec. 50-3. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock, or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1982, § 16-104) 
Sec. 50-4. - Weeds; standing water. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area, or place located within this municipality to permit any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthy growths to obtain a height exceeding ten inches on such property. For the purposes of this section, the term "weeds" shall be construed to mean jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, or other unsightly growths of a like kind. It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area, or place located within the city to allow standing water to accumulate on such property. 
(1)  Notice to remove. Upon being notified of any violation of this subsection (a) the city clerk/treasurer shall immediately notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the violation exists that he must comply with this section within ten days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to such owner or occupant, at his last known address. 
(2)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to comply with this section within the allotted time, the city clerk/treasurer is authorized and empowered to provide for compliance with this section by or for the city. 
(b)  Responsibility for cost if city removes lien. The actual cost of such compliance shall be assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done, and in the event the bill for such charges is not paid within one week after it has been rendered, shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as a lien for tax due the city. 
(Code 1982, § 16-105) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 82. 
Sec. 50-5. - Abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Abandoned automobiles, tractors, and trucks are declared to be a public health hazard. 
(b)  A vehicle which does not bear a current state certificate or registration shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep such a vehicle, as described in subsection (b), on any property, including such person's own property, within the city, including the public streets, alleys, and ways. 
(d)  Exempted from the provisions of this section are such vehicles located on the business lots of licensed automobile dealers, new or used, and any such vehicles which are covered or sheltered sufficiently to prevent the accumulation of moisture therein. Vehicles so covered or sheltered must be protected by a custom fitted waterproof tarpaulin manufactured specifically for that purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 16-106; Ord. of 12-13-2005, § 1; Ord. of 5-9-2006(2), § 1) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Sec. 50-6. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverages in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building. 
(Code 1982, § 16-107) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 50-7. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  By the authority vested in the city under O.C.G.A. § 36-32-9, the municipal court the city is hereby granted jurisdiction to try and dispose of cases in which a person is charged with a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting when the property which was the subject of the theft was valued at $300.00 or less, provided the offense occurred within the corporate limits of the municipality. 
(b)  A person convicted in a municipal court of a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting property valued at $300.00 or less shall be punished as provided in section 1-12, or to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public works for a period not exceeding 90 days, and in the case of a conviction of a second such offense, in addition to or in lieu of any imprisonment which might be imposed, the defendant shall be fined not less than $250.00 and the fine shall not be suspended or probated. 
(c)  This section is subject to all of the terms and conditions provided for by O.C.G.A § 36-32-9. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 50-8. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The mayor and council have determined based on law enforcement reports that there has been an increase in juvenile violence and crime by persons under 18; that persons under 18 are particularly susceptible, by their lack of maturity and experience, to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime; that criminal gang activity from the Athens, Augusta, Atlanta, Macon, Sparta and Greensboro area appears to have infiltrated the community; that there has been an increase in crimes such as substance abuse, entering autos, shootings, burglaries, damage to property, fighting, statutory rape, and other incidents indicating possible "gang" activity. 
(2)  The city desires to protect minors, seeks enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for minors, strives for protection of the general public, and implements this section for reduction of juvenile criminal activities not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. O.C.G.A. § 15-11-2(11)(A)(v) states it is a violation when a juvenile wanders or loiters about the streets of any city or in or about any highway or any public place between midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(3)  The mayor and council recognize that in Mwangi v. State, 316 Ga. App. 52 (2012) the court held: "Even when officers have no basis for suspecting a particular individual, they may generally ask questions of that individual, ask to examine the individual's identification, and request consent to search, as long as police do not convey a message that compliance with their requests is required." The mayor and council recognize that when an apparent juvenile declines to answer questions, provide identification or be searched, law enforcement sometimes needs additional tools to effectively police the community. 
(4)  The council has determined a curfew for those under 18, many of whom are students, will help attain the foregoing objectives and diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens, and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. Parental responsibility for whereabouts of minors is the accepted norm, and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. Law enforcement has reported the effectiveness of curfews in other counties such as Spalding, Clayton, Fayette, Cherokee, Chatham, Murray, Coffee, and Gwinnett. The mayor and councils have determined that a curfew will increase parental responsibility for minors, decrease minor delinquency including criminal activity, and decrease truancy and tardiness of school age minors. 
(b)  Definitions. The following shall apply: 
Emergency errand. A mission from unforeseen circumstances that call for immediate action. Includes fire, natural disaster, auto accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Jurisdiction of juvenile and municipal courts. Any minor under 17 who is charged with violating this ordinance shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. Any minor 17 years of age who is charged with violating this ordinance shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the city municipal court. 
Loiter. See Loitering section herein below. Also see O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. 
Minor. Non-emancipated person under 18. 
Public place. Any place to which the public has access; includes, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys or buildings open to the public, any cemeteries, school yards, any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation including parking lots; any vacant lot. 
Wander. As distinct from loitering (separately addressed below); to "wander" is to move around without a definite purpose; to go or extend in an irregular course or direction; to stray from a path, to deviate, to go astray, to ramble without a definite purpose or objective; roam, rove, to go aimlessly, indirectly, or casually, moving or going about aimlessly without plan or fixed destination or going to a destination by an indirect route, or in current vernacular-hanging out or roaming the streets. 
(c)  Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any minor to permit or, by insufficient control, to allow such minor to violate the rules in this section. A person in violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning. Upon subsequent violation(s), the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-12 of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Minors prohibited from 1) loitering as defined by law or 2) from wandering upon streets and other public places at certain hours; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any minor to loiter (see section below) or to wander in any public place unsupervised by his/her parent, legal guardian, or adult over 21 having the lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of midnight on any day and 5:00 a.m.; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  When the minor is on any emergency errand directed by his/her parent, guardian, or adult 21 or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity; 
(3)  When the minor is traveling to, or returning directly home from, lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in above referenced placed during the proscribed period of time; 
(4)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(5)  When the minor is engaged in interstate or intrastate vehicular travel through the city with parental consent; 
(6)  When the minor is married or has been married pursuant to state law. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-9. - Loitering or prowling prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Code section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution or sodomy. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: that such person is a known prostitute, pimp, or sodomist, repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passers-by in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any bodily gesture. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(d)  A person committing the offense of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1998, §§ 1—3; Amend. of 7-10-2012, § 1; Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
State Law reference— See O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. 
Sec. 50-10. - Inappropriate attire in public places; public exposure prohibited. 
Inappropriate attire in public places, meaning exposed undergarments and skin due to sagging pants and skirts, is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and constitutes a public nuisance to the community, sets a poor civic image and tends to annoy the community, injure the health of the citizens in general, and/or corrupt the public morals. Wearing pants or skirts more than three inches below the hip bone is hazardous, both to the person wearing the garment and to the general public, as walking when pants are three or more inches below the hip decreases the length of the stride and thereby increases the likelihood of tripping and falling and injuring oneself or others in the process. 
A survey of litigation associated with sagging/baggy pants indicates the trend of such pants being utilized by criminals to hide drugs, drug paraphernalia, and weapons. Media reports indicate "sagging" was adopted from the United States prison system and jails, where belts are prohibited, and that during the first decade of the 21st century, a number of United States local governments, school systems, transit agencies, and airlines passed laws and regulations against the practice of wearing sagging pants. 
This mayor and council agree with such laws and regulations, as criminal convicts are not good role models for our youth. Sagging/baggy pants may be associated not only with criminals in general, but also with gang activity, and the promotion of gang activity in this community by a style emulating criminal convicts and gangsters tends to create harm to the city, setting a poor civic image, and detracting from the historic character of this community and the tourism promoted in Union Point. Such must be abated and prevented to avoid detrimental impact and to prevent the spread of such. Without prompt enforcement, our community may become degraded with such, affecting the desirability of Union Point as a tourist destination and a wholesome, safe place to live and work. 
On public property (including without limitation parks, playgrounds, libraries, aquatic centers, hospitals, schools, playing fields, track and field facilities, public housing, streets, sidewalks, walking trails, or public use transportation, including buses) and in other areas frequented by the public such as stores, restaurants, schools, banks, government buildings, gift shops, laundromats, hotels, motels, and other businesses and establishments frequented by the public, all persons shall be properly attired as follows: jeans, pants, miniskirts, and skirts, including long and short, worn by any person, regardless of age, shall be secured at the waist to prevent such from falling or riding more than three inches below the hip bone, causing exposure of the person's skin, "butt cleavage," undergarments, or both (e.g. females wearing low-rise jeans to reveal their G-string a/k/a thong underwear), below the hip bone. 
If a juvenile is determined to be in violation of this article a citation shall be issued to the juvenile and the court may order the juvenile to participate in up to 40 hours of court approved community service activities, or a combination of up to 40 hours of court approved community service and attendance at a court approved family counseling program. 
If a juvenile is determined to be in violation of this article and a citation is issued and it is determined that the parent, legal custodian or legal guardian, who has care and control of the minor, intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly permitted the minor to wear clothing in violation of subsection (b) of this section or if the parent is aware of or knows of the minor's conduct and fails to make reasonable efforts to prevent the commission of the offense by the minor, a citation shall issue to the parent, legal custodian or legal guardian and the court may order the juvenile and/or the parent or legal guardian to participate in up to 40 hours of court approved community service activities, or a combination of up to 40 hours of court approved community service and attendance, by both a parent or legal custodian and the minor, at a court approved family counseling program. 
If an adult is determined to be in violation of this section, a citation shall be issued to the person and the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court approved community service activities, or a combination of up to 40 hours of court approved community service and attendance at a court-approved counseling program. 
Violators of any provision of this article shall be issued a citation and subject to the foregoing. To this end, a violation of this article shall not be deemed a criminal offense, and thus, violators shall not be subject to arrest, imprisonment or other criminal penalty for violation of this section. 
Violators of any portion of this section who refuse to comply with the section after being requested to do so by any law enforcement officer shall be promptly issued a second citation and thereafter shall continue to receive a citation for each refusal committed thereafter. 
(Amend. of 5-12-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 50-11. - Begging, panhandling, or public solicitation.[2] 
It shall be illegal for any person, firm, group, organization, or other entity to beg, panhandle, solicit, or to sell goods, wares, or any other objects or services within any public buildings or on the grounds, sidewalks, parks, or other lands owned by or under the control of the city, its agencies, authorities, commissions, boards, bureaus, or other city entities ("city properties"). No person on city properties, may engage publicly in any commercial activity or sale of goods or services, the public solicitation of commercial activity or sale of goods or services, or begging, panhandling, or other public solicitation of funds for any purpose or public distribution of literature. Any person who violates this shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Provided, however, sale of goods, wares or other objects, or public distribution of literature, when incidental and collateral to free speech activity otherwise permitted in a designated public forum, is not prohibited, but is subject to reasonable time, place and manner regulation. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Charitable organizations registered per O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 and such organizations exempt from registration per O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9 are authorized to solicit for contributions on streets and highways, subject to compliance with this section. Charitable organizations seeking a permit shall file an application with the clerk, which shall include name, address and telephone number of organization, officers of the organization, date(s), time(s) and places(s) of proposed solicitation and must include an agreement by the organization to hold harmless and indemnify the county from liability for damage or injury arising out of the solicitation. Such application must be executed by an authorized officer of said organization. Such organization must provide a copy of the declaration page of an insurance policy which provides liability insurance coverage, with limits of at least $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, for the solicitation. Such policy shall include an endorsement listing the city as a named insured. The cost of the permit for solicitation shall be $10.00 per day. Solicitation for contributions on the streets and highways contrary to this section is a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 per violation, each instance being considered a separate violation. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of 5-10-2016 amended the Code by adding new §§ 50-10—50-31. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the sections have been renumbered as 50-11—50-32 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 50-12. - Use of sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride, or drive any motorcycle, automobile, or other machine or vehicle listed following, upon any sidewalk in this city: motorized bikes or vehicles; electric bicycles; mini-bikes, mopeds and pocket motorcycles/bikes; horses; go-carts; electric-powered or gasoline-powered golf carts or motorized carts; motorized skateboards or motorized scooters; motorized play vehicles; LSMVs, ATVs or UTVs; any other vehicle designed by the manufacturer to be able to travel at speeds in excess of five m.p.h. under its own power on a flat surface; un-registered EPAMDs. None of these prohibited users may use the sidewalks or any related bridges and/or their underpasses for any purpose. Provided, this section shall not apply to necessary use of sidewalks by transportation agencies in crossing sidewalks, nor to the loading or unloading of trailers or other vehicles. 
(b)  Sidewalks are for use by pedestrians and non-prohibited users ("users") as follows: bicyclists, skaters and non-motorized scooter riders may use them. Users shall not loiter or stop on sidewalks, but shall move off the sidewalk when stopped. All users under 16 shall wear a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the ANSI or Snell standards. Normal rules of the road apply to users. For instance, when approaching oncoming users, users shall move to the right side. Passing shall be on the left side. Users shall give pedestrians priority consideration and full right-of-way to ensure them safe passage. A verbal warning shall be given by users, when approaching pedestrians from the rear, such as "coming up on your left." Users shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of others, and dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. Hazardous activities are prohibited, including but are not limited to the following: racing of any form and blocking of public access. All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on streets, also apply to sidewalks. All litter shall be deposited in receptacles or retained for proper disposal later. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-13. - Blocking streets, etc. 
No person shall block any street or sidewalk of this city, or interfere with the full, free and easy use of the same, or shall refuse to "move on" when directed by any proper officer of this city. It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to refuse to clear such public way when ordered by a deputy sheriff or a representative of the police department or other lawful authority. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-14. - Reckless riding or driving. 
(a)  Any person who drives any vehicle in reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property commits the offense of reckless driving. No person shall ride or drive any bicycle, motorcycle, or automobile or any other vehicle or machine, on any of the streets or roads in a disorderly manner or in reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(b)  Reckless driving includes: driving at an excessive rate of speed given the posted speed limit and the driving conditions existing at the time, approaching blind hill, drive or turn at excessive speed, speeding in construction zone, causing the vehicle's tires to squeal and/or the vehicle to fish-tail, screeching tires, spinning circles a/k/a "donuts," exhibitions of speed, racing, coming close to striking persons or objects, wrong side of the road, wrong way on one way street, striking vehicles, persons or objects, taking eyes off the roadway including using electronic device such as texting or internet surfing or watching video, impairment by drugs or alcohol, failure to take seizure medication or other medication required for safe driving, driving with disorders characterized by lapses of consciousness or other mental or physical disabilities affecting the ability of a person to drive safely, being too sleepy to safely drive, driving without lights in rain or darkness, too fast for wet or slick conditions, following too closely, tailgating, repeatedly, abruptly or erratically swerving or changing lanes or passing other vehicles, illegal or unsafe turn or u-turn, passing on double yellow, passing a vehicle in a no-pass zone, crossing the center line, weaving in and out of a lane, failure to maintain lane, striking the curb, guardrail, median divider or other edge of lane markers, driving on median or shoulder of roadway, driving with defective equipment, attempting to elude a police officer or deputy, failing to stop for roadblock or otherwise ignoring command of police officer, accelerating through intersection in attempt to beat a changing light, disregarding pedestrian trying to cross roadway, failure to sound horn or apply brakes for pedestrians trying to cross roadway, failure to obey traffic control device or ignoring road signs, leaving scene of accident, stunts on a motorcycle including standing on the seat, tank or fender, sliding turns, "wheelies" and "stoppies," if the foregoing is in reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-15. - Children playing in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor child to loiter or play in the streets of the city. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the control or custody of any minor to permit, allow, or encourage such minor to become a loiterer on any street or to play in any street of the city. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-16. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2 and following are followed and enforced by city. O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-3 notes that criminal gang activity is a serious public safety concern; criminal trespass and criminal damage to property caused by graffiti placed unlawfully on private property are crimes frequently associated with gang activity; and it is in the public interest, as a means of combating such gang activity and of contributing to general public welfare by improving the aesthetics of public views, to compensate as provided in this section private property owners who are victims of such by using inmate labor to remove or obliterate such graffiti when it is visible from public roads or other public property. Per § 17-15A-4, city authorizes inmate labor to remove or obliterate such graffiti. Graffiti promotes blight and must be abated to avoid detrimental impact and prevent further spread of graffiti. Without prompt removal, other properties become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable to live and work. 
(b)  Nuisance. Graffiti is a public and private nuisance and may be abated per this section and applicable laws. 
(c)  Definitions. 
Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements, written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark. 
Occupant means any person or sub-lessee, successor or assignee that has control over property. 
Owner means any person, agent or entity having a legal or equitable interest in a property. 
Permit means knowingly allowing graffiti or any failure, refusal or neglect to remove. 
Property means any real or personal property and that which is affixed incidental or appurtenant to real property but not limited to any premises, house, building, fence, structure or any separate part thereof, whether permanent or not. 
(d)  Prohibited acts. It is unlawful to apply graffiti or for any owner or occupant to permit graffiti on property. 
(e)  Notice of removal. The city may serve a written notice directing the owner/occupant to remove such graffiti and advising of the appeal procedure. The notice may be served in person or by U.S. mail, return receipt requested. If the owner/occupant cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting in a conspicuous place on the property for three days. 
(f)  Abatement of nuisance. It shall be unlawful for the owner/occupant to fail to remove the graffiti within five days of notice. 
(g)  Appeal. An appeal may be taken to the city by the owner/occupant to prevent removal of any graffiti, within five days of having received the notice. Appeals shall be in writing and state the reasons for the appeal. The city shall not remove or obscure graffiti during the pendency of an appeal. If the party filing the appeal requests a hearing, such hearing shall be held within 45 days. If the city determines the graffiti must be removed, such must be accomplished within five days of the hearing. 
(h)  Removal. If the graffiti is not completely removed by the owner/occupant in five days, the city and/or its private contractor or inmates may enter upon such premises to remove such graffiti. If the owner/occupant applied the graffiti, the owner/occupant shall be liable to the city for all such expenses. The city shall record the expenses incurred in abating graffiti and shall provide a statement of such costs to the owner/occupant. If any expenses remain unpaid after 30 days, the city may sue to recover all expenses incurred by the city in removing the graffiti, including attorney fees and court costs associated therewith. 
(i)  Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section may be punished by a fine up to $500.00 per instance, plus may be required to reimburse the city for expenses to remove the graffiti. The court may suspend or probate a portion of its entire sentence upon such conditions to include but not be limited to the restoring of the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed, or other remedial action. 
(j)  Alternate enforcement. Nothing herein shall prevent city from commencing any other available civil or criminal proceedings to abate a public nuisance under state law or city ordinance as an alternative, or in addition to, this section. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-17. - Disorderly houses. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44, a person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed, and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, is guilty of a misdemeanor. An example thereof is a recurrence of loud parties at an address, with juveniles or others intoxicated from drinking or under the influence from using marijuana, with loud music (loud enough to radiate out over the neighborhood which noise could be heard a block away), which parties are not casual occurrences but general, customary habits of the house, common occurrences. Each party must exist for a sufficient length of time to render it a common disorderly house, generally two hours or more per party, and the noises made and partying therein disturb the peace of a number of orderly citizens in the neighborhood. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-18. - Maintaining a dive. 
A dive is a place where alcoholic, malt, or vinous liquors are kept or sold and where men and women are permitted to come and drink alcoholic, malt or vinous liquors, either in the place or room where such liquors are kept and sold, or in a place of business, or other place connected therewith, or in a place not connected with such place where such liquors are kept or sold, and where men and women drink or commit acts of immorality in such place, or alternatively a place where men and women idle away their time without visible means of support and do not do any work, or a place frequented by lewd men and/or women engaged in prostitution. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a dive. It shall also be unlawful for any person to go into a dive for the purpose of drinking alcoholic, malt, or vinous liquors, or for any person without visible means of support or who does not work to go to such a place for the purpose of idling away his time, or for any person at such place to commit acts of lewdness, immorality, fornication or adultery. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-19. - Maintaining place of prostitution. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10, a person having or exercising control over the use of any place or conveyance which would offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution commits the offense of keeping a place of prostitution when he knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-20. - Maintaining lewd house. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1 is enforced by the city. Whosoever shall knowingly erect, establish, continue, maintain, use, own, or lease any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, prostitution, sodomy, the solicitation of sodomy, or masturbation for hire shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance; and the building, structure, or place, and the ground itself in or upon which such lewdness, prostitution, sodomy, the solicitation of sodomy, or masturbation for hire shall be conducted, permitted, carried on, continued, or shall exist, and the furniture, fixtures, and other contents of such building or structure are also declared to be a nuisance and may be enjoined or otherwise abated as provided in this chapter. The conviction of the owner or operator of any building, structure, or place for any of the offenses stated in this section, based on conduct or an act or occurrence in or on the premises of such building, structure, or place, shall be prima-facie evidence of the nuisance and the existence thereof. It is a violation if the evidence shows that the general reputation of the house or its tenants and/or guests, or both, was that it was a lewd house and that fornication or adultery was regularly committed in the house. In order for defendant to be charged with maintaining disorderly house, defendant must be occupant of house or keep and maintain house in some manner. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-21. - Public drunk. 
Public drunk. A person in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of a private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness or indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-22. - False fire alarm. 
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for police or ambulance assistance or aid or abet in the commission of such act. This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27, a person who transmits in any manner to a fire department, public or private, or to any other group which is organized for the purpose of preventing or controlling fires a false report of a fire, knowing at the time that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-23. - False reports of crimes, false statements and writings; concealment of facts. 
No person within the city shall make to, or file with, the police department of the city or any police officer of the city any false, misleading, or unfounded statement, or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime or ordinance violation occurring within the city. This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26, a person who willfully and knowingly gives or causes a false report of a crime to be given to any law enforcement officer or agency of this state is guilty of a misdemeanor. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20, a person who knowingly and willfully falsifies, conceals, or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a material fact; makes a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or representation; or makes or uses any false writing or document, knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry, in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of state government or of the government of any county, city, or other political subdivision of this state shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for up to one year, or both. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-24. - Gambling. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-12-21, a person commits the offense of gambling when he: 
(1)  Makes a bet upon the partial or final result of any game or contest or upon the performance of any participant in such game or contest; 
(2)  Makes a bet upon the result of any political nomination, appointment, or election or upon the degree of success of any nominee, appointee, or candidate; or 
(3)  Plays and bets for money or other thing of value at any game played with cards, dice, or balls. A person who commits the offense of gambling shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-25. - Commercial gambling. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-12-22 a person commits the offense of commercial gambling when he intentionally does any of the following acts: 
(1)  Operates or participates in the earnings of a gambling place; 
(2)  Receives, records, or forwards a bet or offer to bet; 
(3)  For gain, becomes a custodian of anything of value bet or offered to be bet; 
(4)  Contracts to have or give himself or another the option to buy or sell or contracts to buy or sell at a future time any gain or other commodity whatsoever or any stock or security of any company, when it is at the time of making such contract intended by both parties thereto that the contract to buy or sell, the option whenever exercised or the contract resulting therefrom, shall be settled not by the receipt or delivery of such property but by the payment only of differences in prices thereof; 
(5)  Sells chances upon the partial or final result of or upon the margin of victory in any game or contest or upon the performance of any participant in any game or contest or upon the result of any political nomination, appointment, or election or upon the degree of success of any nominee, appointee, or candidate; 
(6)  Sets up or promotes any lottery, sells or offers to sell, or knowingly possesses for transfer or transfers any card, stub, ticket, check, or other device designed to serve as evidence of participation in any lottery; or 
(7)  Conducts, advertises, operates, sets up, or promotes a bingo game without having a valid license to operate a bingo game as provided by law. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-26. - Keeping a gambling place. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per § 16-12-23 a person who knowingly permits any real estate, building, room, tent, vehicle, boat, or other property whatsoever owned by him or under his control to be used as a gambling place or who rents or lets any such property with a view or expectation that it be so used commits the offense of keeping a gambling place. A person who commits the offense of keeping a gambling place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-27. - Dogfighting. 
(a)  This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37, as used in this Code section, "dog" means any domestic canine. 
(b)  Any person who commits the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Owns, possesses, trains, transports, or sells any dog with the intent that such dog shall be engaged in fighting with another dog; 
(2)  For amusement or gain, causes any dog to fight with another dog or for amusement or gain, causes any dogs to injure each other; 
(3)  Wagers money or anything of value on the result of such dogfighting; 
(4)  Knowingly permits any act in violation of (1) or (2) of this subsection on any premises under the ownership or control of such person or knowingly aids or abets any such act; or 
(5)  Knowingly promotes or advertises an exhibition of fighting with another dog. 
(c)  Any person who is knowingly present as a spectator at any place for the fighting of dogs shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each act in violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Any dog subject to fighting may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 4-11-9.2 through 4-11-9.6. 
(e)  This shall not prohibit, impede, or otherwise interfere with animal husbandry, training techniques, competition, events, shows, or practices not otherwise specifically prohibited by law and shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Owning, using, breeding, training, or equipping any animal to pursue, take, hunt, or recover wildlife or any animal lawfully hunted under title 27 or participating in hunting or fishing in accordance with title 27 and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto as such rules and regulations existed on the date specified in O.C.G.A. § 27-1-39; 
(2)  Owning, using, breeding, training, or equipping dogs to work livestock for agricultural purposes in accordance with the rules and regulations of the commissioner of agriculture as such rules and regulations existed on January 1, 2008; 
(3)  Owning, using, breeding, training, or equipping dogs for law enforcement purposes; or 
(4)  Owning, using, breeding, training, or equipping any animal to control damage from nuisance or pest species in and around structures or agricultural operations. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-28. - Peeping toms. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-11-61 it shall be unlawful for any person to be a "peeping Tom" on or about the premises of another or to go about or upon the premises of another for the purpose of becoming a "peeping Tom." As used in this Code section, the term "peeping Tom" means a person who peeps through windows or doors, or other like places, on or about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of the persons spied upon and the doing of any other acts of a similar nature which invade the privacy of such persons. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-29. - Obstruction of officers. 
This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24, a person who knowingly and willfully obstructs or hinders any law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties is guilty of a misdemeanor. Whoever knowingly and willfully resists, obstructs, or opposes any law enforcement officer, prison guard, correctional officer, community supervision officer, county or department of juvenile justice juvenile probation officer, probation officer serving pursuant to article 6 of chapter 8 of title 42, or conservation ranger in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties by offering or doing violence to the person of such officer or legally authorized person is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-30. - Disturbing or breaching the peace of others. 
It is a violation to disturb the peace, defined "as a violation or disturbance of the public tranquility and order." The term disturbing the peace, or breach of the peace, is a term that includes all violations of the public peace or order or decorum. A breach of the peace may consist of either actual physical force or constructive force, such as threats of violence or intimidation to compel the submission of a person against his will to the demands of another. The threat of violence or an act likely to produce violence constitutes such a breach. Abusive and insulting language ("fighting words") constitutes a breach of the peace if there is an accompanying incitement to immediate violence. Any person who commits the offense of disturbing or breaching the peace shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-31. - Noise regulations 
(a)  Purpose. This section is to prevent certain loud or excessive noises, plainly audible from 100 feet and detrimental or annoying to the public. 
(b)  Sound amplifying devices regulated. It shall be unlawful to speak through a horn, megaphone, sound box or amplifier or play a radio or other mechanical or electrical device where the sound is amplified, where the sound is plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet and is detrimental or annoying to the public. This shall not restrict the playing of radios or musical instruments for amusement, instruction or education of oneself, members of his family or guests, within the limits in subsection (e) below, as long as the sound is not plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet and detrimental or annoying to the public. Nor shall said paragraph restrict noises made by participants in a parade for which a permit has been obtained. 
(c)  Motor vehicles. No person shall slow a road tractor, dump truck or other truck over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating by downshifting. The brakes shall be used. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle without a proper muffler, in good working order and in constant operation, to prevent excessive noise. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device for noise making. This shall not apply to farm tractors. 
(d)  Noise from automotive shops. It shall be unlawful to perform or permit to be performed maintenance or repairs on automobiles, motorcycles or other motor vehicles or to operate or permit to be operated a machine shop, if such activity results in excessive noises detrimental or annoying to the public and plainly audible from 100 feet. 
(e)  Nuisance may be abated. Violation of this section is a nuisance and the judge may issue an order directing abatement. If a violation exists, a notice shall be served on the violator, notifying of the violation, requesting abatement. The violator shall have 14 days to comply. Otherwise, the city shall sue for abatement in court and seek the fines provided for below. 
(f)  Covered area and establishments. This section shall only apply in residential areas. 
(g)  Violations and fines. Any violator this section shall be subject to a civil fine up to $500.00 per offense. Each time such violation is committed shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Amend. of 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 50-32. - Nuisances. 
(a)  This section is cumulative of O.C.G.A. Per O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6, any person who shall have or continue after notice to abate a nuisance which tends to annoy the community, injure the health of the citizens in general, or corrupt the public morals shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The following conditions are nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on a premises; 
(2)  Dead or decaying matter, vegetation, fruit, vegetable or animal, odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance; 
(3)  Garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin or any other refuse of any kind; 
(4)  Junk allowed to scatter or blow off any premises; 
(5)  Combustible material not necessary or beneficial to the premises, or other fire hazard; 
(6)  Smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance; 
(7)  Burning of junk or debris other than tree limbs and leaves per a burn permit; 
(8)  Pollution of water or putting matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(9)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(10)  Storage of junk: tractors, equipment, implements, trailers, cycles, grills, and other debris; 
(11)  Dumping fuel or oil; 
(12)  Storage of fuel or oil other than in approved closed containers; 
(13)  Sand blasting and any other unreasonably loud mechanical work in a residential area; 
(14)  Unreasonably loud automotive, truck, motorcycle or other exhaust noise; 
(15)  Obstruction of a street, highway, sidewalk, or path of travel regularly used by the public; 
(16)  Loud noises clearly audible at 100 feet including loud disturbances in or around churches or single-family or multiple-family areas, such as loud music and other loud activities; 
(17)  Listing, unsafe, rotten, deteriorated or unstable walls, trees and buildings; 
(18)  Any business or building where illegal activities are commonly conducted as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the activities and failed to prevent those activities; 
(19)  Exterior storage of iceboxes, refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, stoves; 
(20)  Exterior storage of mattresses, furniture or similar which would attract rodents and other pests; 
(21)  Toilets or sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers in bad repair; 
(22)  Conditions conducive to the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects; 
(23)  Conditions conducive to a harboring of colonies of bats, such as bat-accessible attics; 
(24)  Any animal that excessively makes disturbing noises, defined as ongoing howling, barking or crying or causing unreasonable annoyance continuously for a period of one-half hour or more; 
(25)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants which obstruct clear vision on roads and intersections; and 
(26)  Any other continuous or regularly repetitious acts or conditions constituting a nuisance under state law, namely, anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another or which tends to annoy the community, injure the health of the citizens in general, or corrupt the public morals. 
(b)  Any person or entity found guilty of violating any of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined up to $1,000.00 or imprisoned up to 30 days, or both. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the violation of this section is declared a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement by a restraining order or a temporary or permanent injunction by a court. Nothing in this section shall be construed as an election of remedies and the city may seek both criminal penalties and injunctive relief contemplated by this section for any violation. 
(Ord. No. 5-10-2016) 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-A-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; . 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Comprehensive plan. 
The Joint City/County Comprehensive Plan for Greene county, Greensboro, Siloam, Union Point and Woodville, dated May 1994, as approved by the state department of community affairs is adopted. 
(Res. of 8-9-1994) 
Sec. 54-2. - Short term work program. 
The short term work program for Greene County and the cities of Greensboro, Siloam, Union Point, White Plains and Woodville dated September 1999 as approved by the state department of community affairs is adopted. 
(Res. of 4-18-2000) 
Secs. 54-3—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING HEARINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 54-31. - Amendment procedure jurisdiction. 
The zoning ordinance as set forth in appendix A to this Code and official zoning map of the city may be amended from time to time by the city council pursuant to the policies and procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 54-32. - Definitions. 
When used in these policies and procedures, words and phrases shall have the meaning given pursuant to Article III of the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1991, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-33. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any person or persons requesting a zoning change shall file with the building inspector or other person so designated by the city council, two copies of such petition, and two copies of a plat of the property attached thereto, together with payment of $25.00 to cover administrative and advertising costs. Such person, or persons or their authorized agent shall appear in person at the public hearing held to consider the zoning change. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a petition for a change in a zoning district, the building inspector or other person so designated by the city council, after consultation with the city clerk/treasurer shall establish a date for a public hearing of the district change petition which shall be not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days from the date of the filing of the petition. Upon the filing of a petition for a change in a zoning district, the applicant shall at his expense cause to be erected in a conspicuous place on the property in question, and visible to the public, a sign of not less than nine square feet, with not less than three-inch black letters upon a white background which shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC 
A petition has been filed with the city council requesting that this property be changed from district (insert present name) to district (insert district requested). A public hearing will be held (insert place) on (insert date) at (insert time). All those having an interest in this petition should be present at this time. 
/s/ (Property Owner)  (Address) 
Only this sign is not subject to the provisions of Article IX, Section 9.7 of the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Union Point. This sign shall be in place at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
(c)  The city shall provide for a hearing on the proposed action. At least 15 but no more than 45 days prior to date of the hearing the city shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
(d)  The public hearing shall be conducted by the city council. 
(e)  The following factors shall be considered by the city council when making a decision on rezoning requests, zoning district boundary changes, or amendments requested by the city council, or by individual property owners of their duly authorized agents. 
(1)  Will the rezoning requested permit a use that is suitable in view of the existing use and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(2)  Will the rezoning requested adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(3)  Does the property for which the rezoning is requested have a reasonable economic use as currently zoned? 
(4)  Will the rezoning requested create an overcrowding condition with respect to the existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools? 
(5)  Does the rezoning requested conform to the city land use map? 
(6)  Are there other existing or changing conditions regarding the use and development of the property which give support for approval or disapproval of the rezoning request? 
(f)  Public hearing. 
(1)  A public hearing will be convened at the advertised time and place and will be presided over by the city council. 
(2)  The presiding officer will review for those present these procedures and set forth the operating procedures for the hearing: 
a.  In order for a person in attendance to speak, the presiding officer must recognize him. Upon rising to speak, the person recognized will first identify himself. The presiding officer may also request that the person furnish a home or business street address, as appropriate. 
b.  The person speaking will be allowed two minutes to express opinions and make points on each separate element of the proposed revisions which he wishes to address, with a maximum total of ten minutes allowed per person. Any affiliation or group spokesperson will be allowed a total of 30 minutes to express opinions and make points on the proposed revisions. 
c.  Additional persons and previous speakers will be recognized per the above procedure for the purpose of addressing additional elements of the proposed revisions or to make additional points and rebuttals with regard to elements already addressed, but not to reiterate points already made. 
d.  When all elements that attendees want to discuss have been addressed and all arguments relative to each element have been made, the chairperson will, from the notes made, restate each point, at one time and the attendees will ask for a show of hands of those who support that same point, thus allowing each person an effective voice. A count of the supporters will be recorded. 
(3)  The presiding officer or his designee will review the proposed revisions providing a rationale for both the need for revisions and for the specific recommendations. 
(4)  A secretary will be made available to take notes of the proceedings following the above review. 
(g)  The city council shall make a decision within 30 days of the public hearing or the request shall be deemed to have been recommended for approval. 
(h)  Any rezoning request brought before the city council, which is recommended for denial, cannot be resubmitted in less than six months from the original hearing date. 
(i)  All property that undergoes a district change shall be developed in accordance with any development plans submitted to the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 54-34. - Disclosure of campaign contributions. 
(a)  When any applicant has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to an official of the city who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the city council showing: 
(1)  The name and office position of the city official to whom the campaign contribution was made; 
(2)  The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the city official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for rezoning action and the date of each such contribution; and 
(3)  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250.00 or more made by the applicant to the official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for rezoning. 
(b)  When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a city official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the city council showing: 
(1)  The name and official position of the city official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
(2)  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the city official during the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
(c)  The disclosure required under subsection (b) of this section shall be filed at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1991, § 4) 
Sec. 54-35. - Zoning decision. 
The city council shall have 30 days following the public hearing within which to make its decision. If the city council fail to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. of 11-12-1991, § 5) 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Regional solid waste management plan. 
The Northeast Georgia Regional Solid Waste Management Plan dated September 1992, as approved by the state department of community affairs is adopted. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993) 
Sec. 58-2. - Short term work program. 
The updated short term work program of the Northeast Georgia Regional Solid Waste Management Plan as approved by the state department of community affairs is adopted. 
(Res. of 5-11-1999) 
Secs. 58-3—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 58-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this article is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 1982, § 8-101) 
Sec. 58-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disposal system means a procedure for the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and abandoned or junk automobiles. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes, construction wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in this definition. 
(Code 1982, § 8-102) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-33. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The city council shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. In the exercise of such duties, the city council shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(3)  Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation systems to insure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Delegation of authority. The city council may delegate the day-to-day administrative duties of the solid waste disposal system to a competent city officer designated by the city council. 
(c)  Council committee established. The city council may establish a committee, chosen from its members, which shall serve as a policy and regulation formulating body. Such committee shall make recommendations to the entire city council for its approval or disapproval. 
(d)  Grievances. Any person aggrieved by a requirement or regulation of or a fee charged under this article shall have the right to a hearing before the city council, which authority may, upon hearing, conform, modify, or revoke such requirement, regulation, or fee. 
(Code 1982, § 8-103) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 58-34. - Precollection. 
(a)  Owner or occupant's responsibility. Every owner or occupant of premises served by the city solid waste disposal system or any private disposal system shall be responsible for the sanitary conditions thereof. 
(b)  Unauthorized accumulations. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building or other structure within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth in this article or under the express prior approval of the city council or its designee. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The city council or its designee by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premise with such solid waste accumulation to remove the such accumulation. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to the penalties set forth in this article. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(c)  Containers. 
(1)  Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant or residence or establishment in sufficient number to accommodate the waste generated by such residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodent-proof, fly-proof, free of holes, and easily cleanable. Containers shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall not have a capacity exceeding 35 gallons, except that bulk containers approved by the city council as suitable for mechanical collection may be used. 
(2)  Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size, and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain solid waste for collection, provided they are unbroken, sealed, and filled in such manner that normal handling will not cause them to tear open. 
(3)  Containers shall not be filled beyond their normal capacity. 
(d)  Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored for collection in paper-board boxes or other throwaway containers strong and durable enough to retain the rubbish. Rubbish containers shall not exceed 50 pounds. Such containers shall be placed for collection beside the solid waste containers. Limbs, leaves, and other rubbish not in containers shall be collected only upon request at an additional charge over the regular garbage pick-up rate. 
(e)  Placement. Containers shall be placed for collection at places easily accessible to the collector and shall not be placed in gutters or in the streets so as to interfere with vehicular traffic. 
(f)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers or boxes containing garbage, rubbish, or other collectible solid wastes. 
(Code 1982, § 8-104) 
Sec. 58-35. - Collection. 
(a)  Frequency. Garbage, rubbish, and other collectible solid waste shall be collected by the city or by private collectors at least once a week for business and commercial establishments. 
(b)  Limitations. It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed in a container or otherwise set out for collection any: Industrial wastes; junk cars; large animals over 30 pounds; poisons; acids; hazardous or toxic wastes as defined by state and federal law; explosives; infected materials; and waste from construction, demolition, landscaping, or processing operations. Such wastes are hereby deemed uncollectible wastes and shall not be collected, transported, or disposed of by city facilities. Any person responsible for maintaining the sanitary condition of premises not served by the city collection system, or any person responsible for disposing of uncollectible wastes, shall make arrangements with an authorized private collector, licensed by the city, or dispose of the waste himself provided that such disposal shall be in accordance with all city, state, and federal solid waste laws, particularly those pertaining to hazardous or toxic wastes. 
(c)  Collection vehicles. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked, or blown from the vehicle. 
(d)  Private collectors. No person other than city employees shall collect, transport, or dispose of solid waste for pay within the city without first having applied for and received a license from the city to engage in such business in accordance with chapter 22. 
(Code 1982, § 8-105) 
Sec. 58-36. - Disposal. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. 
(Code 1982, § 8-106) 
Sec. 58-37. - Fees. 
(a)  Monthly and special charges for public collection and disposal of solid waste generated by individuals, business establishments, and industries shall be established from time to time by the city council. Such charges shall reflect the reasonable costs to the city for maintaining and operating its disposal system. 
(b)  The community center and churches within the city shall be exempt from the payment of collection and disposal fees. 
(Code 1982, § 8-108) 
Secs. 58-38—58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 58-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or any conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm property, timberlands, or forests. 
(Code 1982, § 8-109(1)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-62. - Litter prohibited; exceptions. 
Pursuant to authority granted in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq., it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city, or any waters in this municipality unless: 
(1)  Such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; 
(3)  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of such owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Code 1982, § 8-109(2)) 
Sec. 58-63. - Litter from vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of section 59-62, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of such conveyance shall have violated this section. 
(b)  Pursuant to the purposes and terms of this article, it shall be the responsibility of all owners of any motor vehicles containing litter (as defined in section 58-61) carried within or upon an exposed, open ended, or open topped vehicle bed or platform, to provide for the adequate coverage for, and retention of such litter when operating such vehicle within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1982, § 8-109(3)) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Sec. 58-64. - Posting of signs, placards or advertisements. 
Pursuant to the purposes of this article and the authority granted by O.C.G.A. § 85-16C, it shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect, or cause to be erected, or otherwise place or leave any sign, placard, or advertisement whatever on any public lands, public ways, highways, or roads adjacent to a public park within the corporate limits; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any properly authorized government official posting signs in pursuit of an official duty. (See also subsection 62-1(h).) 
(Code 1982, § 8-109(4)) 
Sec. 58-65. - Maintenance of litter receptacles; notice of requirements of article. 
The city council may establish and provide for the maintenance of receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate public locations within the corporate limits, and may otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 8-109(5)) 
Sec. 58-66. - Open burning of litter. 
Open burning of litter shall be governed by chapter 42, article II of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 8-109(6)) 
Cross reference— Open burning, § 42-31 et seq. 
Sec. 58-67. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 8-110) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing the street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cemeteries, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66; design standards for streets in subdivisions, § 66-64; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; distance from curb and sidewalk, § 82-9; distance from street corners and fire hydrants, § 82-10; zoning, app. A; off-street automobile parking, app. A, § 6.2; off-street loading and unloading space, app. A, § 6.3. 
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - General regulations. 
(a)  Maintenance and repair of public streets. All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the public works superintendent, who shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this Code relating to such public ways. 
(b)  Maintenance of sidewalks. It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid, to keep such walkways properly maintained at all times and to remove from them all materials and substances, including snow and ice, hazardous to passersby within 12 hours after such material or substance accumulates thereon or within less time, if so ordered by the city council. 
(c)  Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curb line of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curb line of the street as aforesaid, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then the responsibilities set forth in this section shall devolve upon their tenants of those who have possession or control of the property. 
(d)  Defacing sidewalks, streets, and curbs. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the city by painting any signs or making any marks thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk on, drive any vehicle upon, or injure in any way newly laid street, sidewalk, or curbing pavement while the street, sidewalk, or curbing pavement is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(e)  Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be provided in this article. 
(f)  Deposits and discharges onto public ways. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street, sidewalk, or other public way, any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material or any glass or other matter which may do injury to any person, animal, or property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewerage, waste milk, or other organic material. 
(g)  Report of defects, obstructions, deposits, and discharges. It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public way of the city, to report the defect, obstruction, unlawful deposit or discharge to the street and garbage department as soon as possible. 
(h)  Private use. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation, or other business enterprise to use any street, sidewalk, or other public way as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale or lease; or to write, make, or post any sign for commercial, political, or other advertisement on any such public way. (See also litter control provisions at section 58-64.) 
(i)  Encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street, way, or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this article. 
(j)  Openings; permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk, alley, or public way without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in accordance with the procedure established in this article. 
(k)  Guarding of openings. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the city council or by the appropriate committee created by such authority. 
(l)  Trees and shrubs. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure, or cut any tree, bush, or shrub in or from any public street, sidewalk, or other public way or place without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 13-101) 
Sec. 62-2. - Street construction and improvements. 
(a)  Authorization of improvements. Improvements of any streets within the city may be authorized in either of the following ways: 
(1)  Council resolution. Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the city council, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the land abutting on the proposed improvement do not, within 15 days after the last day of publication of such resolution, file with the city clerk/treasurer a written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 
(2)  Petition by property owners. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the land liable to assessment for such improvement shall petition the city council for such improvement citing O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq., and designating by general description the improvement to be undertaken and the street or streets or part thereof to be improved, it shall thereupon be the duty of the city council to proceed, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq., to cause such improvements to be made. In such cases, the city council resolution, as specified in subsection (a) of this section, shall not be required. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, or to repair the pavement, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this article. 
(c)  Bond. Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, shall be required to file a bond in sufficient amount with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by, or resulting from, the work undertaken. 
(d)  Specifications. 
(1)  Generally. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved, from time to time, by the city council. 
(2)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving on the coursewalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(e)  Barricades. Any person, firm, or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public way or place, shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1982, § 13-102) 
Sec. 62-3. - Driveways and curbs. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any driveway, curb, or curb-out on the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk/treasurer in the manner specified in this article. 
(b)  Fee. The permit fee to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any driveway, curb, or curb-out on the public streets shall be in the amount of $5.00. 
(c)  Bond. The street and garbage superintendent shall have authority to require an applicant for a permit to file a bond with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons or property by reason of the proposed work. 
(Code 1982, § 13-103) 
Sec. 62-4. - Procedure for the issuance of permits. 
(a)  Application. Every person required to secure a permit under the provisions of this article shall submit a written application for such permit to the city clerk/treasurer. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The purpose for which the application is submitted; 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work; and 
(5)  The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work and other dates or plans as may reasonably be required by the city clerk/treasurer or the city council. 
(b)  Permit fee. Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $10.00. 
(1)  Issuance of receipts. The city clerk/treasurer shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. 
(2)  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk/treasurer shall refund such fee. 
(c)  Review of application and issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application for a permit, the city clerk/treasurer shall forward such application to the street and garbage superintendent for recommendations and suggestions. Such official shall forward the application, with its recommendations and suggestions, to the city council, which body shall approve or disapprove such application within two weeks after receipt thereof. Upon receipt of an approved application from the city council, the city clerk/treasurer shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk/treasurer. All permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be kept in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. 
(Code 1982, § 13-104) 
Sec. 62-5 - Outdoor dining on the public right-of-way. 
Standards. For outdoor dining to be permitted within the public right-of-way, all of the following standards must be met: 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Outdoor dining is limited to the area approved by the city as specified on the permit application. 

(2)  Outdoor dining operation shall provide not less than five contiguous feet of sidewalk clear of obstructions and parallel to the street, to allow unimpeded pedestrian traffic. At street corner intersections, there shall be a minimum of five feet of unobstructed sidewalk. Said area is the corner sight triangle. Tables and chairs must be kept out of corner sight triangles. A minimum of five feet back from both handicap ramps is required. Obstructions shall include, but not be limited to, light poles, traffic signal poles, fire hydrants, utility structures and street signs. Further, the location of outdoor dining cannot obstruct the clear sight distance for vehicles across the corner sight triangle or access or crossings for the disabled. 
(3)  Clear unobstructed height of seven feet shall be maintained between the sidewalk surface and overhead objects including umbrellas. 
(4)  A minimum clearance of three feet shall be maintained between the outdoor dining space and edge of driveways, alleys, curbs or tree islands. 
(5)  The outdoor dining space shall not block access to public amenities like street furniture, trash receptacles, and way finding or directional signs or existing obstructions (i.e. fire hydrants). 
(b)  Design. 
(1)  Outdoor dining furniture shall be constructed of durable material. Plastic and unfinished or pressure treated wood is not permitted. 
(2)  Perimeter posts, planters, metal fencing, pots or markers may be used to delineate the outdoor dining space. No such features may be located outside the designated outdoor dining space. 
(3)  Tabletop signage is limited to menus and must not exceed two square feet in area. 
(4)  There can be no more than two umbrellas per table and umbrellas must be fixed such as to leave a clear height of seven feet from the sidewalk surface. 
(5)  Umbrellas are not allowed on tables located within ten feet of block corners. 
(c)  Operation. Outdoor dining is permitted in the front of a restaurant property or on the side or in the rear if in a courtyard. 
(1)  Waiters are permitted to access all pedestrian space between the building and the designated outdoor dining space to serve the diners. 
(2)  Tables, chairs, planters and pots may remain in the designated outdoor dining area throughout the permit period. All umbrellas, signage and other accessories however, must be removed from the dining area at the close of business each day. 
(3)  Outdoor dining areas are permitted to be open until 10:30 p.m. daily. 
(4)  A host stand and table top candles are allowed within the approved dining area. However, these accessories have to be removed from the dining area at the close of business. 
(5)  No tents or cash registers are permitted within the outdoor dining area. 
(6)  Outdoor dining areas shall not run electrical cords from the restaurant building. 
(7)  Where beer and wine or alcohol is served, the permit holder must comply with all state and local regulations for the sale, possession and/or consumption of beer and wine or alcohol. 
(8)  Loudspeakers are prohibited. 
(d)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The permit holder is responsible for keeping the immediate area covering six feet on all sides from the edge of the designated outdoor dining area clean of garbage, food debris, paper, cups or cans associated with the operation of the outdoor dining space on a daily basis. All waste and trash must be properly disposed of by the permit holder. 
(2)  The permit holder is responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and security of furniture and accessories used in the outdoor dining area. 
(3)  Sidewalks within and adjacent to the outdoor dining area must be washed down and cleaned on a daily basis by the permit holder. Any stains from spills must be removed. Soiled pavement not able to be cleaned must be replaced by the permit holder. Water and detergents used for cleaning must not drain into tree wells. 
(4)  Umbrellas and other outdoor dining area furniture shall be kept clean, safe, and attractive. 
(5)  The permit holder is responsible for paying any costs resulting from damage to public space due to the outdoor dining operation. Repairs may also be contracted to third parties. However, the permit holder is responsible to ensure that the contract work meets any city streetscape standards. 
(6)  Outdoor dining space is subject to inspection by the city's building inspector or code enforcement officer for compliance with these standards. 
(Amend. of 7-10-2007, § 1) 
Secs. 62-6—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78. 

Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage means the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment, or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock, or other materials in or on ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including augering, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
Operator means any person who owns or operates a utility. 
Person means any individual; any corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity organized under the laws of any state; any state; any subdivision or instrumentality of a state; and any employee, agent, or legal representative thereof. 
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting, or disturbing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewerage. 
Working day means every day, except Saturday, Sunday, and national and legal state holidays. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-32. - Excavation and demolition permits. 
A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations, shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 3) 
Sec. 62-33. - Prohibition. 
Except as provided in section 62-38, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, a private easement of an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in sections 62-35 and 62-37 the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 4) 
Sec. 62-34. - Filing requirements of utility operators. 
(a)  Each operator having underground utilities in the city shall file with the city clerk/treasurer a list containing every section within the city in which it has underground utilities (including those utilities that have been abandoned in place by the operator but not yet physically removed), the name of the operator and the name, title, address and telephone number of its representative designated to receive the written or telephonic notice of intent required by section 62-35. 
(b)  Changes in any of the information contained in the list filed under subsection (a) of this section shall be filed by the operator with the city clerk/treasurer within five working days of the change. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 5) 
Sec. 62-35. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 62-38, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 62-33, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three, but not more than ten full working days: 
(1)  On each operator which has filed a list required by section 62-34 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition; or 
(2)  If the proposed area of excavation or demolition is served by an association provided for in section 62-36, on such association and on each operator which has filed a list required by section 62-34 indicating that it has underground utilities in the proposed area of excavation or demolition that is not receiving the services of the association; provided, 
where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) of this section must contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration, and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators and associations notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 6) 
Sec. 62-36. - Operator associations. 
Operators may form and operate an association providing for mutual receipt of section 62-35 notifications of excavation or demolition operations in a defined geographical area. An association that provides such service on behalf of operators having underground utilities within the city the telephone number and address of the association, a description of the geographical area served by the association, and a list of the names and addresses of each operator receiving such service from the association. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 7) 
Sec. 62-37. - Response to notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Each operator or designated representative, including an association established in accordance with section 62-36, notified in accordance with section 62-35 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities including, providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utilities is a strip of land at least three feet wide but not wider than the width of the utility plus 1½ feet on either side of the utility. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 8) 
Sec. 62-38. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 62-35 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health, or property, provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area (or to an association provided for in section 62-36, that serves an operator) where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health, or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health, or property will result before the procedures under sections 62-35 and 62-37 can be fully complied with. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 9) 
Sec. 62-39. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 62-35, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 62-33 shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utilities; 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 10) 
Sec. 62-40. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 62-33 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 62-33 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic, or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary, to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire departments. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 11) 
Sec. 62-41. - Civil penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such violation. Actions to recover the penalty provided for in this section shall be brought by the city attorney at the request of any person in the city court in and for the city in which the cause, or some part thereof, arose or in which the defendant has its principal place of business or resides. All penalties recovered in any such actions shall be paid into the general fund of the city. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property (including underground utilities) damage except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1977, § 12) 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable development; 
(2)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments; 
(3)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; 
(4)  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
(5)  To insure that all development and construction plans will implement proper soil erosion controls; 
(6)  To promote a safe and healthy environment; 
(7)  To assure adequate identification of property on the public records; 
(8)  To encourage, in general, the wise development of the city in accordance with adopted land use policies. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 1.2) 
Sec. 66-2. - Authority and jurisdiction. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted in accordance with, and under the power of, the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia (Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I and ¶ IV). 
(b)  By the same authority, the city council exercise the power and authority to review and approve or disapprove plats of land subdivided prior to the recording of such plats in the offices of the clerk of the superior court of the county, within the incorporated section of the city. 
(c)  By the same authority, the city council does hereby possess and exercise the power and authority to review and approve or disapprove the development of a platted subdivision of land already recorded in the offices of the clerk of superior court of the county, if such plat was recorded after June 20, 1989, without prior approval of the city council and more than 50 percent of the platted lots have not been sold to individual owners for the purpose of providing residence for the owner, provided that any review, approval, or disapproval shall concern only the lots yet to be sold to individual owners. Subdivisions which are entirely developed or which received preliminary plat approval prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to proceed in accordance with the design standards in effect at time of approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 1.3) 
Sec. 66-3. - Interpretations, conflicts, and severability. 
(a)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Conflict with public and private provisions. 
(1)  Public provisions. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul other ordinances, rules, or regulations, statutes, or other provisions of law. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or provision of law, the more restrictive shall control. 
(2)  Private agreement. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where this chapter is more restrictive or impose higher standards than a private restriction, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(c)  Separability of provisions. Should any term, part, provision, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or phrases of this chapter to be held unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining terms, parts, provisions, section, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, or phrases of this chapter. 
(d)  Separability. If any portion or provision of this chapter is found unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not effect any other portion of this chapter. 
(1)  Saving provision. This chapter shall not be construed as abating any subdivision development now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, resulting from such development. 
(2)  Repeal of existing regulations. Upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the existing land subdivision regulation of the city, as amended are hereby repealed. 
(3)  Amendments. For the purposes of protecting and providing for the public health, safety, and welfare, the city council may from time to time amend the provisions of this chapter. Before enacting any amendment to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of the date of the submission of a request for an amendment. A public notice shall be given at least 15 days prior to the public hearing in the legal organ of the city. 
(4)  Resubdivision of land. For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, including variation of, part of, all of any plat, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any plat legally recorded prior to the adoption of this chapter, such parcel shall be reviewed and approved, or disapproved by the city council. 
(5)  Variances. 
a.  General. Where the city council finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this chapter or the purpose of this chapter may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve a variance to this chapter; however, such a variance shall not nullify the intent and purpose of this chapter. The city council shall not approve a variance unless it shall find that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or injurious to adjacent property. 
2.  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not generally applicable to adjacent property. 
3.  The variance shall not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city, comprehensive plan, or official map, shall any of these exist. 
b.  Conditions. In approving variances, the city council may require such conditions as in its judgment, will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this chapter. 
c.  Procedures. A petition for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the petitioner at the time when the preliminary plat is submitted for consideration of the city council. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the request. The granting of any variance shall be made concurrent with the approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 1.4) 
Sec. 66-4. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision (including the failure to decide within 60 days upon submission of all documents required by this chapter) of the building inspector, shall have the right of appeal to the city council, if such appeal is filed with the city clerk/treasurer within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the building inspector. 
(b)  Any person or person, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the city council shall have the right to appeal to a court of law if such appeal if filed with the clerk of the court within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 1.5) 
Sec. 66-5. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  General enforcement procedures. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce these regulations, and to bring to the attention of the city council any violations thereof. 
(2)  No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision or an existing subdivision meeting the requirements of subsection 66-2(c) shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a final plat of such subdivision has been approved by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and filed with the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(3)  The subdivision of any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds shall not be permitted except as provided for by the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  No building permits shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or site subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to trial and possible convictions, and shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or both provided further that each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of this chapter; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover damages; to restrain, correct, or abate a violation; to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises; and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 1.6) 
Secs. 66-6—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 66-31. - Definition of terms generally. 
For the purpose of this chapter, except as specifically defined in this article, all words used have their customary dictionary definitions. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, art. II) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-32. - Definitions pertaining to grammatical usage. 
(a)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(b)  The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
(c)  The word "may" is always permissive. 
(d)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
(e)  The word "temporary" shall mean a period of time not exceeding 180 days. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 2.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-33. - Definitions of specific terms. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of these properties whose principle frontage is on some other street. 
Applicant means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
Block means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines of waterways, boundary lines or municipalities. 
Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or shelter of persons, animals or goods. Where roofed structures are separated from each other by party walls having no opening for passage, each portion so separated shall be considered a separate building. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade of the lot to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the average height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, and to the deck line in the case of a mansard roof. 
Building inspector means the authorized building inspector for the city. 
Building line means the line established by law past which a building shall not extend as determined by front, side, and rear yards in this chapter. 
Building, principle means a building in which is conducted the predominant use of the lot on which it is situated. 
Central sewerage system means a private sewerage system including collection and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision in an outlying area. 
Central water system means a private water system formed by a developer to serve a new subdivision in an outlying area. It includes water treatment and distribution facilities. 
Common area means that portion of a site and building which are collectively owned and controlled. 
Condominium means a single unit in a multi-unit structure whose right to legal title is based either in fee simple, estate for years, or a leasehold estate, and where joint or common ownership is vested in all other fixtures, structures, land and its appurtenances. 
Construction plans means the engineering drawings submitted after approval of the preliminary plat showing the specific location and design of the improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the design standards of this chapter. 
Crosswalk (pedestrian walkway) means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor vehicles are excluded. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic, the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Developer means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises in order to undertake subdivision development. 
Double-frontage lot means a lot having frontage on two streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Drainage easement means an area set aside for the purpose of transporting stormwater. Maintenance of these easements are the responsibility of the private property owner unless dedicated and accepted by the city for maintenance. 
Driveway means an access way connecting one or more dwelling units and their parking spaces with a street. 
Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons. 
Engineer means a registered, professional engineer licensed by the state. 
Grading means altering surfaces to specific elevations, dimensions, or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Health department means the health department of the county. 
Improvements guarantee means a guarantee in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank certified check to insure completion of required subdivision improvements. 
Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device approved by the sanitarian. 
Land use plan means a development plan or any part thereof, adopted by the city council that indicates the general location for the various physical classes of public works, places and structures, and depicts the general planned physical development and land use in the city. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one principle building or use, including accessory building or use incidental to it. 
Lot area means the service area inside the lot lines. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no portion of the right-of-way of a street or crosswalk may be included. 
Lot, corner means a lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage means the service area occupied by all buildings within a lot. 
Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot improvement means any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or alteration of the land, constituting a physical betterment of real property. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot or double frontage lot. 
Lot width means the distance between one side lot line and the other side lot line measured at the minimum building setback line. The mean width is measured at a right angle to the lot depth. 
Major subdivision means a subdivision which is not classified as a minor subdivision, including but not limited to four or more lots, or of any size but requiring any new street or extension of city facilities or the creation of any public improvements. 
Minor subdivision means a subdivision which comprises not more than three lots provided that: 
(1)  Each lot in the proposed subdivision abuts an existing street for a minimum distance of 100 feet and the depth shall not exceed three times the width. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision shall be directly accessible to existing required improvements that shall be necessary for connection to existing utilities and other existing facilities. 
(3)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots is permitted where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots comply with the standards of the regulations and all other ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
Nonresidential subdivision means a subdivision whose intended use is other than residential. 
Open space means any portion of an individual lot within the subdivision that is designed and designated for use by the residents of the subdivision or for the general public, not including streets and off-street parking areas. Open spaces shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain such improvements as shown on the plans as finally approved. Unless dedicated and accepted by the city, maintenance shall be the responsibility of all property owners within the subdivision. 
Outlot means a lot which is either unbuildable or not intended for development and is allocated to be used for aesthetic purposes. safety, or common public use. 
Owner means any person who has title to real property. In the case where equitable title is vested in more than one person, authorization by all parties claiming a title to the property in question shall be provided to the governing authority prior to any review and application of the provisions of this chapter. Owners are not holders of security deeds or mortgages on the property. 
Parcel means a plot or plots of land which are shown with a separate identification on the official appraisal maps of the county. 
Plat means a map, plan, or representation that depicts the subdivision of a parcel of land indicating the location and boundaries of the property. 
Plat, final means the final plan of the subdivision and any accompanying documents as required by this chapter that, once approved by the city council, will constitute the plat of record that will be the basis for the authorization of building permits. 
Plat, preliminary means the preliminary drawing or drawings, described in this chapter, indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision that is to be submitted to the city council for approval. 
Public improvement means any drainage, ditch, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility or liability, for maintenance or operation, or which may effect an improvement for which city responsibility and liability is established. 
Public street means a street over which the general public has acquired the right of use. 
Public utilities means water. gas, sanitary and storm sewer, electrical and communications lines and facilities. 
Resubdivision means a change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout, easement, area reserved for public use, or lot line. 
Right-of-way means access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Right-of-way width means the distance between right-of-way lines measured at right angles. 
Sanitarian means a professional sanitarian appointed by the health department and authorized to perform health services in the city. 
Shoulder means the portion of a street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface or curb to the inside edge of the ditch, gutter or original ground surface. 
Sidewalk means the portion of the right-of-way which is parallel to a street or road which is intended for pedestrian traffic. 
Sketch plat means a generalized representation of the proposed subdivision submitted prior to the preliminary plat that will enable the subdivider to reach general agreement with the city council as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this chapter. 
Soil erosion ordinance means the soil erosion ordinance of the city, chapter 38, article II of this Code. 
Street means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic shelter designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, freeway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or otherwise. Various subclassifications are defined as follows: 
(1)  Arterial means a street which is used primarily for fast and heavy traffic flow, is of considerable continuity, and is used to travel through and within the city. 
(2)  Major collector means a street which carries traffic from activity centers and minor collector streets to arterial streets and streets of higher classification. 
(3)  Minor collector means the principle entrance streets to subdivision and the main streets for circulation within a subdivision which serve a network of four or more local streets. 
(4)  Local street means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties as opposed to the collection and dispersion of traffic. 
(5)  Cul-de-sac means a local street having one end open to traffic, the other being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(6)  Marginal access road means a street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(7)  Dead end means a stub street in a subdivision which may at a later time be continued into another portion of the subdivision. 
Street, city means a street which is owned or maintained by the city. 
Street grade means the grade of the centerline of a street measured at any point along the street expressed as a percent. 
Structure means anything constructed, erected or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Subdivider means any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
Subdivision means any land which is divided or proposed to be divided into three or more lots or parcels. The following are not included within this definition. The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of this chapter. 
Surveyor means a registered, practicing surveyor licensed by the state. 
Variance means a modification of the terms of this chapter where such modification will not be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare; where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, not the result of actions of the subdivider or owner, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city, appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 2.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 66-34—66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND DESIGN 

Sec. 66-61. - General requirements. 
(a)  Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the requirements established in this chapter, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances: 
(1)  All applicable statutory provisions. 
(2)  The zoning ordinance of the city, building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions. 
(3)  The comprehensive plan, official map, and capital improvements program of the city. 
(4)  Any and all rules of the county health department or appropriate state agencies. 
(5)  The rules of the state highway department, if the subdivision or any lot contained herein, abuts a state highway. 
(6)  The soil erosion ordinance of the city, chapter 38, article II of this Code. 
(b)  Plats straddling political boundaries. Whenever access to a subdivision is required across land in another governmental jurisdiction, the city council may request assurance from the city attorney that access is legally established. 
(c)  Suitability of the land. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion, geological hazards, topographical limitations, or for other reasons that classify land as unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazards can be sufficiently mitigated and the actions needed to do so are shown on the final plat prior to its approval. 
(d)  Rejection of land dedication. Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land for public use and it is determined by the city council that such land is not suitable for the proposed public use, the city council shall refuse to approve either the preliminary or final plat until such dedication is removed from the plat. 
(e)  Water retention structures. No water retention structure shall be shown to be dedicated or accepted by the city. When the city council finds such structure is recorded on a plat, such dedication shall be stricken from the plat prior to approval. 
(f)  Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate phonetically or visually, the name of any other subdivision in the city. The city council shall have final authority to approve the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined at the time of approval of the preliminary plat. 
(g)  Large scale development. The requirements of this chapter may be modified in the case of a large-scale community, commercial or neighborhood developments in excess of 15 acres that is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks, and streets. Such modifications shall conform with the purpose and intent of this chapter, and shall follow the requirements for a planned unit development (PUD) as included in the zoning regulations of the city if in effect at the time they are revised. 
(h)  Removal of existing trees. All trees six inches in diameter that do not interfere with rights-of-way, utilities, or septic tank drainfields, and actual construction shall be preserved. Tree removal must be approved by the building inspector in all other circumstances. Clearcutting is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 3.1) 
Sec. 66-62. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Generally. The requirements of this section shall apply to every major subdivision and shall be planned for and provided by the subdivider, by installation and payment prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(b)  Street name. All streets shall be named and marked with signs. Street names shall have the approval of the city council and shall not duplicate, nor closely approximate phonetically or visually, the name of any other street in the city, nor the name of any other street within the applicable postal service delivery area. A street that is in alignment with an existing street shall continue the name of the existing street. 
(c)  Streets. All streets shall be designed, constructed, and paved in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. No street shall be accepted by the city until the provisions of section 66-153 are met. The subdivider shall provide suitable ground cover, such as grass, on all unpaved areas of street right-of-way and other public areas. 
(d)  Street sign/traffic control devices. Street name signs and traffic control devices of a design approved by the city will be furnished and installed by the city. Material and installation costs shall be paid for by the subdivider prior to the recording of the plat and issuance of any building permits. 
(e)  Utilities. Except as provided in section 66-213 the following provision shall apply: Sewerage requirements must meet the minimums specified in the zoning ordinance. 
(1)  All water, sewer, and natural gas lines shall be installed along street right-of-way, underground, but generally not under paved areas. Where required, because of topography, location of existing utilities, or other factors the city council may allow the installation of utilities in other areas. 
(2)  If a public water system is located within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision, water mains shall be installed by the subdivider within the subdivision with connections to each lot extended to the lot line. If a public water system is not available, the subdivider shall provide a water supply through a community water system or individual wells in conformity with the regulations of the county health department and this chapter. 
(3)  If a public sanitary sewer system is located within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision, sewer mains shall be installed by the subdivider with connections to each lot extended to the lot line. If a public sewer system is not available, the subdivider shall provide a community sewage collection and treatment system or individual septic tank systems in conformity with the regulations of the county health department and the state department of natural resources. 
(f)  Storm drainage. 
(1)  Generally. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to connect to drainage easements. 
(2)  Connection to existing systems. If a public stormwater drainage system can serve the proposed subdivision, then the subdivider must install an underground storm drainage system which will be connected to the public system. Should a storm drainage system not exist, then adequate surface drainage facilities shall be installed. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 3.2) 
Sec. 66-63. - Design standards for blocks and lots. 
(a)  Block lengths and widths. Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Blocks shall not be greater than 1,200 feet nor less than 400 feet in length, except in unusual circumstances. 
(2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth except where abutting arterial streets or railroads or other situations make these requirements impractical. 
(3)  Blocks shall have pedestrian walkways of not less than four feet in width where deemed essential by the city council to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. 
(4)  Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, as determined by the city council, culs-de-sac (dead-end streets) shall not be greater than 1,200 feet in length. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a pavement radius of at least 40 feet. Paved temporary turnarounds shall be provided for dead-end streets which are scheduled to be extended at a later date. 
(b)  Alleys. Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial development. Alleys in single-family residential subdivisions shall not be permitted, unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the city council of the need for alleys. 
(c)  Development along arterial street. Where a subdivision abuts an arterial street or railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to the right-of-way may be required by the city council. 
(d)  Lot size. All lots shall meet the lot requirements of the zoning ordinance. Corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from all abutting streets as defined in the zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code. 
(e)  Lot lines. All side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless topographic or other features make more practical lot lines. 
(f)  Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of development from arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topographic and orientation. 
(g)  Easements. The city council shall require all easements to have adequate widths and be located along the rear or side lot lines, with provision for access from a public way. 
(h)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips which control access to streets and public grounds shall be permitted only when the control of the reserve strip is placed in the hands of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 3.3) 
Sec. 66-64. - Design standards for streets. 
(a)  Generally. In order to provide for roads suitable in location, width, and improvement, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the design standards for roads in this section are hereby required and shall be planned for and provided by the subdivider, prior to the approval of the final plat. Road classifications may be indicated in the comprehensive plan; otherwise, they shall be determined by the city council. 
(b)  Rights-of-way. 
(1)  Minimum street rights-of-way. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: Widths are back to back of curbs. 
Arterial street ..... 100 feet 
Major collector street ..... 80 feet 
Minor collector street ..... 70 feet 
Local (nonresidential) ..... 60 feet 
Local (residential street) ..... 50 feet 
Alley ..... 30 feet 
(2)  Additional right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards, designated in this chapter shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate cut slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three-to-one. 
(c)  Street pavement widths. Street pavement widths shall be as follows. Widths are back to back of curbs. 
Arterial street ..... 67 feet 
Major collector street ..... 52 feet 
Minor collector street ..... 42 feet 
Local (nonresidential street) ..... 32 feet 
Local (residential street) ..... 28 feet 
Alley (residential) ..... 18 feet 
Alley (Comm./Ind.) ..... 20 feet 
(d)  Paving requirements. 
(1)  Clearing and grubbing right-of-way. Clearing and grubbing the right-of-way shall consist of removing and disposing of all vegetation and debris within the right-of-way to a depth of at least three feet below finished subgrade. All stump holes shall be back filled with a suitable material, Class I or II soil. All clearing and grubbing shall be completed in accordance with the requirements of the state department of transportation, State of Georgia Standard Specifications, Construction of Roads and Bridges. 1977, Section 201, Clearing and Grubbing Right-of-Way. 
(2)  Subgrade. Subgrade work shall consist of placing, mixing, compacting and shaping the top six inches of soil. Subgrade work also includes subgrade stabilization. 
(3)  Compaction. The entire surface shall be plowed, harrowed and mixed to a depth of at least six inches. After the material has been thoroughly mixed, the subgrade shall be compacted at a 90 percent of the maximum density. Sheepfoot rollers are required. Compaction test shall be at 500-foot intervals and at every two feet of fill material. Any areas that do not meet with the specified compaction shall be excavated and replaced with suitable material. Test results shall be submitted to the city council as conducted, All costs for compaction tests shall be incurred by the developer. 
(4)  Subgrade material. The material shall consist of Class I or II soil. If such material is not available on-site, it shall be furnished by the developer. 
(5)  Base. All streets shall have a six-inch crusher run stone base or a four-inch compacted asphaltic concrete base. 
(6)  Paving. All streets shall have a two-inch plant mix asphalt Type "E" or "F" top weaving surface applied to a properly prepared base. 
(e)  Shoulder requirements. The street right-of-way shall be graded at least eight feet, measured from the back of curb or edge of pavement on both sides of the street. Utilities and water lines shall be permitted only within the 12-foot utility easement. Topsoil, striped and stock piled before paving, shall be spread at a minimum depth of four inches in preparation of the seedbed. The soil shall be thoroughly broken, well pulverized, smoothed and firm before planting. Shoulder shall be seeded with bermuda applied at a rate of two pounds per 1,000 square feet or fescue applied at a rate of five pounds per 1,000 square feet. Mulch shall be used on all seeded areas. 
(f)  Culverts. Pipe size shall be determined by standard engineering practices. All pipes shall be bituminous coated. A flaired-end-section shall be attached to all pipe openings. 
(g)  Design guidelines. 
(1)  Continuation of existing streets. Where feasible, existing streets shall be extended for access into the subdivision. Such extensions shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case shall be less than the required width. 
(2)  Linear street grades. Maximum and minimum linear street grades shall be as follows: 
Arterial street — Not more than six percent. 
Major collector street — Not more than eight percent. 
Minor collector street, local streets, and alleys — Not more than ten percent. 
No linear street grade shall be less than one percent. 
(3)  Horizontal curvature. The radii of centerline road curvature shall be as follows: 
Arterial streets ..... -300 feet 
Collector streets ..... -200 feet 
Local street (nonresidential) ..... -200 feet 
Local streets (residential) ..... -100 feet 
Alleys — (Determined by city council) 
(4)  Tangents. Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent having a length of not less than 100 feet. 
(5)  Vertical alignment. There shall be horizontal sight distance at all street intersections, when measured from a height of six feet according to the following: 
Arterial streets ..... -400 feet 
Collector streets ..... -300 feet 
Local street (nonresidential) ..... -250 feet 
Local street (residential) ..... -200 feet 
Alleys ..... -150 feet 
(Note: Where two or more streets of different classifications intersect, the sight distance requirement for the highest classification shall be used.) 
(6)  Intersection design. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Street intersections must be separated from each other by at least 125 feet. 
(7)  Culs-de-sac. All streets shall not exceed 12 times the minimum required lot width or 1,200 feet, whichever is less. Larger cul-de-sac may be approved by the city council if topographic conditions pose development constraints or unusual platting exists. Such approvals must be with consent of the fire marshal. 
(8)  Turnaround. For a residential subdivision, right-of-way diameter shall be 100 feet and pavement diameter shall be 80 feet. For a nonresidential subdivision, right-of-way diameter shall be 160 feet and pavement diameter shall be 140 feet. 
(9)  Private access drives. Private access drives shall be permitted to serve no more than two land-locked residential lots where, due to special problems created as a result of necessary unusual platting configuration, or as a result of special physical features, the property could not otherwise be developed. No more than one such drive shall be approved per subdivision development and must be approved as part of the original plat. These drives are exempt from paving requirements. Private access drives shall have the same right-of-way as is required for local streets. 
(10)  Alleys. Alleys serving residential lots or dwellings feet are not permitted. Alleys with a minimum width of 30 feet may be required for loading at the rear of all lots designated for business and industrial use. Dead-end alleys are prohibited. 
(11)  Slope maintenance easement. Slope maintenance easement shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. 
(12)  Primary highway system. Whenever a proposed subdivision abuts an arterial road or major collector, an access road or lane with curbing extending the full length of the subdivision along such highway and providing limited access thereto may be required at a distance suitable for the use of the land between such access road or lane highway. 
(13)  Visibility. Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to comply with the sight distance required of this chapter. 
(14)  Driveways. Driveways shall have a slope of not more than a positive or negative 12 percent for a distance of ten feet measured along the driveway centerline from the right-of-way line and must be a minimum of six inches above the elevation of the gutter line. 
(15)  Sidewalks. The inclusion of sidewalks within subdivisions is encouraged. When included, sidewalks shall be within the dedicated nonpaved right-of-way of all roads within the subdivision. Concrete curbs are required for all roads where sidewalks are to be installed. The minimum paved width of sidewalks shall be five feet and a median strip of grassed or landscaped areas at least two feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. 
(h)  Slopes. 
(1)  General requirements. Development of subdivisions is to be accomplished with minimal earth moving and disruption to the natural topography of the site. It is the intent of this chapter that existing or manmade slopes be modified or designed in such a way as to minimize potential for erosion and to minimize ease of maintenance. Subdivision development shall conform to provisions of chapter 38, article II regarding erosion and sediment control. 
(2)  Design standards. 
a.  No existing or proposed cut or fill slope shall exceed three horizontal units to one vertical unit within 11 feet of the edge of pavement of back of curb. If the distance is greater than 11 feet, the slope may be greater than three to one up to a maximum to one vertical unit, provided that all cut and fill shall be within the prescribed right-of-way of the road or slope easements. All grading as provided within this section shall be completed and approved by the building inspector prior to the installation of any utilities. 
b.  All fill slopes created for the purpose of street construction shall have a compaction of not less than 95 percent as determined by established engineering practices. 
c.  Slopes flatter than those set forth in the foregoing paragraphs may be required when, in the opinion of the building inspector, the general nature of the soil involved warrants a flatter slope. To control surface drainage on existing and proposed slopes, berm ditches may be required at the top and the intersection of the slope and ground line. 
d.  All slopes created or existing within the subdivision or as a result of the subdivision development shall be planted or otherwise protected from erosion and failure. Such planting and other protection from erosion and failure shall be completed and shall be undertaken immediately upon creation of any slope steeper than two horizontal feet to one vertical foot and completed without delay in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the building inspector. In addition, the sub divider may be required to provide a fence, hedge, guardrail or other protective device, specified by the building inspector along ridges in excess of 20 vertical feet in height and with slopes in excess of 1.5:1 (horizontal:vertical) to prevent dangerous falls for children and other residents of the subdivision. At the option of the building inspector the developer shall provide certified test results of compaction and any material provided at the location and frequency determined necessary by the building inspector. 
(i)  Drainage. 
(1)  General requirements. The stormwater drainage system and easements shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and easement. The city council shall not recommend for approval any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff channels or basins. Stormwater runoff and storm sewer or channel design shall be designed by a method as approved by the building inspector and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with the construction plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow at that point. Natural drainage channels existing within a subdivision shall be improved by the subdivider to specifications approved by the building inspector, if erosion, flooding, or hazard will be created by the continued existence thereof, as determined by the building inspector. 
(2)  Nature of stormwater facilities. 
a.  Location. The applicant may be required by the building inspector to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way, where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the building inspector. 
b.  Accessibility to public storm sewers. When a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of stormwater, subject to the specifications of the building inspector. If a connection to a public storm sewer will be eventually provided, as determined by the city engineer, the developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public utility system at the time the final plat receives final approval. 
c.  Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area whether inside or outside the subdivision. The building inspector shall approve the necessary size of the facility, which has been designed by a registered professional engineer, based on 110 percent of the current storm runoff for the 100-year storm for culverts under streets, and the 25-year storm for all other culverts. Minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches. 
d.  Effect on downstream drainage areas. The developer shall study and the building inspector shall review and approve the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Drainage studies, together with such other studies as shall be appropriate shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the city council shall withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of such condition. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage is provided to an adequate watercourse or facility. 
e.  Stormwater management report required. 
1.  Every project shall provide a stormwater management report prepared by a professional engineer currently registered in the state. The purpose of this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage stormwater runoff so that stormwater runoff hazards are not created and existing runoff-related problems are not exacerbated, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed. 
2.  The stormwater management report shall identify the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre- and post- developed conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties shall anticipate future development in addition to addressing existing conditions. It shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the site relative to water courses, drainage divides, drainage structures, and other pertinent features. 
3.  The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainageway "immediately" downstream from the project. This area shall generally extend a flow distance of about one-half mile from the project's boundary line, but shall be longer for projects contributing relatively large amounts of runoff to the study area, and shorter for small runoff contributions. In all cases, the most critical downstream area investigation shall be conducted relative to existing and anticipated land uses on tracts which adjoin the project site. 
f.  Storm detention required. 
1.  Whenever a stormwater management report indicates that adverse stormwater runoff related impact is expected to result from the development of property, that project shall be required to provide stormwater detention facilities such that peak flows from the developed site do not exceed those associated with predevelopment conditions. 
2.  The following criteria shall be evaluated by the engineer in preparing the stormwater management report, and determining whether or not detention should be required for any portion of any site: 
i.  Existing land uses downstream; 
ii.  Anticipated future land uses downstream; 
iii.  Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development; 
iv.  Presence of existing drainage problems; 
v.  Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage systems; 
vi.  Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously; 
vii.  Availability of feasible locations for detention facilities; 
viii.  Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the project site; 
ix.  Anticipated future flows generated off-site which pass through the project site; and 
x.  The nature of the receiving watercourse. 
3.  Stormwater drainage facilities shall be required for any portion of any site in which development activities will result in increased flows, unless the registered professional engineer currently registered in the state certifies and provides certified documentation supporting the conclusion to the city council that the following is true and correct as applicable: 
i.  The nondetained, post-development runoff will leave the project site as sheet flow, and will not have an adverse impact upon downstream properties. 
ii.  The effect of detention would be to concentrate flows where sheet flow had occurred under pre-developed conditions, and any impact of increase sheet flows upon downstream properties would be less adverse than that which would result from the concentrated flows from a detention facility even if energy dissipation devices were employed. 
iii.  The runoff will flow directly into a floodplain without crossing off-site properties, and the runoff will constitute less than five percent of the total runoff in the watercourse at the point where the watercourse crosses the project site's downstream property line. 
iv.  The undetained flow will pass through downstream properties, in drainage easements obtained by the developer, to an existing detention facility which has been designed to manage the upstream property's runoff. 
4.  In the event that the professional engineer has concluded that stormwater detention may not be necessary as compliance with subsection (i)(2)f.3 of this section, a pre-design conference with the building inspector shall be required before the submittal of plans. 
g.  Detention design criteria—Generally. 
1.  All stormwater detention design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the state. 
2.  All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to control the peak flow rates associated with storms having two-year, ten-year, and 25-year return frequencies. Where conditions warrant, the 100-year storm shall also be regulated. 
3.  A variety of methods of achieving stormwater management goals shall be acceptable in providing detention facilities. The type of facility provided shall be based on the following criteria: 
i.  The type of development for which the detention facility is being provided; 
ii.  The type of development which the detention facility is intended to protect; 
iii.  Volume of stormwater to be stored; 
iv.  Origin and magnitude of the flows to be managed; 
v.  Topographic opportunities and limitations; 
vi.  Safety considerations; 
vii.  Maintenance requirements; 
viii.  Aesthetic considerations; 
ix.  Likelihood of facility operation interfering with access to public or private facilities; 
x.  Proximity of facility to property lines, utilities, buffers, etc. and 
xi.  Similar site-specific constraints. 
4.  Detention facilities may be of any of the following types, and two or more types may be used in combination with one another: 
i.  Normally-dry basins, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination of both methods; 
ii.  Lakes and ponds, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination or both methods; 
iii.  Parking lot facilities; 
iv.  Underground facilities; or 
v.  Roof top facilities. 
5.  Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design. 
6.  The detention methodology required for any given project shall conform to the following table. Although the various methods shown are authorized, it shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to use the correct coefficients and applications which will result in compliance with the requirements of this article and the intent of this chapter. 
TABLE 7-A  DETENTION METHODOLOGY BY DRAINAGE BASIN SIZE 

 
i.  For the purpose of this chapter, a drainage basin includes all of the acreage which will contribute flow to a study point (or area) along a downstream property line of the site being developed. 
ii.  All sub-basins draining a project which fall within the same size category above should' be analyzed using the same methodology. 
iii.  Under no circumstances will the "bowstring" method be acceptable. 
7.  Runoff coefficients used for pre- and post- development conditions for the rational method shall be consistent with those shown in Table 9-F. For the SCS method the runoff curve numbers found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia shall be used. 
8.  If either the rational method or the SCS method is used for detention design, calculations shall be provided showing how all times of concentration or lag times were computed, both for pre-and post-developed conditions. Likewise, adequate support must be provided for all composite runoff coefficients or curve numbers used. 
9.  If a computer program is used for detention design, including generating and routing hydrographs, the output from the program shall be summarized in the stormwater management report, and the name and version of the program shall be indicated. Computer output sheets may be attached to the report, if desired, by the design engineer or if requested by the city council. 
10.  The design of every detention facility of any type shall consider the effects both of inflows in excess of those the facility is designed to accommodate and of malfunctioning of the primary outlet system. A safe path for overflow condition flows shall be provided. 
h.  Dedication of drainage easements. 
1.  General requirements. Where a subdivision is transversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Whenever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by appropriate means of adequate width for maximum potential volume or flow. 
2.  Drainage easement. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road right-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across to the road. Where pipe size warrants, a ten-foot easement may be permitted. Easement shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. Easements less than 20 feet may be approved by the building inspector. When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside this subdivision and outside a natural drain, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee sample or by drainage easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses, for a distance to be determined by the building inspector. Low-lying land along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Final plats for all subdivisions shall show (or include by note) a ten-foot wide drainage easement along every property line whether the developer intends to channel water in these easements or not. 
i.  Water facilities; general requirements. 
1.  Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a water supply district for the purpose of providing domestic water use and fire protection. 
2.  Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the state and city authorities. 
3.  All water mains shall be at least eight inches in diameter. Water main extensions shall be approved by the county health department. 
4.  To facilitate the provisions of this subsection, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat and the cost of installing hydrants and water supply improvements shall be included in the improvement guarantee to be furnished by the developer. 
5.  A copy of the as-built water plans shall be submitted to the building inspector. 
j.  Individual wells and central water systems. At the discretion of the building inspector, if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the health department for its approval and individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate health authorities. Orders of approval shall be submitted to the building inspector. 
k.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions except those served by individual wells or central water systems. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 500 feet apart for fire insurance rating purposes and within 500 feet of any structure and shall be approved by the fire marshal. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with fire hydrants themselves and all other water supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. All fire hydrants shall be set plumb with outlets 18 inches above finished grade or 12 inches above a finished concrete surface. All fire hydrants shall have at least two 2½-inch discharge outlets and one 4½-inch discharge outlet. All threads shall comply with local and state firefighting equipment standards. 
l.  Design standards. The water system design standards shall be those of the city. 
m.  Preservation of natural features and amenities. Existing features, which would add value to residential development or to the local government as a whole, such as trees, as herein defined, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. 
n.  Soil preservation and seeding. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved final subdivision plat and the lot precovered with soil with an average depth of at least six inches over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or natural vegetation seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the lots. 
o.  Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and percolation test and test holes shall be made as directed by the county sanitarian and the results submitted to the health department. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, shall also be approved by the county sanitarian. 
p.  Design standards. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the health department and other appropriate agencies. 
q.  Utilities. 
1.  Location. The facilities for underground utilities or conduits for their construction shall be in place prior to final surfacing of streets. All facilities for utilities shall, where possible, be placed in easements provided for that purpose in the subdivision or located as approved by the building inspector. No subdivision street shall be cut for underground utilities. 
2.  Easements. Utility easements for electric and telephone service lines, sewerage lines, water lines, or other such utilities located along rear lot line or side lot lines or passing through a lot shall be at least ten feet wide, five feet on each lot, and more if determined by the city engineer. Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
r.  Lots. 
1.  General requirements. All lots shall conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code, specifically those provisions governing minimum area, frontage, and setbacks. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with city regulations and in providing drive way access to buildings on such lots from an approved street. 
2.  Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance. All lots approved under this chapter shall front on a street or private access drive. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the building inspector may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code and this chapter. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for construction of buildings and observing the minimum front-yard setbacks. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance. Commercial and industrial lots shall be of adequate size to provide for the intended use and for the yards, buffer areas, and the off-street parking and loading requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
3.  Lot lines. All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. 
4.  Front yard setback lines. A line meeting the front yard setback requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be established on all lots. Any projection beyond the front building line such as uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters, and similar fixtures shall be subject to provisions of the zoning ordinance and approved or disapproved by the appropriate city official for each individual application. 
5.  Lots abutting public streets. Each lot shall abut upon a publicly dedicated and publicly maintained street or a private vehicular way designated by the city as providing public access within a development. 
6.  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to provide separation or overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Double frontage lots which are necessary shall be required to have a no-access easement across them, preventing access to arterial or collector streets. 
7.  Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
8.  Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, rocks, stones, junk rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any right-of-way or under any proposed structures. All such bury pits shall be approved by the inspection department prior to excavation. All lots shall be seeded from the roadside edge of the unpaved right-of-way to a distance of 25 feet behind the principle residence on the lot. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until respreading of soil and seeding of lawn has been completed; except that between October 1 and March 15, and between May 15 and August 15. the applicant shall submit an agreement in writing signed by the developer and the property owner, with a copy to the building inspector, that respreading of soil and seeding of lawn will be done during the immediate following planting season as set forth in this section, to the satisfaction of the property owner. Sod or any approved grass seed may be used to comply with any requirement of seeding set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 3.4) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 66-65. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
(a)  If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision shall conform to these subdivision regulations. Land zoned for agricultural purposes is excluded from this chapter. 
(b)  A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in the zoning ordinance. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  In addition to the principles and standards in this chapter, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city council, that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  A preliminary plat of a commercial or industrial center development shall conform in all respects with the approved master development plan for the project and any conditions associated with the project's zoning. 
(2)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development associated. 
(3)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
(4)  Special requirements may be imposed by the city engineer with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
(5)  Special requirements may be imposed by the city engineer with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and stormwater drainage. 
(6)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
(7)  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 3.5) 
Sec. 66-66. - Responsibility for improvements. 
(a)  Generally. In lieu of the required improvements in a subdivision, the subdivider may deposit surety for the completion of such improvements with the city and present a final plat for approval. In no case shall any building be occupied or otherwise utilized until all required improvements are completed. 
(b)  Requirements. To assure the construction and installation of required improvements, the subdivider shall deliver to the city a certified check, surety bond, or other acceptable security in such aggregate amount as is estimated by the city to be the total cost of the construction and installation of all required improvements. In addition, the subdivider shall, if applicable, deposit surety for road maintenance for a period of 12 months. 
(c)  Conditions. Bonds or other surety posted shall run to the city and provide that the subdivider, his heirs, successors, assigns, their agents, shall comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of this chapter and other regulations and the final plat; will faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing and installing all required improvements; that the subdivider shall be responsible to the city for any unnecessary expenses incurred through the failure of subdivider, his heirs, successors, assigns, or their agents, to complete the work of such installations and construction in an acceptable manner, and from any damages growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform such installation and construction. If a bond is offered, it shall be executed by a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in the state. Where a bond is required for a road construction project and is to be other than a bond issued by a commercial fidelity bonding company, the surety must meet the following conditions: 
(1)  The surety must be an individual or group of individuals; 
(2)  The surety or sureties shall be the equity in real property located in the city and the value of the surety or sureties shall be at least two times the estimated cost of paving the road; 
(3)  The bond must be accompanied by an affidavit setting forth the facts in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section; 
(4)  The bond must be double the amount of the estimated cost of the road project; and 
(5)  If there is more than one surety, all sureties shall be jointly and severable liable. 
(d)  Duration and release of bonds and surety. Bonds and surety posted pursuant to this chapter shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such time as the facilities guaranteed thereby have been installed and accepted. Acceptances shall be in writing and accurately identify the improvements covered. Facilities shall not be accepted unless they conform to the applicable specifications and requirements. 
(e)  Default procedures. If the construction or installation of any improvements of facilities for which a bond or other surety is posted. is not completed within three months after substantial completion of any buildings or structures which such improvements or facilities are designed to serve, or within three years after the date of recording of final plat, whichever is sooner, or if such construction or installation is not in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements, the city shall, using proceeds from such surety deposits, pay for such work. Such work may be done under contract or by city personnel. To the extent that any portion of a cash deposit is not required or used, such excess cash shall be repaid to the person making the deposit. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 3.6) 
Secs. 66-67—66-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS 

Sec. 66-91. - General procedure. 
(a)  When any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any lot or part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure, which includes three steps for a minor subdivision and four steps for a major subdivision. 
(1)  Minor subdivision: 
a.  Sketch plat; 
b.  Final plat. 
(2)  Major subdivision: 
a.  Sketch plat; 
b.  Preliminary plat; 
c.  Soil erosion plan; and 
d.  Final plat. 
(b)  If such use is for commercial or industrial purposes, then such subdivision shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. If such use is for agricultural purposes, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply. All submittals shall be consistent with provisions of the zoning ordinance and other codes, ordinances, and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 4.1) 
Sec. 66-92. - Subdivision review fees and procedures. 
(a)  Fee schedule. The fee schedule for subdivision review shall be as follows: 
(1)  Sketch plat review: $25.00. 
(2)  Preliminary plat review: $150.00 
(3)  Final plat review: $150.00. 
(b)  Procedures. The following procedures shall be followed when submitting plats for minor subdivision, or plats and/or construction plans for major subdivision: 
(1)  Minor subdivision. For a minor subdivision the subdivider shall meet with the building inspector to review a sketch plat of the proposed subdivision and insure compliance with these, and other appropriate city ordinances and regulations. After receiving approval of the sketch plat by the building inspector: 
a.  The subdivider shall submit a copy of the final plat on reproducible material to the building inspector and appropriate fees shall be paid. 
b.  The building inspector shall review the final plat and approve or disapprove such plat within five working days. 
c.  The final plat, if approved, shall be submitted by the subdivider to the city council for informational purposes. 
d.  The approved final plat shall be submitted by the subdivider to the office of the clerk of superior court and shall be recorded within 60 days of the date of approval. 
(2)  Major subdivision. For a major subdivision the following procedure applies: 
a.  Three copies of the sketch plat shall be submitted to the city council. 
b.  The subdivider and his professional representative shall meet with the building inspector to review the sketch plat. Approval of the sketch plat shall constitute permission to prepare a preliminary plat. 
c.  No later than 30 days prior to the meeting date of the city council, the subdivider shall submit six copies of a preliminary plat to the building inspector for review, local distribution, and appropriate fees shall be paid. 
d.  The building inspector shall utilize the 30-day period prior to the city council meeting date, to review the preliminary plat. The subdivider shall be notified if any changes are necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter. The subdivider shall be responsible for having all changes made and a revised plat submitted prior to the city council meeting date. 
e.  At the meeting, the city council shall approve, approve subject to modifications, table, or disapprove the preliminary plat. If approval is given subject to modifications, the required modifications shall be provided to the subdivider in writing. All modifications shall be made on the plat approved by the building inspector prior to issuance of a grading permit. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the city council shall notify the subdivider in writing, citing the reasons for disapproval. The action of the city council shall be noted on the copy of the preliminary plat, and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. 
f.  Preliminary plat approval is tentative, pending submission of construction plans, and is valid for a period not to exceed 12 months, after which it shall expire. 
g.  A grading permit shall be issued subsequent to preliminary plat approval of construction plans. 
h.  Two copies of construction plans depicting the design of all required improvements shall be submitted by the subdivider to the building inspector within six months from the date of approval of the preliminary plat for review by the building inspector and prior to installation of any improvements. 
i.  Within 12 months from the date of preliminary plat approval, copies of a final plat for one or more phases of the subdivision shall be submitted to the building inspector at least 30 days prior to the date of the meeting of city council and all appropriate fees shall be paid. The subdivider shall also provide the necessary improvements guarantees. Failure to submit within this time period shall void the plat unless an extension for a period not to exceed six months is granted by the city council. Such extension must be applied for in writing by the subdivider. 
j.  At the meeting the city council shall determine whether all requirements of this chapter have been met and either approve, table, or disapprove the final plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the city council shall notify the subdivider in writing, citing the reasons for disapproval. 
k.  Recordation. An approved final plat shall be filed by the subdivider with the clerk of superior court within 30 days after final approval. However, if the final plat is approved during the month of December, it shall be filed with the clerk of superior court for recordation no later than 12:00 p.m. on December 31. Failure to comply with this subsection shall void any approved plat. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 4.2) 
Sec. 66-93. - Section document submittal schedule. 
In order to process a subdivision application, the following schedule shall be adhered to: 
(1)  Minor subdivision. For minor subdivisions the following document submittal schedule shall apply: 
a.  Sketch plat: By advance appointment with the building inspector. 
b.  Final plat: By advance appointment with the building inspector. 
(2)  Major subdivision. For major subdivisions the following document submittal schedule shall apply: 
a.  Sketch plat: By advance appointment with the building inspector. 
b.  Preliminary plat: 30 days prior to the date of the city council meeting at which the plat is to be reviewed. 
c.  Construction plans: Within six months subsequent to preliminary plat approval, but prior to installation of any required improvements. 
d.  Final plat: 30 days prior to the date of the city council meeting at which the final plat is to be reviewed, but no later than 12 months from the date of preliminary approval. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 4.3) 
Sec. 66-94. - Resubdivision; amendments of plats. 
Any change in a plat of an approved or recorded subdivision, if such change is in the plat, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any plat or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, shall be submitted to the city council for review by the building inspector. The building inspector shall approve or disapprove this resubdivision. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 4.4) 
Sec. 66-95. - Subdivision where future resubdivision is indicated. 
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and it is intended that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into small building sites, the building inspector shall require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat. 
(1)  Minor subdivisions. The subdivider of a minor subdivision shall meet with the building inspector to review a sketch plat of the proposed subdivision and insure compliance with these, and other appropriate city ordinances. After receiving approval of the sketch plat by the building inspector: 
a.  The subdivider shall submit to the building inspector a copy of the final plat on reproducible material of the final plat and copies shall then be submitted to the city council and all appropriate fees paid. 
b.  The building inspector shall review the final plat and approve or disapprove such plat within five working days. 
c.  The final plat, if approved, shall be submitted by the subdivider to the city council for informational purposes. 
d.  After approval, the approved final plat is to be recorded in the office of clerk of superior court. 
(2)  Major subdivision. For a major subdivision the following procedures shall apply: 
a.  Six copies of the sketch plat shall be submitted to the city council. 
b.  The subdivider and his professional representative shall meet with the building inspector to review the sketch plat. Approval of the sketch plat shall constitute permission to prepare a preliminary plat. 
c.  No later than 30 days prior to the meeting date of the city council, the subdivider shall submit copies of a preliminary plat to the city council for review by the building inspector and local distribution, and appropriate fees shall be paid. 
d.  The building inspector shall utilize the 30-day period prior to the city council meeting date to review the preliminary plat. The subdivider shall be notified if any changes are necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter and shall be responsible for having all changes made and a revised plat submitted prior to the city council meeting date. 
e.  At the meeting, the city council shall approve, approve subject to modifications, table, or disapprove the preliminary plat. If approval is given subject to modifications, the required modifications shall be provided to the subdivider in writing. All modifications shall be made on the plat and approved by the building inspector prior to issuance of a grading permit. If a preliminary plat is disapproved, the city council shall notify the subdivider in writing, citing the reasons for disapproval. The action of the city council shall be noted on a copy of the preliminary plat, and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. 
f.  Preliminary plat approval is tentative, pending submission of construction plans, and is valid for a period not to exceed 12 months, after which it shall expire. 
g.  A grading permit shall be issued subsequent to preliminary plat approval. No improvement may be installed prior to approval of construction plans. 
h.  Two copies of construction plans depicting the design of all required improvements shall be submitted to the city council within six months from the date of approval of the preliminary plat for review by the building inspector prior to installation of any improvements. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 4.5) 
Sec. 66-96. - Subdivision with prior approval. 
Subdivisions which received preliminary plat approval prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to proceed in accordance with the design standards in effect at time of approval of the preliminary plat. This subsection shall expire five years after date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, after which all subdivisions shall conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 4.6) 
Secs. 66-97—66-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED 

Sec. 66-121. - Sketch plat. 
(a)  Generally. The sketch plat shall represent the entire area which the subdivider contemplates developing, including those units or sections not scheduled for immediate development. Three copies of the sketch plat shall be submitted to the building inspector for review with the subdivider and his professional representative. The sketch plat shall include, as a minimum, the information set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Contents. The sketch plat submitted to the building inspector may be prepared in ink or pencil on a reproducible medium, and may be a freehand rendering. The sketch plat shall illustrate the ultimate development of the entire parcel owned by the applicant and shall identify the section for which formal plat approval will initially be requested. The sketch plat shall be prepared at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet and is to include site topography at a contour interval of five feet or less. The sketch plat shall include at minimum the following information: 
(1)  Subdivision name and unit if within existing subdivision. 
(2)  Proposed name, if not within a previously platted subdivision. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of legal owner or agent of the property. 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of registered professional responsible for subdivision design, design of improvement, and for survey. 
(5)  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
(6)  Vicinity map. 
(7)  Proposed use of property to be subdivided. 
(8)  Total acreage. 
(9)  Location of existing property lines, major easements/rights-of-way, water courses, drainage areas and ditches, and distinctive natural features. 
(10)  The location and width of all existing or proposed streets or public ways within or directly adjacent to the subject property. 
(11)  Existing buildings. 
(12)  The approximate location of all proposed or existing lots, and the square footage of the smallest lot. 
(13)  The location of flood hazard areas taken from the Housing and Urban Development (FEMA) maps. 
(14)  Statement of proposed water/sewer supply or collection method. 
(15)  Zoning of subject property and adjacent properties. 
(16)  Any sketch plat of a major subdivision shall contain the locations of all general topographical features and the approximate slopes and gradients, both present and proposed. Information on any changes caused by grading that will affect soil erosion and sedimentation must be included as well as information as to the conditions of soil types within the subdivision and the relationship between soil limitations and dwelling density within the subdivision. 
(17)  Any sketch plat shall provide information and data relating to surface water runoff as it effects stormwater drainage and impact on adjacent areas. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 5.1) 
Sec. 66-122. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Generally. The preliminary plat shall represent the entire area which the subdivider contemplates developing, including possible unit divisions not scheduled for immediate development. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be transmitted by the subdivider to the appropriate city agency. 
(b)  Preparation. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor. registered professional engineer or licensed landscape architect and include, as a minimum, the requirements set out in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Contents. The preliminary plat submitted to the building inspector shall be in ink, on a reproducible medium, and prepared in accordance with acceptable professional standards. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background, and the submittal shall include such other documents as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. If the preliminary plat is prepared by a registered professional engineer, reference must be made to the legal survey of the parcel. A copy of the survey must be included with the preliminary plat if not stamped by a licensed land surveyor. The preliminary plat shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger. Sheet size shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches. Additional sheets may be used if necessary. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  Names and right-of-way width of all proposed streets. 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner or owners of the land to be subdivided and the name, address, and telephone number of the subdivider. 
(4)  The seal, name, and address of the licensed land surveyor or registered professional engineer. 
(5)  Date, graphic scale, numeric scale, north arrow, and space for revisions. 
(6)  Vicinity map indicating streets, highways, railroads, and other significant features within, or adjacent, to the proposed subdivision. 
(7)  Proposed use of property to be subdivided. 
(8)  Total acreage, outlot acreage, if applicable, and the acreage of the smallest lot. 
(9)  Present zoning of subject property and adjacent properties. 
(10)  The location of property with respect to surrounding streets, and the names of adjoining developments. 
(11)  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property, expressed in feet. 
(12)  Unit divisions if known or staged development if proposed by the subdivider. 
(13)  Contour lines, at intervals not to exceed two feet, based on mean sea level datum, and the basis for development of contour lines, shall be indicated on the plat. 
(14)  The approximate location and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, drainage or other underground structures within, and immediately adjacent to the subject property. 
(15)  The location of existing and proposed streets, easements, water bodies, flood hazard areas, streams and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, building parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges and rock outcrops. 
(16)  Reference points from proposed intersections to permanent features. 
(17)  The location and scaled dimensions of all proposed or existing lots and the minimum front yard setback on all lots and side lot setback for corner lots. 
(18)  The location, scaled dimensions, and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
(19)  Sufficient data acceptable to the building inspector to determine the location, bearing and distance from a first order geodetic control point: the location, bearing and length of all property lines, as well as monumentation of the existing boundary survey and adequate geodetic location, vertical control with respect to mean sea level and a mathematical closure within a tolerance of one foot in 5,000 feet. 
(20)  Blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order and blocks in numbered additions to the subdivision bearing the same name shall be lettered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
(21)  All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered in a logical sequence. 
(22)  List of proposed utilities to be located underground. 
(23)  A statement of the proposed method of water supply, major drainage provisions, detention areas, and proposed sewage disposal plans. If the development is to utilize a private sewer system, all information required by the health department shall be provided. 
(24)  The total number of units if not a single-family subdivision. 
(25)  Certification for signature, for the mayor approving the preliminary plat. The lack of information under any item specified in this section, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause of disapproval of a preliminary plat. Note: this is a temporary plat and shall not be used for final recording. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 5.2) 
Sec. 66-123. - Construction plans. 
(a)  Generally. Prior to installation of any required improvements, the subdivider shall submit two copies of construction plans to the city council. No improvements shall be installed until the building inspector formally approves the construction plans. Construction plans shall be prepared only by a registered professional engineer, registered land surveyor, or registered landscape architect. 
(b)  Content. All construction plans submitted to the city council shall be prepared in accordance with acceptable professional standards and shall be in ink, on a reproducible medium. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background. Construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards contained in this chapter and shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equal 100 feet with a contour interval not to exceed two feet. Drawing sheets size shall not exceed 24 by 36 inches. Construction plans shall be submitted for all required improvements and amended when necessary. The following shall be depicted: 
(1)  Profiles shall be accompanied by plan views of street intersection, significant cuts and fills and intersections with existing property lines. This includes all known geographical features such as faults and rock formations. 
(2)  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevation along centerlines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the elevation along the centerline of the existing road or roads shall be shown. The radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets shall be shown. 
(3)  Where slopes in excess of 20 percent occur on cross slopes, the building inspector may require that cross sections of all proposed streets at fifth foot stations shall be shown at five points as follows: On a line at right angles to the centerline of the street, and such elevation points shall be at the centerline of the street, each property line and points 50 feet inside each property line. 
(4)  Plans and profiles showing the location and typical cross section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks if provided, drainage easements, right-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed storm sewers, drains, and exact location and size of all existing water, gas, or underground utilities or structures. All utilities proposed for location underground shall be duly noted. 
(5)  Location and size of all existing and proposed drainage structures including retention ponds, catch basins, grates, headwalls and any extensions thereof. The acreage of the drainage area and all pipe and ditch sizing calculations shall be provided. 
(6)  The engineer preparing the construction plans shall certify the centerline of all streets and drainage ways based upon a field run survey. 
(7)  Plans for water systems and plans and profiles for sewer system and storm drainage pipes. 
(8)  All information required by the city's construction standards and specifications. 
(9)  An approved sedimentation and erosion control plan. 
(10)  A hydrological study including the drainage plan for the area. 
(11)  Title, name, address, stamp, and signature of professional engineer and date, including revision dates. 
(12)  Typical street section to include asphalt and base thickness, curb, road width, shoulder slope, and right-of-way width. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 5.3) 
Sec. 66-124. - Final plat. 
(a)  Submittal generally. The final plat must be submitted to the city council for review within 12 months of the date of approval of the preliminary plat. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(b)  Conformance with preliminary plat. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat. It may represent only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to develop and record at this time. 
(c)  Contents. The final plat submitted shall conform to the preliminary plat and shall be in ink on a reproducible medium prepared in accordance with accepted professional standards. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background, and the submittal shall include such other documents as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger. Sheet size shall be 12 inches by 16 inches for a minor subdivision and 17 inches by 21 inches for a major subdivision. If the entire final plat cannot be depicted on one sheet, the plat may be divided and an index provided. The following shall be contained on the plat: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of subdivider. 
(3)  Date of survey, date of plat drawing, and revision dates, graphic scale; north arrow with reference of bearings to magnetic, true, or grid north; the longitude and latitude and state plane coordinates; and the mean sea level datum. 
(4)  Location of tract (land district and land lot) and acreage. 
(5)  If part of all of the tract is a portion of a former subdivision, reference shall be made to the former plat, with identification of the former lots and blocks being resubdivided. 
(6)  Index map, when more than one sheet is required to depict plat. 
(7)  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street lines, bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments which shall be accurately described on the plat. 
(8)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distance to the nearest one-hundredth foot and bearings to the nearest second. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field, and shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 5,000 feet. The bearing and distance from a first order geodetic control point to the property boundary shall also be shown. 
(9)  The error of closure, as calculated by latitudes and departures, shall be stated. Surveys shall be coordinated and vertically tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Elevations. The benchmark used shall be provided. 
(10)  Municipal, county, or land lot lines must be accurately tied to the boundary line of the subdivision by distance and angles, when such lines transverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. The boundary line of the subdivision must be shown by distance and angles, when such lines transverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
(11)  Exact location, right-of-way, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all cross angles of intersections, radii, length of tangents, and arcs and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
(12)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs and chords, and tangents of radii of rounded corners. 
(13)  Building setback, with dimension. 
(14)  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width at the building lines shall be shown. 
(15)  Blocks lettered alphabetically within each block; lots or sites numbered in numerical order. 
(16)  The square footage of the smallest lot. 
(17)  Location, dimensions, and purposes of: 
a.  Easements, including slope easements, public service utility right-of-way lines, areas (other than streets) to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to the public; 
b.  Sites for other than residential use, with notes stating their purposes and limitations; and 
c.  Any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
(18)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. Monuments to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated as "future." 
(19)  The following certification: In addition to any other powers that the city may have, this subdivision is a special drainage district. See Ga. Const. art. 2, § 2, ¶ 2. 
(20)  Certifications for final plat approval by the city council. 
(21)  Owner's certification. The final plat shall contain, in addition to a licensed land surveyor's certification, a statement as follows: 
"I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, dedicate all streets, easements, alleys, walks, parks and other open spaces to provide directly or indirectly for maintenance of all common areas or outlots." 
This statement shall be signed and dated by the owners, proprietors, or trustees, if any, prior to the final plat submittal. The final plat shall be accompanied by statements of deed restrictions (covenants) which the subdivider intends to apply to the subdivision, if any. All deed restrictions shall meet or exceed the requirements contained in this regulation and the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
"The city of Union Point assumes no responsibility for overflow, or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat." 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 5.4) 
Sec. 66-125. - Revision. 
No change, erasure, or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor on accompanying data sheets after approval of the city council. In no case shall the city council approve a revision unless the fact that it is a revised plat is clearly stated thereon. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 5.5) 
Secs. 66-126—66-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 66-151. - Installation of improvements, improvements guarantees. 
Before the final plat is signed by the city council, all applicants shall be required to complete or produce improvement guarantees for all improvements as required in this chapter: 
(1)  Completion of improvements. The building inspector must certify that all improvements required by the city have been satisfactorily installed or the installation guaranteed. 
(2)  Improvement guarantees. The subdivider shall provide improvement guarantees at the time of application for final plat approval. Such guarantee amount shall be determined by the city council for the assurance of the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the incompleted portion of improvements. Improvement guarantees may take the form of either a bond, letter of credit or a certified check. Guarantees shall be structured to permit periodic demands for payment from the issuer in whole or in part for the entire amount of the credit. All checks will be cashed and held in interest bearing accounts with interest accruing to the city. No check accepted as a guarantee will be held. Such improvement guarantees shall be approved by the city council as to amount and surety. The guarantee shall be released only after the city has accepted the work. 
(3)  Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the subdivider, at his expense, without reimbursement by the city or by any improvements district therein. 
(4)  Failure to complete improvements. In those instances where an improvement guarantee has been posed and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such guarantees, the city shall call the improvement due and collect all funds or require that all improvements be immediately installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the improvement guarantee is declared to be in default. If the city engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's construction standard and specifications, the subdivider shall be responsible for removing any defects and completing the improvements or forfeiting the guarantee. 
(5)  Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public area, easements, and parks shall be by act of the city council. The approval by the city council of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the city or any street, easement, or park shown on such plat. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 6.1) 
Sec. 66-152. - Inspection of improvements. 
The building inspector shall provide for inspection of required improvements during and upon completion of installation to insure satisfactory compliance with provisions of this chapter. The city shall not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release, nor reduce an improvement guarantee, until the building inspector has submitted a letter stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and a deed submitted. Upon such approval and recommendation of the building inspector, the city council shall consider acceptance of the improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 6.2) 
Sec. 66-153. - Maintenance of improvements. 
The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements on the individual subdivided lots until acceptance of such improvements by the city council. If there are any certificates of occupancy issued on a street not dedicated to the city, the city may on 12 hours notice effect emergency repairs and charge the cost to applicant. Prior to dedication of improvements, the applicant shall be required to file with the city council a maintenance bond in an amount equal to one-third of the total cost of improvements, in order to assure the satisfactory condition of all lot improvements. The bond shall be maintained for a period of one year after the date of their acceptance by the city council and dedication of the improvements to the city. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 6.3) 
Sec. 66-154. - Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
Where an improvement guarantee has been required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the improvements and dedication of such improvement to the city as required in the city council's approval of the final plat. No building permit shall be issued for the final ten percent of lots in a subdivision or, if ten percent is less than two lots of a subdivision, until all public improvements required by the city council for the plat have been fully completed and dedicated to the city. No permit shall be issued until the road base is completed and inspected by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 6.4) 
Secs. 66-155—66-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL CONFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 66-181. - Scope of article. 
The provisions in this article shall govern the submittal and review of all plats. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 7.1) 
Sec. 66-182. - Conformance to rules and regulations. 
In addition to the requirements established in this chapter, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations: 
(1)  All applicable statutory provisions. 
(2)  The zoning ordinance of the city in appendix A to this Code, building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the city. 
(3)  The special requirements of this chapter and any rules of the health department and appropriate state agencies. 
(4)  The rules of the state department of transportation if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street. 
(5)  The standards and regulations adopted by the code enforcement officer and the building inspector. 
(6)  Erosion and sediment control ordinance, chapter 38, article II of this Code. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with this chapter. Such restrictions or reference thereto shall be required to be indicated on or attached to the final plat. When conflicts exist between this chapter and other public regulations and other public regulations or covenants, the stricter regulations shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 7.1(1)) 
Sec. 66-183. - Plats straddling governmental boundaries. 
When access to the subdivision is required across land in another local governmental jurisdiction, the city council may request assurance from the city attorney that access is legally established, and the building inspector that the access road is adequately improved, or that an improvement guarantee has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross governmental boundary lines. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 7.1(2)) 
Sec. 66-184. - Monuments. 
Permanent reference monuments shall be placed at block corners and other points such as street intersections, lot corners, and angle points, and shall be marked with a solid iron rod or an iron pipe not less than one-half inch in diameter and at least 18 inches long, driven flush with the ground. Monuments shall be indicated on the final plat. Removal of monuments and resetting by anyone other than a registered land surveyor is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 7.1(3)) 
Sec. 66-185. - Character of the land. 
Land which the city council and building inspector find to be unsuitable for subdivision development due to potential for flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse topography or landforms, or other features which could be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods to alleviate these problems are formulated by the developer with concurrence of the city council and building inspector. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 7.1(4)) 
Sec. 66-186. - Subdivision name. 
The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by this chapter. The city council shall have final authority to approve the name of the subdivision which shall be determined at sketch plat review. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 7.1(5)) 
Secs. 66-187—66-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 

Sec. 66-211. - Prior approval. 
No construction activity of any kind including finished grading, installation of improvements, or building shall begin on any land subject to this chapter without prior approval of the preliminary plat and construction plans. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 8.1) 
Sec. 66-212. - Grading. 
Grading operations limited to clearing and grubbing may commence once approval of the preliminary plat is granted. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 8.2) 
Sec. 66-213. - Utilities. 
Utility installation shall not occur until the building inspector has received the certification that the streets were graded as designed by the design engineer and approved the rough grade of the street and shoulder preparation. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 8.3) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78. 
Sec. 66-214. - Inspections. 
Periodic inspection during the installation of the required improvements in a subdivision shall be made by the building inspector to insure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the building inspector when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 8.4) 
Sec. 66-215. - Sale and transfer. 
No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred or a building permit issued until the final plat, of which such lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 8.5) 
Sec. 66-216. - Building permits. 
The building inspector shall not issue any permit for the construction of any building or structure to be located in any subdivision, a plat whereof is required to be recorded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter until such plat shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 8.6) 
Sec. 66-217. - Occupancy. 
Within each phase of development, no building may be occupied for dwelling or other purposes, nor shall an occupancy permit be issued for any building until required utility installations, including the water supply and sanitary sewer systems, have been completed and approved by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 6-20-1989, § 8.7) 
Chapter 70 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal; any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein saved from repeal, § 1-11(14); administration, ch. 2; occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; general assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c). 

Sec. 70-31. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $25.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 70-32, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $25.00. For the purposes of this article the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 70-32. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 70-33. - Insurers agency license fees: independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted, and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 70-31 in the amount of $25.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 70-34. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 70-31. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 70-35. - Gross premiums tax on all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 70-31. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1994, § 5) 
Sec. 70-36. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 70-31 and 70-32 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1994, § 6) 
Secs. 70-37—70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 70-61. - Types of tangible personal property which are exempt. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2, there shall be exempt from taxation 20 percent of the value of the tangible personal properties set forth in this section for the year beginning January 1, 2002, and all subsequent years unless changed by further resolution of the city council. 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for in this section shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into this state from outside this state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. 
(Res. of 4-10-2001) 
Secs. 70-62—70-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 70-91. - Levy. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Res. of 9-13-1983) 
Sec. 70-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts means the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized in this section during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by this article is due: 
(1)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are: 
a.  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
b.  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
c.  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
d.  Interest on other bonds, notes and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States; 
e.  Dividends on stocks; 
f.  Income from direct lease financing; 
g.  Income from fiduciary activities; 
h.  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
i.  Other service charges, commissions and fees; and 
j.  Other income. 
(2)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are: 
a.  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others; 
b.  Interest on mortgages, participations or mortgage-backed securities; 
c.  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
d.  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
e.  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
f.  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
g.  Loan fees; 
h.  Loan servicing fees; 
i.  Other fees and charges; 
j.  Gross income from real estate owned operations; 
k.  Net income from office building operations; 
l.  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
m.  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
n.  Miscellaneous operating income; 
o.  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans and other assets; and 
p.  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(3)  The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) of this definition: 
a.  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
b.  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-730; 
c.  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
d.  An amount equal to a depository financial institutions gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than this state; and 
e.  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections b. through d. of this subsection shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (3)b through d of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (3)a through d of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1983) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-93. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 each year. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1983) 
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; abandoned vehicles, § 50-5; litter from vehicle, § 58-63; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101) 
Secs. 74-2—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING 

Sec. 74-31. - Parking regulations. 
(a)  Two-hour time limit. The city council shall establish, where practicable and necessary, individual parking spaces to be designated by parallel white lines. Vehicles shall not remain parked in any such parking spaces for a period exceeding two hours. 
(b)  No parking zones. Curbs painted yellow shall indicate "No Parking Zones." It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle along such curbs. 
(c)  Loading zones. The city council shall establish, where necessary, loading zones to be designated by appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such zones except for the purpose of loading or unloading store supplies, wares, merchandise, stock, and the like. 
(Code 1982, § 7-102) 
Sec. 74-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of June 13, 2006, § 1, deleted § 74-32, which pertained to one-way streets. This section bore no history note. 
Sec. 74-33. - Stop signs. 
(a)  All automobiles or vehicles of any kind, when approaching the following streets and highways from an intersecting street, shall come to a complete stop before crossing such street or highway: 
Highway 278; 
Highway 77; 
Highway 44; 
Abercorn Road; 
Alexander Avenue; 
Barnes Street; 
Bloodworth Street; 
Carlton Avenue; 
Country Club Drive; 
Country Club Lane; 
Crawfordville Road; 
Dennis Avenue; 
Dolvin Avenue; 
Hart Avenue; 
Hendry Street; 
Hunter Street; 
Industrial Boulevard; 
McKinley Street; 
Newsome Street; 
North Hilliard Street; 
North Rhodes Street; 
Old Siloam Road; 
Sibley Avenue; 
South Rhodes Street; 
Thornton Street; 
Veazey Street; 
Watson Avenue; 
Witcher Street; and 
Wooten Avenue. 
(b)  All automobiles or vehicles of any kind, when approaching the streets and highways from an intersecting street as provided in subsection (a), shall come to a complete stop before crossing such street or highway, except for the following circumstances: 
Crawfordville Road has the right-of-way at all intersections except at the Rhodes Street intersection which shall be a four-way stop street; 
Highway 278 has the right-of-way at the intersections with Highway 77; 
Highway 278 has the right-of-way at the intersections with Country Club Drive, Industrial Boulevard, Sibley Avenue McKinley Street and Crawfordville Road; 
Highway 44 has the right-of-way at the intersections with Dolvin Avenue, Watson Avenue and Crawfordville Road; 
Highway 77 has the right-of-way at the intersection with Highway 44; 
Highway 77 has the right-of-way at the intersections with Old Siloam Road, Industrial Boulevard, North Rhodes Street, South Rhodes Street, and Wotten Avenue, Abercorn Road and Bloodworth Street; 
Abercorn Road has the right-of-way at the intersection with Bloodworth Street; 
Barnes Street has the right-of-way except at the intersection of Stewart Avenue which shall be a three-way stop intersection; the intersection of Dolvin Avenue which shall be a four-way stop intersection; the intersection of Carlton Avenue; and the intersection of Crawfordville Road; 
Bloodworth Street has the right-of-way at the intersection with Alexander Avenue; 
Carlton Avenue has the right-of-way except at the intersection of North Rhodes Street which shall be a four-way stop; the intersection of Veazey Street which shall be a three-way stop; McKinley Street; and Crawfordville Road; 
Country Club Drive has the right-of-way except at the intersections of Highway 278 and Old Siloam Road; 
Country Club Lane has the right-of-way except at the intersections of Country Club Drive and Old Siloam Road; 
Crawfordville Road has the right-of-way at all intersections except at the North Rhodes Street intersection which shall be a four-way stop; the intersection with Highway 44; and the intersection with Highway 278; 
Dennis Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Hendry Street, North Hilliard Street and Newsome Street; 
Dolvin Avenue has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Highway 44, North Rhodes Street, and Barnes Street which is a four-way stop; 
Hart Avenue has the right-of-way at all intersections except at North Rhodes Street; Thornton Street which shall be a four-way stop; Veazey Street which shall be a four-way stop; Witcher Street which shall be a four-way stop; and Hendry Street which shall be a yield right-of-way; 
Hendry Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Crawfordville Road and Carlton Avenue; 
North Hilliard Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Crawfordville Road, Hart Avenue and Carlton Avenue; 
Hunter Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Crawfordville Road, Dolvin Avenue and Carlton Avenue; 
Industrial Boulevard has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Highway 278 and Highway 77; 
McKinley Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Crawfordville Road; 
Newsome Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Crawfordville Road, Hart Avenue and Carlton Avenue; 
North Rhodes Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Carlton Avenue which shall be a four-way stop; Park Avenue which shall be a four-way stop; and Crawfordville Road which shall be a four-way stop; 
Old Siloam Road has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Highway 77; 
Sibley Avenue has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Scott Street which shall be a three-way stop, and Highway 278; 
South Rhodes Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Highway 77; 
Thornton Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Hart Avenue which shall be a four-way stop, Carlton Avenue, and Crawfordville Road; 
Veazey Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Carlton Avenue which is a three-way stop; Hart Avenue which is a four-way stop; and Crawfordville Road; 
Watson Avenue has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Highway 44, Hunter Street, and Barnes Street; Witcher Street has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Hart Avenue which is a four-way stop, Carlton Avenue, and Crawfordville Road; and 
Wotten Avenue has the right-of-way at all intersections except at Highway 77. 
(c)  Stop signs shall be placed at the intersections and crossings designated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section and shall be of standard size and specification as approved by the division of highway planning, state highway department (department of transportation). 
(d)  Failure to comply with the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1982, § 7-103) 
Sec. 74-34. - No parking zones. 
(a)  State Route 12. 
(1)  Established. Within the city limits, the following no parking zone is hereby established: 
Georgia State Route 12 from mile post 17.99 to mile post 18.29. 
(2)  Violation; penalty. A person committing the offense of parking in this designated no parking shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(b)  Industrial Boulevard. 
(1)  Established. Within the city limits, the following no parking zone is hereby established. 
Industrial Boulevard from Georgia State Route 12 to Georgia State Route 77. 
(2)  Violation; penalty. A person committing the offense of parking in this designated no parking zone shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2003, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-13-2004(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 74-35—74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED ZONES 

Sec. 74-61. - Speed zones. 
(a)  The following speed zones are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation. 
ON-SYSTEM 

 
***School zones hours are effective*** 
A.M.—From 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time—school days only. 
P.M.—From 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time—school days only. 
Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation. 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
Signs shall be erected by the city. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2000) 
Secs. 74-62—74-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 74-91. - Findings; definition. 
(a)  Certain city streets with speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less under its exclusive jurisdiction (non-DOT streets) are constructed so as to safely permit their use by operators of motorized carts and low speed motor vehicle ("LSMV"), except as stated elsewhere in this article. The permitted streets are as follows: all city streets, but no state or federal or county roads. 
(b)  Definitions: 
All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or four tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars. 
Bicycle means having only two wheels and either of which is more than 13 inches in diameter. 
Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles which has an established place of business in this state. 
Electric bicycle means a device with two or three wheels which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. It shall meet the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and operate so that the electric motor ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric assisted bicycle shall: 
(1)  Have a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; 
(2)  Be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; and 
(3)  Be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than 20 miles per hour. 
Electric personal assistive mobility device or EPAMD means a self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs no more than 170 pounds. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Low-speed motor vehicle or LSMV means any four-wheeled vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500. 
Moped means a motor driven cycle equipped with two or three wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum displacement shall be 3.05 cubic inches (50 cubic centimeters). The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour (48.28 kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and moped. 
Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, every bicycle with a motor attached, and every moped. 
Motorized cart means every motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour. 
Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, scooter, pocket bike, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled and is not otherwise defined in this Code as an "ATV", "motorized cart", "low speed motor vehicle (LSMV)" "motor vehicle", "motorcycle", "electric bicycle", motorized skateboard", "electric personal assistive mobility device", "UTV", or "motorized wheelchair". 
Motorized skateboard or motorized scooter means a self propelled device, a deck upon which a person may ride, not equipped with a seat, and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in this Code as a "motor vehicle," "motorcycle," "motorized play vehicle," "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair." 
Motorized wheelchair means self-propelled wheelchair used by a physically disabled person for mobility. Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike means a two-wheeled vehicle, (other than a motor vehicle, bicycle with helper motor or a motorized scooter) which is self-propelled, capable of carrying a rider and/or passenger in excess of 20 miles per hour, and is designed to replicate the general appearance of a motorcycle. 
UTV means any motorized vehicle with a combustion engine designed for off-road use equipped with four or six tires and seats inside a roll cage, with seat belts, and a steering wheel and a pickup truck style bed. 
(Amend. of 7-14-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 74-92. - Registration/transfer requirements. 
(a)  Motorized carts. Every owner of a motorized cart operated over the streets and parking areas accessible by the public shall register the cart with the city within ten business days of purchase. Two decals shall be issued upon registration; and a record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by the city. The decals must be affixed to the sides of the cart to be fully visible at all times. The failure to have a current registration decal on a motorized cart shall be a violation of this section and subject the owner of such cart to the penalties in section [1-12] of this Code. 
(1)  Resident fee. The registration fee for motorized carts owned by city residents shall be $12.00, and the registration shall be effective for five years. 
(2)  Registration deadline. If the cart is not registered within ten business days of purchase, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the registration fee; and the cart shall be considered unregistered. 
(3)  Transfers. Upon sale of the cart to another person who shall operate the cart over the streets of the city, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership at a cost of $5.00, and if the new owner is not a city resident, the nonresident registration/user fee for the balance of the year shall be due from the new owner. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the $5.00 transfer charge; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart. 
(4)  Special tourism events. Council may, at its discretion, waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration to which out-of-city residents may bring carts as participants. 
(b)  Gasoline carts. Every gasoline powered motorized cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation. The cart shall not emit smoke or fumes. 
(c)  Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD). EPAMDs shall be subject to the same registration requirements outlined above in subsections (a) and (c). 
(d)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(e)  LSMV. No LSMV shall be operated on the designated streets located within the city unless it is legally registered and insured according to laws of the state. 
(f)  Before any motorized cart or LSMV may be operated upon the designated city street or areas of the city, it shall have installed an emblem per O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. and an amber strobe light per O.C.G.A. § 40-8-35. 
(Amend. of 7-14-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 74-93. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Only those currently licensed drivers who are 16 years of age and older may drive a motorized cart or LSMV on the designated streets and those parking areas accessible by the public. 
(b)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic. Seat belts shall be worn by all occupants at all times the vehicle is moving. All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation. No person may sit on the operator's lap. 
(c)  Motorized carts or LSMVs shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(d)  Motorized carts or LSMVs may be operated over those designated streets and those parking areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours, unless such motorized carts or LSMVs are equipped with functional headlights and taillights and turn signals. 
(e)  No motorized cart or LSMV or EPAMD shall be permitted to operate over, along, or across State Highways 78, 77, 44, 12 and 278, except where crossing areas are clearly designated. Said crossing areas shall be marked in accordance with Georgia Law. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any motorized cart or LSMV to drive in violation of this article. 
(g)  EPAMD. Only persons possessing a valid driver's license, or in lieu of a driver's license, persons who are at least 18 years of age and older, may operate an EPAMD on the designated streets located within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(h)  EPAMDs shall be equipped with front, rear, and side reflectors which shall be visible from a distance of 300 feet when directly in front of high beams of headlights on a motor vehicle; a system that when employed will enable the operator to bring the device to a controlled stop; and, if the device is operated between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, a lamp emitting a white light which, while the device is in motion, illuminates the area in front of the operator for a distance of 300 feet. 
(i)  No person shall operate an EPAMD at a speed greater than seven miles per hour when traveling on any path or sidewalk or 15 miles per hour on any other city right-of-way. See O.C.G.A. § 40-6-322. 
(j)  No person shall operate an EPAMD with more than a single user at any time. 
(Amend. of 7-14-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 74-94. - Sidewalks—Prohibited uses. 
Prohibited uses of sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks (except authorized maintenance vehicles); 
(2)  Motorcycles; 
(3)  Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles (not to include electric bicycles); 
(4)  Minibikes and mopeds; 
(5)  Horses; 
(6)  Go-carts; 
(7)  Electric-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(8)  Gasoline-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(9)  Motorized skateboards or motorized scooters; 
(10)  Motorized play vehicles; 
(11)  LSMVs, motorized carts, ATV's and UTV's; 
(12)  Any other vehicle designed by the manufacturer to be able to travel at speeds in excess of ten miles per hour under its own power on a flat surface; and 
(13)  Un-registered EPAMDs. 
(Amend. of 7-14-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 74-95. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Sidewalks are for use by the non-prohibited users. Hazardous activities on the sidewalks and streets and those parking areas accessible by the public are prohibited. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(b)  None of the prohibited users in section 74-94 of this article shall use the sidewalk system or any related bridges and/or their underpasses for any purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  Bicyclists, skaters and non-motorized scooter riders shall not loiter or stop on sidewalks, but shall instead move off the sidewalk when stopped. 
(d)  Normal rules of the road shall apply to the sidewalks. For instance, when approaching oncoming users, each user shall move to his right side. Passing shall be on the left side. 
(e)  Pedestrians should be given priority consideration and full right-of-way by other users of the sidewalks to ensure them safe passage. 
(f)  A warning or announcement shall be given by users of the sidewalks designated such as bicyclists, non-motorized scooter riders and skaters, when approaching pedestrians from the rear. This warning or announcement should be verbal such as "coming up on your left". Each user of the sidewalks shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of other users, and dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. 
(g)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city, also apply to the sidewalks. 
(h)  All litter shall be deposited in the receptacles provided or retained by the user for proper disposal later. Littering shall be subject to twice the fines and penalties as littering on the streets. 
(i)  All users of bicyclists, skaters and non-motorized scooter riders who are under 16 shall wear a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation's Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling. 
(Amend. of 7-14-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 74-96. - Motorized play vehicle; authorizations; prohibitions; disclosure requirements. 
(a)  No motorized play vehicle may be operated on any public street, public roadway, public sidewalk, public park, public or private parking lot, public trail, public shared multi-use path, public bicycle path, and all other public property. 
(b)  Motorized play vehicles are permitted on private residential property with the permission of the property owner. 
(c)  No motorized play vehicle may be operated on any private commercial/industrial property unless the location where the vehicles are to be operated is inaccessible to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic (such as an enclosed warehouse or fenced parking lot with a locked gate). Motorized play vehicles may be operated on private commercial/industrial property meeting these restrictions with the written permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or the authorized agent of either. 
(d)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle on any private property in a manner causing excessive, unnecessary, or offensive noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(e)  The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor shall not authorize or knowingly permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any vendor or merchant to sell motorized play vehicles without making disclosures required by this section. Any merchant or vendor who sells motorized play vehicles within the city shall: 
(1)  Post in a prominent place at each location where motorized play vehicles are on display, a notice, on a sign not less than 96 square inches and visible to the public, stating that operation of motorized play vehicles: 
a.  Are prohibited on any public street, public roadway, public sidewalk, public park, public parking lot, public trail, public shared multi-use path, public highway or any part of a highway, public bicycle path and all other public property in the city. 
b.  Are allowed to be used on private residential property with owner's written permission. 
c.  Are allowed to be used on private commercial/industrial property only in areas inaccessible to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic and only with the written permission of the owner/agent. 
(2)  Provide a copy of such notice to each purchaser of a motorized play vehicle, either before or in connection with the purchase of a motorized play vehicle. If the purchaser is a minor, the minor's parent or legal guardian must sign a receipt of said notice. 
(3)  Any motorized play vehicle owned by a governmental entity and which is operated in the performance of authorized duties or activities, is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Amend. of 7-14-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 74-97. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this article, except subsection 74-93(d), shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code; except that any fine for a littering offense shall be doubled. 
(b)  Any violation of subsection 74-93(d) shall be charged against the registered owner of the motorized cart, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered owner of the motorized cart as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less than $250.00. 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $500.00. 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one year of conviction for a second offense for a motorized cart, a fine of $1,000.00, and the registered owner's motorized cart registration shall be revoked. The registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the city for a period of two years following the third conviction. 
(c)  Any violation by an operator of a LSMV shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia and this Code. Any violation by an owner of a LSMV shall be charged against the owner according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia and this Code. 
(Amend. of 7-14-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; public works department, § 2-92; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; underground utility damage prevention, § 62-31 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, § 66-213; utilities, § 82-11. 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; authority to provide for the development storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWERAGE SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - RATES AND SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 9, 2008, § 1, enacted provisions codified herein as Div. 2 of this article. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, §§ 78-31—78-41 have been redesignated as Div. 1, §§ 78-31—78-41. 

Sec. 78-31. - Rate schedule. 
The schedule of water and sewer rates of the city shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § I; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § I) 
Sec. 78-32. - Application for water service. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at the city hall and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit for water service and for sewer service. The cash security deposit shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § II; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § II) 
Sec. 78-33. - Charges for initial water and sewer service. 
Each consumer subscribing to use the water and sewer service of the city shall pay a connection fee for each water connection that shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer and shall pay a connection fee for each sewer connection that shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § III; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § III) 
Sec. 78-34. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § IV; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § IV) 
Sec. 78-35. - City's responsibility and liability. 
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 78-33, will be made for a five-eighths-inch by three-quarter-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee above will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(1)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(4)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § V; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § V) 
Sec. 78-36. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff value on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(5)  No one shall drill or bore a well in the city without the prior consent and permission of the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § VI; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § VI) 
Sec. 78-37. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across and property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § VII; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § VII) 
Sec. 78-38. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § VIII; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § VIII) 
Sec. 78-39. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall, and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of such bills. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within ten days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 20 days from the due date will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment within 60 days after the original date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate the agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city be obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(b)  Service discontinued for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the city council is made, and a service charge paid for each meter reconnected. The service charge shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § IX; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § IX; Ord. of 2-22-2006(1)) 
Sec. 78-40. - Suspension of service. 
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(1)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit shall be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection debts. 
(2)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
a.  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
b.  The consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
c.  Emergency repairs. 
d.  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
e.  Legal processes. 
f.  Direction of public authorities. 
g.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § X; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § X) 
Sec. 78-41. - Complaints; adjustments. 
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(1)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee, provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over read, no charge will be made. The fee shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test, provided, however, that if the meter is found to over register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1986, § XI; Ord. of 8-10-2004(1), § XI) 
DIVISION 2. - IDENTIFY THEFT/ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 9, 2008, § 1, enacted provisions intended for codification as §§ 78-42, 78-43. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as Div. 2, §§ 78-42, 78-43. 

Sec. 78-42. - Identify theft prevention program. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known as the identify theft prevention program. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(d)  Findings. The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include utility accounts. The city has little or no previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts. The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. There is a risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(e)  Process of establishing a covered account. As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, for example, a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. Each account shall be assigned an account number and may be assigned a personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(f)  Access to covered account information. Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. Such password(s) shall be changed on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city clerk/treasurer and the password changed immediately. Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city clerk/treasurer and the city attorney. 
(g)  Credit card payments. [If] credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(h)  Sources and types of red flags. All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(i)  Prevention and mitigation of identity theft for existing accounts. In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk/treasurer. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk/treasurer, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk/treasurer in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk/treasurer: 
Contact the customer; If, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account or close the account; Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; Notify a debt collector within three working days of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or; Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(j)  Prevention and mitigation of identity theft for new accounts. In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk/treasurer. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk/treasurer, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk/treasurer, in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk/treasurer: Request additional identifying information from the applicant; Deny the application for the new account; Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(k)  Updating the program. The city council shall periodically review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: The city's experiences with identity theft; Updates in methods of identity theft; Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(l)  Program administration. The assistant city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city clerk/treasurer is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city clerk/treasurer, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. The assistant city clerk will report to the city clerk/treasurer at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: The effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; Service provider arrangements; Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and Recommendations for material changes to the program. The assistant city clerk, is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The assistant city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(m)  Outside service providers. In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the assistant city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of Dec. 9, 2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 78-43. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known as treatment of address discrepancies. 
(b)  Purpose. Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this [section] is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(c)  Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(d)  Policy. If the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or Information the city obtains from third party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(e)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. If the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; And the city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(f)  Methods of confirming consumer addresses. The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: Verifying the address with the consumer; Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; Verifying the address through third party sources; or Using other reasonable process. 
(Ord. of Dec. 9, 2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 78-44—78-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 78-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
City means the legal governing body of the city, or its duly authorized manager, superintendent, or representatives. 
Constituents means the combination of particles or conditions which exist in the industrial wastes. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial or trade processes as distinct from domestic wastes. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Public sewer means a pipe or conduit, owned or controlled by public authority for carrying sewage. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Suspended solids means water borne solids which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Water pollution control facility means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
(Code 1982, § 11-101) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-62. - General regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, spill, deposit, or permit to be deposited, in any manner creating unsanitary conditions or creating a public nuisance, on public or private property within the city, any domestic, trade, industrial, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided meeting state and city approval, to any natural outlet within the city. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. 
(e)  The city shall be responsible for maintaining and repairing sewage lines from the street or easement abutting a person's property to the person's property. 
(f)  The city shall assess a reasonable fee for each service call to inspect a person's sewage lines after the lines have been cleared. 
(Code 1982, § 11-102) 
Sec. 78-63. - Connection to public sewers. 
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly to the proper public sewer within 60 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1982, § 11-103) 
Sec. 78-64. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 78-63, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all requirements and recommendations of the state department of natural resources. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge into any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 78-63, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(d)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 11-104) 
Sec. 78-65. - Regulation of discharges into public sewers. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether or not emulsified, in excess of 100 parts per million by weight which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 40 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, motor oil, mineral spirits, commercial solvent, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(4)  Any water or wastes that contain more than ten parts per million by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide, or nitrous oxide; 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, offal, plastics, wood, paunch, manure, hair and fleshing, entails, lime slurry, lime residues, beer or distillery slups, chemical residues, paint or ink residues, cannery waste, bulk solids, thread, yarn, tar, latex, unground garbage, whole blood, paper dishes, paper cups, paper or plastic milk containers, strong acid, metal pickling wastes, concentrated plating solutions, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works; 
(6)  Any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters; 
(7)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.0 at any time, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the works; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes of such concentration that any such material received in the composite sewage from the industrial plant exceed the limits for such materials as follows: 
Fixed upper limits for constituents (parts per million by weight): 
a.  Cadmium ..... 5.0 
b.  Chromium ..... 3.0 
c.  Copper ..... 3.0 
d.  Cyanide ..... 0.0 
e.  Nickel ..... 0.1 
f.  Silver ..... 5.0 
g.  Tin ..... 5.0 
h.  Zinc ..... 3.0 
i.  Phenol ..... 0.5 
(9)  Any waters containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual provision, attention, or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment facilities; 
(10)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry of workmen into sewers for their maintenance, inspection, and repair; 
(11)  Any waters containing quantities of radioactive wastes or isotopes in excess of applicable state or federal regulations or recommendations; 
(12)  Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions, or other wastes which are highly colored, or wastes which are of unusual volume, concentration of solids, or composition that may create obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation and treated effluent of the sewerage works; 
(13)  Any waters or wastes containing other taste or odor producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other agencies having jurisdiction over such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(14)  Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment facilities effluent cannot meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
(15)  Waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 400 parts per million by weight on a 24-hour composite basis; 
(16)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a suspended solids content in excess of 600 parts per million by weight on a 24-hour composite basis; 
(17)  Scavenger wastes shall not be permitted to be disposed of in the sewer system; scavenger wastes are considered to be any putrid or offensive matter and the contents of septic tanks and cesspools; and 
(18)  All other materials and substances, chemicals or chemical compounds, and/or industrial wastes shall not be permitted to be discharged into the public sewer systems except as theretofore provided. 
(b)  Should waters or wastes be discharged or proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, where such waters contain substances or possess the characteristics prohibited by this article, the city may: 
(1)  Terminate admission of prohibited waters or wastes into the public sewers whenever discovered to exist; 
(2)  Refuse proposed admission of prohibited waters or wastes into the public sewers; 
(3)  Require pretreatment to a permissible condition of any waters or wastes as a condition to acceptance into the public sewers; 
(4)  Require control over the quantities and rates of waters or wastes entering the public sewers; and/or 
(5)  Require payment to cover the added capital and operating costs not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, to cover the added cost of handling and treating otherwise prohibited wastes. 
(c)  Where pretreatment or control over quantities of wastes is required, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the state water quality control board and the city. 
(d)  Where privately owned pretreatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and efficient operation by the owner thereof at his expense. 
(e)  The owner of any operation producing industrial wastes which enter public sewers shall install a final one-half-inch mesh screen in their effluent waste system immediately prior to entrance into the public sewer. There shall be no bypass around the screen. Such screen shall be locked in place and sealed with a city seal. 
(f)  When required by the city, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole on the building sewer on his property to facilitate observation and sampling the measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his own expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The manhole shall be located on the industrial waste service connection with all sanitary wastes excluded. 
(g)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted laboratory procedures approved by the state water quality control board, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided in subsection (f) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(h)  Any approval by the city of a type, kind, or capacity of an installation shall not relieve a person of the responsibility of revamping, enlarging, or otherwise modifying such installation to accomplish the intended purpose. Nor shall any written or verbal agreement as to limits of constituents or volumes of waters or wastes be considered as final approval for continuing operation. These limits shall be subject to constant study and change as considered necessary to serve their intended purpose. 
(i)  In the event of an accidental spill or unavoidable loss to the drains of any deleterious material, the industry concerned shall promptly notify the city of the nature of the spill, the quantity, and the time of occurrence. 
(Code 1982, § 11-105) 
Sec. 78-66. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the utilities superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city to enforce the provisions of this article; and in the performance of this duty such persons shall be permitted to enter any property at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, and enforcement. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the amount specified in section 1-12. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day or portion thereof during or on which a violation occurs or is allowed to continue. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, shall become liable thereby to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1982, § 11-106) 
Secs. 78-67—78-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NATURAL GAS SYSTEM 

Sec. 78-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appliances means all stoves, heaters, hot water tanks, conversion units, and any other devices in which natural gas is used. 
Customer means any person, firm, or corporation buying gas from the city. 
Customer's inlet means the location of the pipe at the customer's premises where gas is delivered to the customer. 
Gas system means the transmission line from Transcontinental Pipeline Southwest of Danielsville, Georgia, to the Cities of Greensboro and Union Point, inclusive of all mains and extensions and distribution systems in the various cities and communities. 
House piping means the piping in or around the house or building of the customer. 
Licensee means any person, firm, or corporation who has been licensed by the city to install house piping and appliances. 
Line customer means any persons, firm, or corporation receiving gas service from the high pressure transmission line. 
Main means a line, part of the distribution system, that transports gas. 
Service line means the line from the main to the customer's inlet. 
Specifications means the standard specifications of Robert P. Grey, Consulting Engineer for the construction of Natural Gas Systems, together with the standards for the installation of gas appliances and gas piping of the National Fire Protection Association, Pamphlet No. NFPA No. 54 shall be complied with unless other procedures, methods, or specifications are specified in the joint gas board ordinance or these operating instructions. 
Utilities superintendent means the duly authorized person hired by the city to inspect house piping and appliance installation. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-92. - Connection and service regulations. 
(a)  Every person, firm, or corporation who can be served by the city at a profit will be served natural gas under the city's rules, regulations, and tariffs. The size of the service and appurtenances used to serve each customer shall be such that they will render efficient service to the customer. 
(b)  Prospective average customers desiring gas service where the city has an existing main will be furnished free of charge 100 feet of service line and the necessary fittings, valves, meter, and regulator. In the event the customer's inlet is over 100 feet from the city's main, a charge of $0.45 per lineal feet of three-quarter-inch service line may be made by the city for that amount of the service line exceeding 100 feet. 
(c)  Any prospective average customer who desires gas service where the city does not have a main available, may be furnished 200 feet of two-inch main fee of charge. If the additional main necessary to serve such 200 feet, the city may charge $0.80 per lineal foot for that part of the main in excess of 200 feet. 
(d)  Subsequent to initial construction, any prospective average customer who desires gas service from the high pressure transmission line will be required to pay the cost of the additional valve, regulator, and safety relief necessary for such service, but not to exceed $25.00 per customer. Arrangements can be made between two or more prospective customers to share the cost of one high pressure regulator when one regulator will suffice for the customers involved. Other charges to high pressure customers will be as per subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Subsections (c) and (d) of this section apply to an average customer. Any prospective customer who is over or under the average will be served by the city on a basis consistent with the subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(f)  Each prospective customer must sign up with the city for the service the customer desires. Each prospective customer must obtain for the city an easement over the property where the service will be installed permitting the city to use this property to lay the gas service and permitting the city ingress and egress to the property for purposes necessary for the operation thereof. 
(g)  Each average prospective customer shall make a deposit of $35.00 with the city at the time of signing an application for service. Such deposit shall be refunded to the customer at the time service is discontinued, provided the customer has paid all amounts due the city. In addition, each average customer shall pay a nonrefundable tap fee in the amount of $150.00 to the city at the time of signing an application for service. 
(Code 1982, § 12-102) 
Sec. 78-93. - Rate schedules; service rules; regulations. 
(a)  Rate schedule. The schedule of natural gas rates shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Application for natural gas service. The consumer shall make application for natural gas service, in person, at the city hall and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit for natural gas service service. The cash security deposit shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Charges for initial natural gas service. Each consumer subscribing to use the natural gas service of the city shall pay a connection fee for each natural gas connection that shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Minimum charges. The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Natural gas furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot. 
(e)  City's responsibility and liability. The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property where the distribution line exist or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in subsection (c), will be made for a 250 Btu per hour meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee above will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(1)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(f)  Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(1)  Where meter is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefore, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumers piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the Standard Gas Code and other applicable natural gas regulations. 
(g)  Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(1)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the natural gas service and its facilities. 
(2)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across and property traversed by the natural gas lines. 
(h)  Change of occupancy. Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue natural gas service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all natural gas consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for natural gas service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying the natural gas consumed since the last meter reading. 
(i)  Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(1)  Bills to customers for natural gas service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of such bills. The failure of natural gas users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
a.  Nonpayment within ten days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
b.  Nonpayment within 20 days from the due date will result in the natural gas service being shut off from the natural gas user's property. 
c.  Nonpayment within 60 days after original date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement, and in such event, the natural gas user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city be obligated to supply, any natural gas under this agreement. 
(2)  Service discontinued for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the city council is made, and a service charge paid for each meter reconnected. The service charge shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(j)  Suspension of service. When natural gas service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(1)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit shall be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection debts. 
(2)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
a.  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
b.  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
c.  Emergency repairs. 
d.  Insufficiency of natural gas supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
e.  Legal processes. 
f.  Direction of public authorities. 
g.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(k)  Complaints; adjustments. If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(1)  The city will make a special natural gas meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee, provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. The fee shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  Natural gas meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test, provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103; Ord. of 6-6-2005, §§ I—XI; Ord. of 2-22-2006(2), §§ I—XI) 
Sec. 78-94. - Inspection. 
(a)  Utilities superintendent. The city shall appoint a utilities superintendent who is authorized, empowered, and directed to inspect the installation, construction or reconstruction of all house piping, appliances, fittings, or any other appliances that will transport or use natural gas. Further duties of the utilities superintendent shall be as follows: 
(1)  The issuance of permits when required; 
(2)  Conduct final test of installed appliances; 
(3)  Advise public as to gas regulations; 
(4)  Inspect and investigate reported faulty installation of gas appliances; 
(5)  Prosecute offenders of provisions of this article; 
(6)  Check for excessive gas odors and investigate and report; investigate, report, and repair meters and facilities that may be leaking; and 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the city officials. 
(b)  License required to install pipe and appliances. No pipe or appliances installed to use natural gas from the mains and service of the gas system shall be installed by any person unless such person shall be licensed by the city to do such work. Any applicant for a license who is experienced in this type of work, who is familiar with these rules and regulations, and who is a reliable and competent workman, shall be examined by the utilities superintendent. If the utilities superintendent is satisfied that this prospective licensee is capable of doing the work in a first class workmanlike manner, a license shall be issued to such person upon payment of a fee in an amount determined under subsection (e). If such person desires a license to do one job only, then a fee of $10.00 will be paid. This license shall be revoked immediately if any licensee shall violate any provisions of this article or shall do any work that is not first class. 
(c)  Test of installations. Every licensee shall test every installation with air by mercury gauge or approved monometer in a manner satisfactory to the utilities superintendent. This test shall include all house piping and appurtenances up to and including the shut-off cock of the appliance. No appliance shall be installed without the licensee notifying the utilities superintendent. The utilities superintendent shall witness such test and when test is satisfactory, sign a certificate that such test has been made at a certain location and for a certain number of outlets. Such certificate shall be filed in the office of the city clerk/treasurer before any gas is turned into this house pipe. 
(d)  Regulating appliances. Each person, firm, or corporation installing appliances shall report to the city the kind, make, model number, and capacity of each appliance so installed and the date installed. In the event the person installing an appliance does not regulate the appliance in a satisfactory manner, the city shall regulate such appliance and charge the cost thereof to the person who should have done the work. 
(e)  Fees for house pipe inspection; unsatisfactory work. A fee of $1.00 shall be charged by the city to the licensee for each house pipe inspection made and certificate issued. In the event the utilities superintendent finds the work done by the licensee unsatisfactory, he shall so advise the licensee. The licensee shall then correct any improper work. Another inspection shall then be made for which a fee of $5.00 will be charged. If the work is not satisfactory on the second inspection, the work will be condemned and the license of the licensee shall be revoked. 
(f)  Detecting leaks. In the event any test indicates a leak, soapsuds at each fitting or connection shall be used to find the leak. 
(g)  Test of service or house pipe. No gas shall be turned into a service or house piping until such service or house piping is tested and proved to be gas-tight. 
(h)  Air bled out of line. As gas is turned into a service or house piping, the air in the line shall be carefully bled out through the appliance burners or through the dead end of a pipe run. No air shall remain in any part of the piping, however small, at the time the piping starts serving gas. 
(i)  Applicability of other standards. Where not specifically covered in this section on inspection, applicable provisions of NFPA, Pamphlet No. 54 shall apply. 
(Code 1982, § 12-104) 
Sec. 78-95. - Appliances. 
(a)  All gas appliances hereafter installed shall be of a design and construction approved as to safety by the American Gas Association; except such apparatus as such association does not accept for test and approval must be a design and construction set forth in specifications of Bureau of Standards of the United States Department of Commerce. Used appliances may be reinstalled, when, in the opinion of the utilities superintendent, they may be used without danger. 
(b)  All pipe used for house pipe shall be of good quality wrought iron or steel, either black or galvanized, free from all defects. The use of secondhand or reconditioned pipe is forbidden unless tested and approved by the utilities superintendent. 
(c)  An automatic safety shut-off valve shall be installed on all appliances when such appliances burn gas in a concealed combustion chamber. 
(d)  Fittings used for house piping shall be either black or galvanized, all steel or malleable iron. All stops or cocks should be of ground key type. Where flexible tubing is used it shall be either copper, aluminum, or plastic, satisfactory to the utilities superintendent, and shall be used where permitted by the utilities superintendent. Compression couplings or brazed joints must be used on flexible tubing. 
(e)  Where not specifically covered in this section on appliances, applicable provisions of NFPA, Pamphlet No. 54 shall apply. 
(Code 1982, § 12-105) 
Sec. 78-96. - Specifications for house piping and appliances. 
(a)  The standard for the installation of gas appliances and gas piping, NFPA, Pamphlet No. 54, shall apply to this section. The following provisions of this section will amplify or supersede the provisions of NFPA Pamphlet No. 54. 
(b)  No part of the house pipe that is concealed between walls or other places inaccessible to visual inspection shall have bushings, unions, or threads on it. Ground joint unions and standard iron pipe threads and couplings are to be used in jointed pipe where such joints are subject to visual inspection. Any pipe laid on the ground or in the ground shall be coated as herein defined. Any pipe encased in concrete shall be coated and further protected by a wrapping or impervious Bitumen impregnated paper. All threads shall be made up with the use of good thread compound. 
(c)  All house pipe shall be securely fastened to floor joists or sills with pipe straps or other approved devices. The maximum spacing on such devices shall be: 
½-inch pipe ..... 6 feet 
¾-inch pipe ..... 8 feet 
1-inch pipe ..... 8 feet 
1¼-inch pipe ..... 10 feet 
(d)  No notch or hole shall be cut in any timber when such notch or hole will reduce the strength of timber over 20 percent. 
(e)  All house piping shall be graded to a drip located in an accessible place generally directly downstream of customer's meter. The drips shall be of a diameter equal to the size piping to which it is attached and at least six inches in length. 
(f)  Ells looking down shall be installed at the customer's inlet at a height from the ground approved by the utilities superintendent. This ell shall be installed in such a manner that the outlet swivel of the meter can be connected thereto. 
(g)  No branches shall take off from a pipe run from the bottom side of the pipe run. 
(h)  Any outlet installed but with no appliance attached shall be capped. 
(i)  The minimum diameter of the pipe from the meter to the largest appliance in the house shall be as follows: 
Less than three outlets ..... ¾-inch 
Three to six outlets ..... 1-inch 
Six to nine outlets ..... 1¼-inch 
Nine to 12 outlets ..... 1½-inch 
Above 12 outlets, the utilities superintendent shall determine the size of inlet line. 
(j)  The diameter of the pipe next to the appliance shall be one size larger than the inlet connection of the appliance. 
(k)  The size line used in the house shall be as follows: In calculating the size of the pipe the calculation should start at the appliance furthest from the meter and proceed successively from that point to the meter. 

 
(l)  All appliances, except movable appliances, shall be installed with steel iron piping together with fittings and unions. Tubing of copper, aluminum, or plastic may be used on small movable appliances provided such tubing is approved by the utilities superintendent and an adequate compression coupling is used for connections. 
(m)  A shut-off cock shall be installed in each outlet within two inches the floor or wall line, as well as a shut-off cock at the appliance itself. 
(n)  Appliances shall be located far enough from the wall to remove any danger of the wall becoming hot enough to ignite. Vents shall be installed in a size and manner recommended by the manufacturers of the appliance and shall be to the satisfaction of the utilities superintendent. 
(o)  Since natural gas will be utilized in many homes previously having LP gas service, it will be to the discretion of the utilities superintendent as to how much of the existing piping is usable. Mercury gauge or monometer tests and installation of appliances will still have to meet with the requirements of this article. In general, three-eighths-inch copper tubing does not provide adequate service for natural gas while five-eighths-inch tubing may provide adequate service for small runs or limited number of appliances. If there is doubt that existing piping will provide adequate service for natural gas, a test may be made to determine that all appliances in the house work adequately and simultaneously without undue loss of pressure. If, in the judgement of the utilities superintendent, no future additional appliances will be added or if there is adequate capacity for future appliances, the piping can be determined satisfactory if it meets all other requirements except as to size, of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12-106) 
Sec. 78-97. - Service lines and services; meters. 
(a)  Each service line shall consist of a service tee either welded to the main or installed on the main with a two strap saddle clamp. The tee shall be of the same size as the service piping. A lubricated lock wing cock shall be installed on each service on the upstream side of the regulator and in a readily accessible place. The size of the line, regulator, and meter shall be determined by the city. 
(b)  Meters shall be located in a readily accessible place and in a place where possible damage to the meter is least. No regulator or meter shall be located in a closed, unventilated place. Meters shall be installed in such a manner that they are easily available for reading and servicing. 
(c)  All service lines shall be installed in such a manner that they will drain from the meter to the main, if possible. The minimum cover on the service line shall be nine inches. 
(d)  All services installed shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications of Robert P. Grey. 
(e)  Subsequent to initial construction, any high pressure line customer receiving gas service shall be required to pay the cost of a high pressure regulator set, not to exceed $25.00. From the downstream connection of the high pressure regulator set, the line customer will receive the same service as the customers served from the city distribution system. If more than one line customer is served by a single high pressure regulator set, the cost of the regulator set may be prorated among the line customers being served by it. 
(Code 1982, § 12-107) 
Sec. 78-98. - Federal rules and regulations. 
The municipally owned natural gas system shall be subject to the provisions of the "Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968," 49 USC 1671—1684 (1970), as amended, and all rules and regulations promulgated by the Materials Transportation Bureau, Department of Transportation, which are contained in the Federal Register and codified in the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Code 1982, § 12-108) 
Sec. 78-99. - Maintenance and operation manual. 
In accordance with Public Law 90-481, the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act, the manual entitled "Approved Standard Maintenance and Operation Procedures for Natural Gas System," as amended and revised, is hereby adopted by reference into this Code. At least one copy of such manual shall be on file for public inspection in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1982, § 12-109) 
Sec. 78-100. - Natural gas system emergency plan. 
In order to protect lives and property, maintain the integrity and function of the natural gas system in the event of an emergency, and re-establish to full function the gas system, the document entitled "Natural Gas System Emergency Plan" is hereby adopted by reference into this Code. At lease one copy of such document is on file for public inspection in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1982, § 12-110) 
Sec. 78-101. - Underground utility damage prevention. 
Article II, Chapter 62 of this Code entitled, "Underground Utility Damage Prevention Ordinance," is incorporated by reference into this section and made a part hereof, as if fully set forth herein. At least one copy of such document is on file for public inspection in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1982, § 12-111) 
Sec. 78-102. - Contingency plan for municipal natural gas systems for the curtailment of natural gas service to priority 1 users. 
In the event of an emergency loss of natural gas, natural gas service to end users shall be curtailed in accordance with the following steps dependent upon the depth of curtailment necessary: 
(1)  Industrial users or large commercial gas users will be cut off from natural gas first, These customers will be asked to completely discontinue use of natural gas and utilize electric heaters to maintain above 32 degree Fahrenheit temperatures for the purpose of keeping water freezing and breaking. 
(2)  Schools and churches will be asked to discontinue use of natural gas and where possible and practical, utilize electric heaters to maintain above 32 degree Fahrenheit temperatures to keep water pipes from freezing and breaking. If this is not practical, they main remain on natural gas at the lowest possible thermostat settings. 
(3)  Nonessential stores and businesses should be requested to discontinue natural gas service. This would except doctors' offices and food stores. These would be considered essential services. The same provision as to electric heaters as provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section should be utilized or the lowest possible thermostat setting otherwise. The continued use of nonessential offices and stores at lowest thermostat settings should be discouraged because in and out traffic will increase use of gas in spite of lowest thermostat setting. 
(4)  Essential offices and stores should be closed with the same proviso as to water pipe freezing protection. 
(5)  If the above four steps have not conserved satisfactory gas, hospitals and other essential institutions should be requested to go to alternate fuels, if practical. 
(6)  If the above five steps have not conserved adequate gas, one emergency area should be re-opened such as a school gymnasium or National Guard Armory, selective areas of town should be cut off from natural gas, and the residents moved into the gymnasium or National Guard Armory. The use of civil defense is encouraged in such an endeavor. 
(7)  If the above six steps have not conserved adequate gas, adequate gymnasiums or National Guard Armory areas should be opened, the entire balance of gas use in the entire town cut off, and residents moved into the heated area. 
(8)  In the event there is no gas available for the town and the weather is cold, a large scale emergency will exist and it is suggested that electric heaters be marshalled for gymnasiums and National Guard areas with people being moved into these areas. 
(Code 1982, § 12-112) 
Sec. 78-103. - Penalties. 
Unless otherwise provided for in this article, any person, firm, business, partnership, or corporation found guilty of violating the provisions of this article over which the municipality has jurisdiction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1982, § 12-113) 
Secs. 78-104—78-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY SYSTEMS USING CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Sept. 8, 2009, deleted the former Art. V, §§ 78-104—78-119, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to Utilities use of right-of-way and derived from Ord. of 12-9-2008. 

Sec. 78-111. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Utility Systems Using City Right-of-Way Ordinance." This shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying city property and rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-112. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations, shall have the meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely discretionary. 
City is the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
Company a/k/a Utility is any utility provider in Union Point. 
Council is the mayor and council of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical conductors, conduits, ducts, inner ducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and other equipment and technology. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Public ways means streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, viaducts, rights-of-way, easements, grounds and other public places owned or controlled by, leased to or granted to the city. 
Service area means the company's system within Union Point. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-113. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city within 90 days of the effective date of this article. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(b)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated to assure accurate contact information is available to city at all times; 
(c)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(d)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the city shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the city shall so notify the utility in writing. acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this [article], any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-114. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a permit from the city per this [article]. Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in applicant's permit application. The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date, unless the utility is in violation of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from city on application made on forms prescribed by the city. Fees shall be set by the mayor and council. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans showing in detail the location, size or capacity, relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact and operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the contractor who is to do such work; 
(4)  Name, address, email address, telephone and fax numbers of facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount related to the scope of the project, to be set by the city, to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy of utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(c)  If the city determines applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the city may issue a permit. 
(1)  Approval will be consistent with this [article]; and 
(2)  Applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  No impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way. 
(d)  Per O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(e)  The utility shall obtain all other required construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state and federal law. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-115. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  Ordinance compliance. Any company, including any which has sought and obtained a state-wide franchise, shall operate within Union Point, Georgia in compliance with the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth as to the construction, operation, maintenance and ownership of a system, including all poles, wires, cables, fibers, underground conduits, pipes, manholes, and other fixtures and appliances ("equipment") necessary for the construction, maintenance and operation in this city of the system and any lines connected therewith, across, above, over, and under the public ways now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, located in city. 
(b)  Regulatory compliance. The system shall be designed, maintained and operated such that quality and reliability of the system will be in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The company shall operate and maintain the system per all applicable state and federal testing procedures and technical performance standards. Company shall also comply with all applicable state and federal regulations pertaining to customer service requirements, and company shall also comply with all other applicable regulations. 
(c)  Work. All work in the installation, operation, upgrade, repair and removal of equipment shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. The free flow and safety of traffic and the public use of city property shall not be unduly impaired and the installation shall not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other city property. Maintenance and operations of the facilities shall not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. 
(d)  Stop work order. At any time the city may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(e)  Corrections. If, using reasonable discretion, it is determined by city or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any equipment or construction is harmful to the health or safety of any person, then company shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions or remove such equipment. 
(f)  Grade changes. If the grades or lines of any street are changed at any time, then company shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the reasonable advance request of city, protect or promptly alter or relocate equipment so as to conform to such new grades or lines. If company refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate equipment, city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate such equipment without any liability to company and company shall pay to city the reasonable costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(g)  Protection of structures. In connection with the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment, company shall, at its own cost and expense, protect the streets and any structures thereon, thereunder or thereover, and shall obtain the prior approval of city before altering the streets or any such structures. any such alteration shall be made by company, at its sole cost and expense, in a manner prescribed by city. Company shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, in a manner reasonably specified by city, any street or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment. If company does not commence such replacement or repair after 30 days' written notice, city or the owner of the affected structure may make such replacement or repair and company shall pay the cost of the same. 
(h)  No obstruction. In connection with the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment, company shall not obstruct the sidewalks, streets, subways, railways, waterways or other traffic to, from or within the corporate limits of city without the prior consent of city. Equipment of company in the streets shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the use of the streets and adjoining property. Company shall install its equipment in accordance with all laws, ordinances, regulations and policies applicable to any individuals, groups or entities who construct, operate, own, control, or provide: 
(1)  Utility facilities or services (including without limitation, a local exchange carrier, inter-exchange carrier, reseller, competitive access provider, cellular or personal communications services provider or telephone company); 
(2)  Telephone, data, voice, television, cable television, video, electric or gas facilities, or services; 
(3)  Fiber optic, coaxial, electric or other wire or cable or conduits, ducts, poles, towers and related facilities (except lighting facilities, traffic control devices, and police and fire alarms). 
(i)  Moving equipment. In addition to company's obligation to move equipment at its cost per the request of city, company shall, upon reasonable prior written notice by city or any person holding a permit issued by city to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move equipment to the extent commercially reasonable permit the moving of said structure. Company may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than city for any such movement of its equipment. 
(j)  Emergencies. Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the city of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. If city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(k)  Disasters. City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster, or other emergency, as determined by city in its reasonable sole discretion, cut or move equipment, in which event city shall not incur any liability to company, any affiliated person or any other person. When possible, company shall be consulted prior to any such cutting or movement of equipment and be given the opportunity to perform such work itself. All costs to repair or replace such equipment shall be borne by company. City shall use reasonable efforts to avoid any disruption to company's services or equipment. 
(l)  Oversight and inspection. City has the right, with reasonable notice, to oversee, regulate and inspect the installation, technical operation, upgrade, repair and removal of equipment in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable law and regulations. By such oversight and inspection, city does not take on any joint partner role or any similar liability or responsibility. 
(m)  Approvals. Company shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals necessary before installing, operating, upgrading, repairing, and removing equipment, and following completion of such installation, company shall provide city with updated as built maps of the utility system. Any fees that city charges to issue permits or approvals shall not be offset against the compensation that company is required to pay to city. 
(n)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a permit or a written approval of registration does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia, and the City Charter, and under the provisions of this Code to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-116. - Non-exclusivity; non-liability. 
(a)  Nothing in this article affects the right of city to occupy and use the streets to install, operate, upgrade, repair and remove equipment for the purpose of providing any services or service, or to engage in any other activity in the streets. Nothing in this article abrogates the right of city to perform any public works or public improvements. If the equipment materially interferes with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of such public works or public improvements, company, at its own expense, shall promptly, following reasonable written notice from city, take action to protect, alter or permanently relocate equipment, as directed by city. 
(b)  The city and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall not have any liability to company for any damage as a result of or in connection with such public works or public improvements. The foregoing provision freeing city and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors from liability pursuant to this section shall not apply to acts of gross negligence or willful misconduct or to damages caused by violations by city or its officers, employees, agents, consultants or independent contractors of O.C.G.A. ch. 25-9, relating to notification prior to and excavation near underground utilities, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-117. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
Company shall, in connection with the protection of the health and safety of the public, be subject to the lawful exercise of the police power by city and to such regulations governing public ways as city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance promulgate. Every installation by company shall be in accordance with the applicable codes then in force in city. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-118. - Company liability—Indemnification. 
Company, as an indemnifying party, shall hold city, as an indemnified party, harmless from all loss sustained by city, on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever, resulting from negligence on the part of company in the construction, operation, or maintenance of the system in city. If any claim or action is brought against city for which company might be liable as an indemnifying party under this section, city shall promptly give notice to company of such and a description of the source and nature thereof. On notice of any claim or action within the scope of this section, company shall have the right and the obligation to negotiate a settlement or compromise (such being subject to the approval of city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld) of any such claim or action, or to defend actions instituted at the sole cost and expense of company. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-119. - Conditions on street use. 
(a)  Use. Company shall, subject to the permitting process herein, reasonably determine the number and location of all transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment for the proper operation of the system on the public ways, and company shall locate such system as is reasonable under the particular circumstances to prevent interference with the proper use of public ways. City shall not grant any request for any use or occupancy of public ways in proximity to the system that would conflict with company's use or occupancy herein permitted or take any action that would be inconsistent with or adverse to company's use or occupancy of the system. Company shall not interfere with the technical operation of any other utility system within the corporate limits of city, and such interference would be a material violation hereof. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance by company of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing of city, company shall at its own cost and expense, replace and restore all sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, to as good a condition as before said work was commenced. 
(c)  Relocation. If city in its governmental capacity shall lawfully elect to alter or change its public ways, company, as reasonably necessary to maintain its system, and on reasonable notice by city, shall at company's expense relocate or adjust its poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, or other fixes. Company shall not be liable for any expense incurred by it in the event company is required to adjust or relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other telephone fixtures, where such alteration is made necessary by actions of a third party other than city. 
(d)  Temporary removal of lines for building moving. Company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by city, temporarily raise or lower or move its lines to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting the same, except where the person is the city, and company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. Company shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes unless there is an emergency. 
(e)  Utility pole and use rental. Company shall have the right to use utility poles erected by city upon obtaining prior permission from mayor and council, or their designate. 
(f)  Tree trimming. Company may, under the general supervision of city after written permission, trim trees upon and overhanging the public ways. but only to the extent reasonably necessary to prevent the branches of the trees from coming interfering with the lines, cables or facilities of company. By such general supervision, city does not take on any joint partner role or any similar liability or responsibility whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-120. - Inspection. 
City shall have the right to inspect all work performed by company on, along, in, or across any of the public ways of city to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations of city and any pertinent ordinances governing installations which affect, or might affect, such public ways. Company shall maintain its system in good operating condition at all times. An exception to this condition is automatically in effect when service furnished by company is interrupted, impaired, or prevented by fires, strikes, riots or other occurrences beyond the control of company, or by storms, floods, or other casualties, in any of which events company shall do all things reasonably within its power to restore normal service. By such inspection, city does not take on any joint partner role or any similar liability or responsibility. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-121. - Violation. 
(1)  An event of violation shall include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following acts or failures to act by company, or by any employees, contractors, subcontractors, consultants, agents or representatives of company, or, to the extent applicable, to any affiliated person: 
a.  Any substantial failure to comply with any material violation of this article that is not cured within 45 days after written notice pursuant hereto; or if such substantial noncompliance, by its nature, cannot be cured within 45 days, if company has not, within 45 days after written notice, initiated reasonable steps to remedy such and notified city of the steps being taken and the projected date of such compliance; 
b.  The condemnation by a public authority other than city, or sale or dedication under threat or in lieu of condemnation, of all or any part of the utility system, the effect of which would materially frustrate or impede the ability of company to carry out its obligations, and the purposes of this article; 
c.  Company's suspension or discontinuing of its business; 
d.  Any denial, forfeiture or revocation by any federal, state or local governmental authority of any authorization required by law or the expiration without renewal of any such authorization, and such events either individually or in the aggregate, materially jeopardize company's ability to operate the utility system in the franchise area; or 
e.  A persistent failure by company, or by any employee, contractor, subcontractor, consultant, agent or representative of company, to comply with any of the material provisions, terms or conditions of this article after company has received notice of a failure to comply and has been given a reasonable opportunity to cure. 
(2)  Upon the occurrence of an event of violation, city may: 
a.  Require company to take such actions as city deems reasonably appropriate under the circumstances; 
b.  Prosecute the company in court for a violation of any provision of this [article], to be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits, and/or the city may; 
c.  Impose a penalty on company for such event of violation, as outlined below. 
(3)  City shall exercise option [(2)a.] above per the procedures below: 
a.  City shall notify company, in writing, of an alleged event of violation, which notice shall specify the alleged event of violation with reasonable particularity. Company shall, within ten days after receipt of such notice, or such longer period of time as city may specify in such notice, either (a) cure such alleged event of violation or (b) in a written response to city, either (i) present facts and arguments refuting such alleged event of violation or (ii) state that such alleged event of violation will be cured and set forth the method and time schedule for accomplishing such cure. 
b.  After receiving company's response to the notice, city shall determine (i) whether an event of violation has occurred; (ii) whether such event of violation is excusable; and (iii) whether such event of violation has been cured or will be cured by company. If company does not respond to city's notice, then city may conclude that an event of violation has occurred, and that such event of violation is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by company in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to city, and city may then issue a written order, detailing its findings and the action to be taken, and company may appeal such order. 
c.  If, after receiving company's response to city's written notice, city determines that an event of violation has occurred and that such event of violation is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by company in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to city, then city shall provide notice of such to company. 
d.  If city's governing body determines that there is an event of violation, then company may within ten days in writing request a public hearing, to take place not less more 45 days from the request. At the hearing, company may state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses. 
e.  If city after the public hearing upholds the finding that an event of violation has occurred, and that such event of violation has not been and will not be cured in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to city's governing body, and that such event of violation is not excusable, then city will issue a written order, detailing its findings and the action to be taken. 
f.  Company may within 30 days seek certiorari to the superior court, which shall review the decision of city non-de novo. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-122. - Penalty. 
If any of the following events occur and are not remedied within 30 days after company's receipt of written notice thereof, city, at its discretion, may impose a penalty on company up to a maximum of $200.00 per occurrence, per day, commencing with the 31st day after company's receipt of the aforesaid written notice, which amount shall be in addition to any other remedies available to city under this article and any other laws, agreements and regulations: 
(a)  Equipment is installed, operated, upgraded, repaired or removed in the streets without appropriate permits and other regulatory approvals obtained from city, as required hereby. 
(b)  Sidewalks, streets, railways, waterways or other traffic to, from or within the corporate limits of city is/are obstructed by company, its officers, employees, agents or contractors without permission having been obtained from city, as required hereby. 
(c)  Structures in the streets are altered by company, its officers, employees, agents or contractors without city approval or are not protected, as required hereby. 
(d)  Failure to provide information required hereby or which city may reasonably require in the oversight and regulation of the installation, operation, upgrade, repair and removal of equipment. 
(e)  Failure to secure or maintain liability insurance as required hereby. 
(f)  Failure to secure or maintain the performance bond as required hereby. 
Each of the foregoing failures may result in injuries to city and its residents, businesses and institutions. Penalties in the amounts above are fair and reasonable for such injuries. Such penalties shall be without prejudice to any other remedies available to city to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-123. - Termination of services. 
Upon termination of services in Union Point by company, city may issue a removal order directing company to remove, at company's sole cost and expense, all or any portion of the utility system, subject to the following: 
(a)  In removing the utility system, or any part thereof, company shall, at its own expense, refill and compact any excavation it makes, and shall leave the streets and other property, including utility cables, wires and attachments, in as good condition as that prevailing immediately prior to company's removal of the utility system; 
(b)  The liability insurance and indemnity provisions hereof shall remain in full force and effect during the period in which the utility system is being removed and the associated repairs to the streets and other property are being made; and 
(c)  If, in the reasonable judgment of city, company fails to substantially complete removal, including repair of the streets and other property, within 12 months of city's issuance of a removal order, city shall have the right to: 
(1)  Authorize removal of the utility system, at company's cost, by another person; and/or 
(2)  Declare that all rights, title and interest to the utility system belong to city, including any portion of the utility system not designated for removal, without compensation to company. 
(d)  Alternatively, company may submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Purchase the facilities; 
(2)  Accept donation of some or all facilities; or 
(3)  Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(e)  Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall he deemed abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-124. - Payment to city. 
Company shall pay city, in consideration of the use of public streets, sidewalks and other right-of-way and property, an annual amount equal to five percent of its revenue derived from customers located within the city, or if a lesser amount is allowed under state or federal law, the greatest amount permitted thereby. Company may, to the extent allowed by law, bill its customers within the corporate limits of city such fee and reflect such charge on its invoices to customers within the city. The payments required by this section shall be due on or before the last day of each April, July, October and January for the quarters ending respectively on the last day of each March, June, September and December. 
All such payment of fees shall be accompanied by a report to city in the form as follows: 
FEE REPORT FORM;eol;CITY OF UNION POINT, GEORGIA;eol;FOR QUARTER ENDING;daterule;, 20;#rule;;eol;[DETAILED GROSS REVENUE FEE CALCULATION] 
FEE REPORT FORM;eol;CITY OF UNION POINT, GEORGIA;eol;FOR QUARTER ENDING;daterule;, 20;#rule;;eol;[DETAILED GROSS REVENUE FEE CALCULATION> 
If any payment required by this article is not actually received by city on or before the applicable date fixed in this article, company shall pay interest thereon, from the due date to the date paid at a rate equal to one percent per month compounded monthly. No acceptance of any compensation payment by city shall be construed as an accord and satisfaction that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of any payment be construed as a release of any claim that city may have for further or additional sums payable under this article. 
All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and re-computation by city for a period of three years from the receipt of such payment. If, as a result of an audit or any other review, city determines that company has underpaid fees in any 12-month period by ten percent or more, then, in addition to making full payment of the relevant obligation, including interest as described above, company shall reimburse city for all of the reasonable costs associated with the audit or review, including all reasonable out-of-pocket costs for attorneys, accountants and other consultants. 
Company shall maintain in city, or make available in city within 30 days after a written request by city, complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership, and operations of company with respect to the equipment and services provided therewith, including without limitation, records indicating the physical location and address of each of company's customers and whether each such customer lives with the city, and books of account and records adequate to enable company to demonstrate, at all times, that it is, and has been, in material compliance with each term and condition of this article. All such documents that pertain to financial matters that may be the subject of an audit by city shall be retained by company for a minimum of six years. 
City and its designated representatives shall have the right to inspect, examine and audit, during normal business hours and upon not less than 30 days' advance written notice to company, all documents, records and other information of company and any affiliated person that pertain to equipment. All such documents, records and other information shall be made available within the corporate limits of city or such other location agreeable to city in order to facilitate inspection, examination, or audit. 
If company is an incumbent utility provider in city, has an established and lengthy record of satisfactory service in city for many years, and is currently in compliance with the material terms and conditions of any existing franchise agreement and this article, city conditionally suspends the right to conduct compliance audits and hold public hearings, but city reserves the right to require such audits and hold such hearings by giving company written notice of city's intention to rescind its conditional suspension of, and activate, the following provision: City may conduct compliance audits and hold public hearings at any time, provided that city gives company written notice ten days in advance of the commencement of compliance audits and public hearings. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-125. - Partial invalidity and repeal provision. 
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be illegal, ultra vices, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article if the invalidity does not substantially alter the meaning thereof. All ordinances and agreements and parts of ordinances and agreements in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-126. - Liability and insurance. 
Company shall maintain a liability insurance policy, in a form reasonably acceptable to city, together with evidence thereof reasonably acceptable to city. City and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees (through appropriate endorsements if necessary) shall be named as additional insureds to the extent of the liabilities assumed by company under this article. Company shall provide such insurance in the minimum combined amount of $3,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage. 
The liability insurance policy shall be maintained throughout any period of time during which company operates or is engaged in the removal of equipment. Each such liability insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until sixty (60) days after receipt by City, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within 30 days after receipt by city of said notice, and in no event later than 15 days prior to said cancellation, company shall obtain and furnish to city replacement insurance policies in a form reasonably acceptable to city. 
The legal liability of company to city and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the liability insurance policy, including without limitation, company's indemnification obligations set forth herein shall not be limited by such insurance policies nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder, except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payment by company. Company shall (i) at its own cost and expense, replace, repair or restore any damaged property substantially to its prior condition, and (ii) pay damages determined to be due pursuant to any claim against company for any injury to or death of any person caused by any act or failure to act of company, or any officer, employee, agent or contractor of company, in connection with the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment or the provision of services through the equipment. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit any recovery to which a person may otherwise be entitled, nor shall anything herein be deemed an admission of liability on the part of company. 
City and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall have no liability to company, any affiliated person or any other person for any special, incidental, consequential, punitive, or other damages as a result of the exercise of any right of city pursuant to this article or applicable law. Nothing herein shall be deemed an admission of liability by city nor be interpreted to waive any protection for city against any liability under the law. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 78-127. - Miscellaneous. 
The preamble to this article is hereby incorporated into this article as if set out fully herein. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be declared illegal by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such illegality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this article. All parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. The effective date of this article is September 8, 2009. All notices shall be in writing and shall be sufficiently given and served upon the other party by first class mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, or via facsimile (with confirmation of transmission). 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009) 
Secs. 78-128—78-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DUE COMPENSATION OWED BY ANY TELEPHONE COMPANY USING CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 78-150. - Intent and purpose. 
The city is authorized per O.C.G.A. [§] 46-5-1, et seq. as amended in 2008 by Senate Bill 379 (the "amended law") to collect due compensation from telephone companies that maintain and operate lines and facilities occupying municipal streets and rights-of-way equal to no more than three percent of actual recurring local service revenues received by such company from its retail, end user customers located within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 78-151. - Payment of DOT rates. 
If a company does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 78-152. - Existing agreements and payments. 
Existing franchise agreement and occupational license tax payments greater than three percent of actual recurring local service revenues are grandfathered until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever is earlier; and payments thereafter will be at the statutory rate. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 78-153. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9). 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 78-154. - Authorized designee. 
The clerk/treasurer shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1, et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(b)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(c)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. 
(d)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. 
(e)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(f)  Provide to all telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, § 1) 
Secs. 78-155—78-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATERING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Jan. 11, 2011, enacted provisions intended for use as Art. V, §§ 78-111, 78-112. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. VII, §§ 78-161, 78-162. 

Sec. 78-161. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2011, Exh. A) 
Sec. 78-162. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained herein. 
(b)  The city police and city clerk/treasurer shall be the enforcement authority for this article. They may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2011, Exh. A) 
Chapter 82 - VEGETATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; weeds, standing water, § 50-4; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 82-1. - Purpose, applicability and tree protection. 
The protection of trees promotes the health, safety and general welfare of the public, and the preservation of trees help to: preserve the city's beauty and character, purify air, moderate the micro-climate, reduce noise and glare, conserve energy in heating and cooling costs, prevent soil erosion, provide storm water management, enhance and stabilize property values, and contribute to the general aesthetic value of the city. 
The city has full power and authority over all trees within street rights-of way, parks and public places of the city and the following trees on private property: 
(1)  Existing trees on new development sites that can reasonably be protected and saved during construction, and will after construction and dedication be on the public right-of way; 
(2)  Replacement trees on public right-of-way for those that were lost during construction on new development sites; and 
(3)  Existing or replacement trees in parking lot islands of new commercial construction sites. All the foregoing trees are collectively known as street trees. 
Protective measures shall be applied to the above-ground portion and roots of street trees within their drip line, as follows: 
(1)  No person shall cut, carve, transplant, or otherwise damage or remove such tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising poster, or other contrivance to such tree; allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to trees (including without limitation concrete washout, fuel, lubricants, herbicides, and/or paint) to come in contact with such trees; or set a fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of such tree; 
(2)  During excavation, filling, construction, or demolition operations, each such tree or stand of such trees shall be marked with a plastic construction area fence enclosing the drip line; 
(3)  All building materials, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt debris, or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or above ground damage shall be kept outside the drip line. A permit must be obtained from the city before any such tree can be removed or pruned, or trenching allowed within the drip line. 
(Amend. of 1-8-2008, § 1) 
Editor's note— The amendment of Jan. 8, 2008, § 1, repealed the former § 82-1 and enacted a new § 82-1 as set out herein. The former § 82-1 pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 1. 
Sec. 82-2. - City tree board—Establishment. 
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city which shall consist of five members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 2) 
Sec. 82-3. - Same—Term of office. 
The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first city tree board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member of the city tree board, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 3) 
Sec. 82-4. - Same—Compensation. 
Members of the city tree board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 4) 
Sec. 82-5. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the city tree board to study, investigate, counsel, and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan. The city tree board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 5) 
Sec. 82-6. - Same—Operation. 
The city tree board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members of the city tree board shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 6) 
Sec. 82-7. - List of trees. 
The city tree board shall make a list of desirable and undesirable trees to plant in the city. These should be listed as small, medium and large trees. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 7) 
Sec. 82-8. - Spacing. 
The spacing of street trees may not be closer that the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 8) 
Sec. 82-9. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
The distance trees may be planted from the curbs or curblines, and sidewalks shall not be closer than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; large trees, four feet. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 9) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 82-10. - Distance from street corners and fire hydrants. 
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet from any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer that ten feet from any fire hydrant. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 10) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 82-11. - Utilities. 
No street tree may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 11) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78. 
Sec. 82-12. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of such trees is in accordance with sections 82-7 through 82-10. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 12) 
Sec. 82-13. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city tree board. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 13) 
Sec. 82-14. - Pruning; corner clearance. 
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way, within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street light or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety to the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any control device or sign. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 14) 
Sec. 82-15. - Removal of dead or diseased trees. 
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by such owners at their own expense with 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the owners. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 15) 
Sec. 82-16. - Interference with city tree board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaged in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 16) 
Sec. 82-17. - Arborists license and bond. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first procuring a license. The license fee shall be paid annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 property damage indemnifying the city or any person or damage resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as described in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 17) 
Sec. 82-18. - Review by city council. 
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make a final decision. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 18) 
Sec. 82-19. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to punishment as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1992, § 19) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF UNION POINT, GEORGIA 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE  NORTHEAST GEORGIA REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT CENTER 
PREFACE 
The following analysis entitled Zoning Ordinance for the City of Union Point, Georgia is designed for the governing authority or authorities of the planning area with a recommended regulatory measure designed to meet present-day and anticipated future needs for the promotion of the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or general welfare of the town by the control of such matters as the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot which may be occupied, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes. 
These recommended regulations shall be designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. 
Said recommended regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in governmental expenditures, conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and other buildings and structures throughout the City of Union Point. 
An ordinance of the mayor and council of the City of Union Point, Georgia, establishing zoning districts and regulating the use of land therein; specifying off-street parking and loading requirements; adopting general zoning regulations; adopting a map for the purpose of indicating land districts; defining said districts; providing for rezoning and redistricting; establishing certain building and zoning regulations in each of the said districts; regulating land uses and accessory uses; prescribing the percentage of land area which may be occupied under varying circumstances; providing for a violation; providing remedies for enforcement hereof; to repeal all conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's zoning ordinance as set forth in the ordinance of April 13, 1993. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 54; zoning hearings, § 54-31 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; vegetation, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT 
The mayor and council of the City of Union Point, Georgia under the authority of Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2, ¶ 2-4, as amended, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the municipality and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other requirements, hereby ordain and enact into law the official zoning ordinance for the incorporated area of the City of Union Point, for planning, zoning and subdivision control purposes and agreed upon through laws enacted by both the mayor and council of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance for the City of Union Point, Georgia." 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED IN THIS ORDINANCE 

Sec. 3.1. - General. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have their customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The word "map" means the "Official Zoning Districts Map for the City of Union Point, Georgia." 
Sec. 3.2. - Special definitions. 
When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. 
Accessory use: A use customarily incidental to the principal use of land. 
Alley: A platted serviceway providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
Apartment: A suite of two or more rooms and a bath which is designed according to the Southern Building Code regulations, and is also designed or intended for occupancy by one family doing its cooking therein, or by one person doing his or her cooking therein. For zoning purposes, an apartment shall be regarded as a dwelling unit. A structure containing two apartments shall be considered a duplex. A structure containing three or more apartments shall be regarded as a multifamily dwelling. 
Apartment house: A multifamily dwelling unit structure consisting of a single-family dwelling unit separated by fire resistance as required by the building code of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
Applicant: Any individual or business entity applying for rezoning action. 
Automobile service station: Any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting, major repairs or automatic washing. 
Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
Boardinghouse: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and/or by prearrangement, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Building, accessory: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or land. 
Building, alterations of: Any change in modification or occupancy. 
Building, height of: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs, and to the deck line of a mansard roof. 
Building inspector: The Greene County Building Inspector or other inspector so designated by the mayor and council to enforce this ordinance. 
Building, main: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
Business entity: Any corporation, partnership, limited partnership, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, or trust. 
Campaign contribution: A contribution as defined in O.C.G.A. § 21-5-3(6). 
Cemetery: Any plot of ground, churchyard, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure used for the burial of the dead. 
City: The City of Union Point, Georgia. 
City council: The mayor and city council of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
City official: Any member of the city council. 
Clinic: An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment. 
Club: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, or persons for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service to the general public. 
Condominium: Individual ownership units in a multifamily structure, combined with a joint ownership of common areas of the building and grounds. 
Convalescent home: A facility for three or more unrelated aged or ill persons not operating as the functional equivalent of a family, that provides food, shelter, and medical care for compensation in addition to meeting the physical, emotional, and social needs of said unrelated aged or ill persons. 
County: Greene County, Georgia. 
Day care center: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation or institution, or any other group wherein are received, for pay, seven or more children under 18 years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for more than four hours and less than 24 hours a day. 
Day care home: Any place operated by any person who receives for pay three to six children under 17 years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for more than four hours and less than 24 hours per day. 
District: A section of the City of Union Point within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Dry cleaners: A business that provides for the cleaning of laundry, excluding self-service, and contains the equipment necessary for the processing of laundry. 
Dwelling unit: A structure or a portion of any structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels, motels, boardinghouses or like uses. 
Dwelling, multifamily: A structure containing at least three dwelling units designed for residential use by three or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, single-family: A structure containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use surrounded by open space on the same lot, which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum width in excess of 14 feet. 
(2)  Minimum square footage required by the zone in which located. 
(3)  The roof shall have a minimum 2:12 roof pitch, unless other specified, and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built-up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the mayor and council. 
(4)  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. 
(5)  Be attached to a permanent foundation. 
(6)  Be constructed according to standards established either by the State Minimum Standard Codes as amended from time to time or the Standard Building Code if locally adopted for site built homes, or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act for manufactured homes, or the State of Georgia Industrialized Buildings Act for residential industrialized buildings. Each of these codes shall be applicable to the specific structure to which it applies. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(1), § 1) 
Dwelling, tenant: A residential dwelling located on a farm and occupied by a nontransient farm worker employed by the owner of the farm. The dwelling shall conform to the standards of the zone in which it is located. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A structure containing two dwelling units designed for residential use by two families living independently of each other. 
Easement: A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, or a corporation or a certain person or persons. 
Fallout shelter: A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger to human life from nuclear fallout, air raids, storms or other emergencies. 
Family: One or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boardinghouse, or hotel, as herein defined. 
Feedlot: Any parcel of land upon which the mechanical, hand feeding of five or more livestock animals per acre is performed for a period exceeding 30 days. 
Financial interest: All direct ownership interests of the total assets or capital stock of a business entity where such ownership interest is ten percent or more. 
Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, but not including the attic space providing headroom for less than seven feet; unusable basement or cellar space not used for retailing; uncovered steps or fire escape; open porches; accessory water or cooling towers; accessory off-street parking spaces; and accessory off-street loading berths. 
Frontage, lots: The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Frontage, street: All the property on the side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or if the street is dead-ended, all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
Garage apartment: A dwelling unit for one family erected above a private garage detached from the main dwelling. 
Garage, parking: A building or portion thereof designed or used for storage of motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils may be sold, and in connection with which may be performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repairs. 
Garage, private: An accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main buildings. A carport shall be considered as a private garage. 
Garage repair: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or parking garage, designed or used for the storage, servicing, repairing, equipping and hiring of motor-driven vehicles. 
Health department: The Greene County Health Department or a person so designated by the mayor and council to perform said functions. 
Home occupation: An occupation for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises and entirely within the main dwelling. 
Hotel: A building in which lodging, or board and lodging, are provided for more than 20 persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally made through the interior of the building. 
Industrialized building: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the Industrialized Buildings Act, 1982 Ga. Laws, pages 1637—1643 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-2, pt. 1). 
Institution: A nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment. 
Junk: Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, or waste; junk dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, or iron, steel, and old scrap ferrous or nonferrous metal. 
Junk yard: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
Kennels: Any location where raising, grooming, or caring for, or boarding of, dogs, cats, or other small animals for commercial purposes is carried on within the City of Union Point. 
Kindergarten: A school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from four through six years, which operates for less than four hours per day. 
Laundromat: A business that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing machines and/or coin-operated dry cleaning machines. 
Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up: A business that provides only for the convenience of taking and picking up of laundry, such as establishments not having any equipment for processing of the laundry. 
Loading space: A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
Lodging[house] or boardinghouse: A building designed or used for the more or less permanent occupancy, with or without meals, of more than two lodgers or boarders whether the compensation be paid directly or indirectly. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one or more main buildings and its accessory buildings with such open and parking spaces as are required by the provisions of this resolution [ordinance] and having its frontage upon a public street or streets. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage: A lot having a frontage on two streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot, width: The distance between one side lot line and the other side lot line measured at the minimum setback line. The mean width is measured at a right angle to the lot depth. 
Lot of record: A lot or parcel of land whose existence, location and dimensions have been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Greene County. 
Manufactured home: A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. The definition at the date of adoption of this part is as follows: 
"Manufactured home: means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary and complies with the standards established under this title." 
Manufactured home, other: Any manufactured home not meeting the definition of "Dwelling, single-family." 
Manufactured home subdivision: Any lot on which are customarily parked two or more manufactured homes for a period of time exceeding 30 days. 
Member of the family: The spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of a city official. 
Mobile home: A structure manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Motel: A building or a group of buildings containing accommodations for rental primarily to automobile transients and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally to the outside of the building. 
Nonconforming use: A use of land, building or premises existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, or at the time of a zoning amendment, and which does not conform with the regulations of the use district in which it is located. 
Nursing home: A home for aged or ill persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are provided with food, shelter, and care for compensation but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
Open space: A yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking, loading space, drying yard or refuse storage space. 
Opponent: Any person who opposes a rezoning action or any attorney or other person representing or acting on behalf of a person who opposes a rezoning action. 
Oppose: To appear before, discuss with, or contact, either orally or in writing, the City of Union Point or city official and argue against a rezoning action. 
Patio house: A single-family dwelling unit on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit on an adjoining lot by a common-party wall with fire resistant separation as required by the building code of the City of Union Point, Georgia. 
Permitted use: Any use that is listed in a zoning district as permitted. 
Person: An individual, partnership, committee, association, corporation, labor organization, or any other organization or group of persons. 
Personal care home: Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator of said home by blood or marriage. Personal services includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(2), § 1) 
Plat: A map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Playschool: A school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from three to four years of age and which operates for less than four hours per day. 
Principal use: The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Professional: When used in connection with "use" and "occupancy," a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stockbrokers and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the structure nor any use which would create any loud noise or noxious odors within the City of Union Point. 
Property interest: The direct or indirect ownership of real property including any percentage of ownership less than total ownership. 
Real property: Any tract or parcel of land and, if developed, any buildings or structures located on the land. 
Restaurant, drive-in: An eating and/or drinking establishment which caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served consumes his food and/or drink while sitting in a motor-driven vehicle, as opposed to a restaurant serving exclusively inside an enclosed building. 
Rezoning action: An action by the mayor and council of Union Point, Georgia, adopting an amendment to a zoning ordinance that has the effect of rezoning real property from one zoning classification to another. 
Right-of-way: Access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Right-of-way line: The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Roominghouse: A building other than a hotel where lodging for three but not more than 20 persons is provided with no meals served. 
Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments, planned, and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property. 
Sign: Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or marks, or combinations thereof, by which anything is made known, such as the designation of an individual, a firm, an association, a profession, a business, a commodity, or product, which are visible from any public way and used as an outdoor display. 
Sign area: The smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof encompassing the entire advertising area, excluding architectural trim and structural supports. 
Sign, outdoor advertising: A structural poster panel or painted sign, either free-standing or attached to a building, for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject unrelated to the premises upon which it is located. 
Sign structure: A structure composed of a single pole or multiple poles which is located on the ground or on top of another structure and which supports no more than two signs. 
Sign structure facing: The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited, not including architectural trim and structural supports. 
Site built: A structure constructed on-site with approved building materials, inspected periodically during construction, and constructed according to the locally adopted building codes. 
Story: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it. 
Street: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, half: A street which does not meet the minimum right-of-way widths as set forth in this ordinance. 
Street line: The legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property. 
Street, major: A street designated as a major street. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: site built buildings, industrialized buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes, and fallout shelters. 
Subdivider: Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as herein defined within the confines of Union Point. 
Subdivision: Any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development, including any division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and including re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process as subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 
(1)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved; and 
(2)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between separate or common owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created. 
Townhouse: A single-family dwelling unit which is erected in a row as part of a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by [an] approved fire resistant party wall or walls extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. 
Travel trailer: A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses that is not more than eight feet in body width, being of any weight provided its body length does not exceed 29 feet. 
Travel trailer park: Any lot on which are temporarily parked two or more travel trailers for a period of less than 30 days. 
Yard: A space on the same lot with a main building, such space being open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the center line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its largest dimension. 
Yard, rear: An open space on the same lot with the main building, which is unoccupied except possibly by an accessory building and extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building projected to the side lines of the lot from the front yard. 
Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. If no front yard is required, the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot. On corner lots, the side yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its greatest dimension. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(1), § 1; Ord. of 2-8-1994(2), § 1) 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 4.1. - Division of the city into districts. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Union Point, Georgia is divided into eight districts as follows: 
R-1 — Single-family residential district 
R-1A — Single-family residential district 
R-2 — Two-family residential district 
R-3 — Multifamily residential district 
C-1 — Neighborhood commercial district 
C-2 — General commercial district 
M-1 — Wholesale and light industrial district 
MHD — Manufactured home district 
R-M — Group development district. 
[PI] — Public institutional district. 
Sec. 4.2. - Incorporation of the zoning map. 
The Official Zoning Districts Map of Union Point with all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be the official map and is hereby made a part of this ordinance. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the city clerk, where the map will be accessible to the general public. 
Sec. 4.3. - Map amendment. 
If, in accordance with provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed in the official zoning maps [map], such changes shall be made on the official zoning maps [map] within 30 days after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 4.4. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the official zoning map of Union Point, the following rules shall apply: 
4.4.1 Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, land lot lines, centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads, centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries, and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
4.4.2 Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, or railroads, or right-of-way of the same, or the centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning maps [map]. 
4.4.3 Where a district boundary line, as appearing on the official zoning maps [map], divides a lot which is under single ownership at the time of enactment of this ordinance, the use classification of a larger portion may be extended by the mayor and council to the remainder without recourse to the amendment procedure. 
4.4.4 Where a public road, street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street or alley. 
4.4.5 In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the mayor and council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5.1. - Use. 
No building, structure, premises, or land use shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, remodeled, extended, enlarged, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulation herein specified for the district in which it is located or is to be located in the future. 
Sec. 5.2. - Building height. 
No building or structure shall hereinafter be erected, constructed or altered so as to exceed the height limit, to accommodate or house a greater number of families than are required or specified in the regulations herein for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 5.3. - Lots. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, inner or outer courts, lot area per family or other requirements of this resolution [ordinance] are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use within Union Point, Georgia. 
Sec. 5.4. - Yards. 
No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues, and eaves, provided such projections shall not extend more than two feet beyond the yard area requirements. 
Sec. 5.5. - Minimum distance between buildings. 
The following minimum distances between buildings shall be required unless otherwise specified within this ordinance. 
5.5.1 The minimum distance between main buildings located on the same lot or parcel shall be: 
5.5.1.1 Front to front arrangement—40 ft. 
5.5.1.2 Front to rear arrangement—50 ft. 
5.5.1.3 Rear to rear arrangement—30 ft. 
5.5.1.4 Side to side arrangement—20 ft. 
5.5.1.5 All other combinations—20 ft. 
5.5.2 There shall be a distance of not less than 20 feet between a main and accessory building located on the same lot or parcel. 
5.5.3 No accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to any lot line in any district. 
Sec. 5.6. - Newly annexed land. 
All land newly annexed into the incorporated limits of the City of Union Point, Georgia shall be automatically classified as to the nearest same type classifcation as it was zoned in the county. 
Sec. 5.7. - Number of buildings. 
There shall be only one principal building per lot, unless otherwise specified; e.g., in areas zoned R-3 (multifamily residential district). 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.1. - Nonconforming buildings and uses. 
It is the intent of this ordinance to recognize that the elimination of existing buildings and structures or uses that are not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this ordinance. It is also the intent of this ordinance to administer the elimination of nonconforming uses, buildings, and structures so as to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. 
Therefore, any structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, and amendments thereto, but not in conformity with its use regulations and provisions may be continued subject to the following provisions. 
6.1.1  Unsafe structures. Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by an appropriate governing authority may be restored to a safe condition, provided the requirements in this section are met. 
6.1.2  Alterations. Any change in a nonconforming building, use, or building site or yard area is subject to the following: 
6.1.2.1 No nonconforming building can be structurally altered, except repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures required by law; the changing of interior partitions; and interior remodeling. 
6.1.2.2 No nonconforming building or lands, except those residential dwellings needing repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures as required by law, can be substantially added to, moved, or extended in any manner unless such building or land is changed so as to conform with the provisions of this ordinance. 
6.1.2.3 Whenever an existing residential dwelling must make repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures which will force the location of the future addition of the dwelling nearer the lot line than the requirements set forth in this ordinance, the addition to the dwelling shall be allowed to extend to the existing building line but no nearer the property line than any existing portion of the dwelling. 
6.1.2.4 Should a nonconforming building be moved, all nonconforming yard areas shall be eliminated. 
6.1.3  Extension. A nonconforming use of land shall be restricted to the lot occupied by such use as of the effective date of this ordinance. A nonconforming use of a building or buildings shall not be extended to include either additional building or land after the effective date of this ordinance. 
6.1.4  Restoration of damaged buildings. A nonconforming building, structure, or improvement which is hereafter damaged or destroyed to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the reasonable estimated replacement cost of the structure, building or improvement may not be reconstructed or restored to the same nonconforming use except upon approval of the building inspector. 
6.1.5  Discontinuance. A nonconforming use which became such after the adoption of this ordinance and which has been discontinued for a continuous period of two years shall not be re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 6.2. - Off-street automobile parking. 
Within the City of Union Point, off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted or conditional use is established in accordance with this ordinance. 
6.2.1  General requirements. For the purpose of this ordinance the following general requirements are specified. 
6.2.1.1 The term "off-street parking space" shall mean a space at least nine feet wide and 18 feet in length with a minimum net area of 162 square feet, excluding area for egress and ingress and maneuverability of vehicles. 
6.2.1.2 If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the building inspector may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space lies within 600 feet of the property line of such principal use. Such vehicle parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
6.2.1.3 The required number of parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that portion of the parking space required for an existing church whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
6.2.1.4 Area reserved for off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent parking space is provided to the satisfaction of the building inspector. 
6.2.1.5 Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
6.2.2  Parking space requirements for all districts. Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal to at least the minimum requirements for the specific land use set forth. 

 
6.2.3  Site requirements. All off-street parking shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements (except in residential areas). 
6.2.3.1 All such parking areas shall be hard surfaces with concrete or plant bituminous material and shall be maintained in dustproof condition. A good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
6.2.3.2 Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that light is reflected away from adjacent properties and streets. 
6.2.3.3 The parking lot shall be adequately drained. 
6.2.3.4 Along those lot lines of parking area which abut residential districts, a dense planting of trees and shrubs shall be established on a strip of land not less than eight feet in width adjacent to the districts and provided that such planting be not less than six feet in height and a substantial bumper rail of wood, metal or concrete shall be installed on the inside of the planting strip. 
6.2.3.5 A raised curb of at least six inches shall be erected along all of the property lines, except for driveway openings, and those lot lines abutting residential districts where the requirements in section 6.2.3.4 shall prevail. 
6.2.3.6 No sign, whether permanent or temporary, shall be placed within the public right-of-way. Signs and planting strips shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 6.3. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided as hereinafter required by this ordinance. 
6.3.1  Size of off-street loading spaces. Each off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 14 feet in height, 12 feet in width, and 55 feet in length. However, upon sufficient demonstration that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by shorter trucks, the building inspector may reduce the minimum length accordingly to as little as 35 feet. 
6.3.2.  Connection to street or alley. Each required off-street loading space shall have direct access to a street or alley or have a driveway which offers sufficient space for satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. 
6.3.3  Floor area over 10,000 square feet. There shall be provided for each hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building or similar use requiring the receipt or distribution of materials for merchandise, and having a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof, sufficient space for off-street loading and unloading. Such space shall be located so as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
6.3.4  Floor area less than 10,000 square feet. There shall be provided for each commercial or industrial building requiring the receipt or distribution of materials for merchandise and having a floor area of less than 10,000 square feet, sufficient off-street loading space (not necessarily a full space if shared by an adjacent establishment) so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
6.3.5  Bus and trucking terminals. There shall be provided sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of busses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded at the terminal at any one time. 
6.3.6  Location of off-street loading spaces. All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building which they are intended to serve, or on an adjacent lot when shared with the use occupying said adjacent lot. 
6.3.7  Permanent reservation. Area reserved for off-street loading in accordance with the requirement of this ordinance shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which is served is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent loading space is provided and approved by the building inspector. 
Sec. 6.4. - Control of curb cuts and vision clearance. 
the requirements for controlling curb cuts and maintaining vision clearance shall be as follows: 
6.4.1  Curb cuts. No curb cuts shall exceed 30 feet in length, nor shall curb cuts be closer than twenty feet to other curb cuts or closer than twenty feet to an intersection of two streets measured along the curb line. 
6.4.2  Vision clearance. In all use districts, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee or other obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half and ten feet from the ground level shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or railroad lines, or of a street intersection with a railroad line. 
Sec. 6.5. - Classification of streets. 
All streets in Union Point, Georgia, are hereby divided into six classes. 
6.5.1 Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. 
6.5.2 Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of freeways, expressways, and arterial streets and highways. 
6.5.3 Minor or local residential streets, including cul-de-sacs are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
6.5.4 Minor or local commercial and industrial streets are those which are primarily for access to the abutting commercial and industrial properties. 
6.5.5 Alleys are those which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
6.5.6 Marginal access streets or frontage roads are minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to freeways, expressways, or arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 6.6. - Storage and parking of trailers and vehicles. 
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following requirements: 
6.6.1 No more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit shall be permitted and in no case shall a commercial vehicle be used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted. 
6.6.2 Travel trailers, hauling trailers, or boat trailers shall be permitted if parked or stored behind the front yard building line. 
6.6.3 A travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a travel trailer park authorized under this ordinance. 
Sec. 6.7. - Buffer areas and lighting. 
6.7.1 In any commercial (C-1, C-2) or industrial (M-1) district, any operation not conducted within a building, such as outdoor recreation, outdoor storage of materials, and outdoor servicing activities, shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height. There shall be a buffer area at least 30 feet wide, unless otherwise specified, that adequately interrupts vision and diffuses the transmission of sound. All buffer area requirements are in addition to the area, yard, and height requirements for that district (article VIII). A landscaping plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in the buffer area must be approved by the mayor and council prior to any site construction. 
6.7.2 In any district not subject to the requirements of section 6.7.1 but requiring screening of a specified operation, such screening shall be a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height. There shall be a buffer area at least 30 feet wide, unless otherwise specified, that adequately interrupts vision and diffuses the transmission of sound. All buffer area requirements are in addition to the area, yard, and height requirements for that district (article VIII). A landscaping plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in the buffer area must be approved by the mayor and council prior to any site construction. 
6.7.3 A vegetation buffer strip of 50 feet in width shall be planted adjacent to the lot line when the following conditions exist or are created: 
(a)  A structure exists or is concentrated on a lot of which the side and/or rear lot line is a district boundary. 
(b)  The district on the opposite side of the boundary is R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3. 
The buffer strip required under section 6.7.3 shall be in addition to any other required buffer strip. The buffer strip shall be planted in the setback area and shall consist of evergreen trees and/or shrubs which will normally obtain a height of eight feet within five years. Maintenance of the buffer strip shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Dead trees or shrubs used in the buffer zone shall be replaced by the property owner no later than the next spring or fall planting season but no later than 12 months from notification by the building inspector. 
6.7.4 If the buffer area is naturally wooded, then it shall be left in its natural state. If not, the buffer area, in addition to the required wall, fence, or tight evergreen hedge, should be planted with trees to further diffuse the sound and light transmission and visual impact of the building. The addition of the required wall, fence, or tight evergreen hedge shall be constructed or planted in such a manner as to preserve the natural topography of the land and the natural growth. If the natural growth is too dense for preferred growth, the natural growth may be thinned. Under all circumstances, diseased, dangerous or decayed growth shall be removed. 
6.7.5 Outdoor lighting of all types shall be directed so as to reflect away from all residential dwellings, and shall be so situated as not to reflect directly into any public rights-of-way. 
6.7.6 Any grading, improvements or construction adjacent thereto shall be conducted far enough from the buffer area so as not to disturb or encroach upon the buffer area. 
ARTICLE VII. - USE PROVISIONS BY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 7.1. - Residential districts. 
7.1.1  R-1 single-family residential districts. Within R-1 single-family residential districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings provided yard area [requirements] as specified in article VIII [are met]. 
(2)  [Reserved.] 
(3)  Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family. 
(4)  Accessory buildings when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incident thereto and provided the requirements under article IX are met. 
(5)  Fallout shelters provided the applicable requirements under article IX are met. 
(6)  Home swimming pools provided the location is not closer than 15 feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least four feet in height. 
(7)  Religious uses such as synagogues, Sunday schools, convents, churches, etc. and related accessory buildings, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. Cemeteries provided the requirements of article IX are met. 
Conditional uses. Within the R-1 residential district, the uses enumerated below may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council after a public hearing. Conditional use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
1.  Home occupations provided that the applicable requirements under article IX are met. 
2.  Kindergartens, playschools, day care centers, and day care homes. 
3.  Private schools and libraries, excluding business and trade schools. 
4.  Municipal, county, state and federal uses which are necessary to the general public welfare, such as community buildings, schools, parks, recreation centers, water storage tanks, pump houses, public utility structures, etc. but excluding such uses as incinerators, dumps, garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards, etc. Such structures shall be properly screened as required in section 6.72 and architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area. 
5.  Golf, swimming, tennis or country clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purposes is located within 100 feet of any property line. 
6.  Public parking area where the area adjoins a commercial or industrial zone, provided such transitional use does not extend more than 100 feet into the R-1 district. 
7.  Manufactured home qualifying as dwelling, single-family, provided public water and sewerage is available. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(1), §§ 2, 3) 
7.1.2  R-1A single-family residential district. Within the R-1A single-family residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings provided yard area as specified in article VIII and roof pitch is greater than 2:12. 
(2)  [Reserved.] 
(3)  Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family. 
(4)  Accessory buildings when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incident thereto and provided the requirements under article IX are met. 
(5)  Fallout shelters provided the applicable requirements under article IX are met. 
(6)  Home swimming pools provided the location is not closer than 15 feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least four feet in height. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(1), §§ 2, 3) 
7.1.3  R-2 two-family residential districts. Within the R-2 two-family residential districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Two-family dwellings (duplex). 
(2)  Garage apartment. 
(3)  Patio house. 
Conditional uses. Within the R-2 two-family residential district, the uses enumerated below may be permitted, in accordance with section 10.7, provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council and after a public hearing. Conditional use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
1.  Manufactured home, qualifying as dwelling, single-family, provided public water and sewerage is available. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(1), § 6) 
7.1.4  R-3 multifamily residential district. Within the R-3 multifamily residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Townhouses or condominiums, provided the requirements of article IX are met. 
(3)  Apartment house. 
(4)  Office buildings exclusively used for professional occupancy and of such character and nature that such use will not adversely affect adjacent and nearby residential properties. 
(5)  Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics, convalescent or nursing homes. 
(6)  Clubs, lodges and boardinghouses. 
(7)  Individual manufactured homes, qualifying as dwelling, single-family; individual manufactured homes which do not meet the requirements of dwelling, single-family; and individual mobile homes. 
(8)  Manufactured home subdivision. 
(9)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(2), § 2; Ord. of 2-8-1994(1), § 7) 
7.1.5  MHD manufactured home district. Within the [MHD] manufactured home district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Manufactured home parks. 
(2)  Single-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings provided yard area [requirements] as specified in article VIII [are met]. 
(4)  Travel trailer parks. 
(5)  Individual manufactured homes, qualifying as dwelling, single-family; individual manufactured homes which do not meet the requirements of dwelling, single-family; and individual mobile homes. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(1), § 8) 
Sec. 7.2. - Commercial district. 
7.2.1  C-1 neighborhood commercial district. 
7.2.1.1  Required conditions. All businesses, servicing, storage, or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, as, for example: off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, miniature golf courses, and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. Uses, processes or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reasons of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibrations. Uses are limited to those which will serve as convenience centers to serve the needs of their immediate neighborhoods and maintain economic compatibility. 
7.2.1.2  Permitted uses. Within the C-1 neighborhood commercial district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any retail business or commercial use in which there is no processing, storage or treatment of materials, goods or products except as provided for, including: 
(a)  Art and antique shops. 
(b)  Drive-in banks. 
(c)  Bicycle or motorcycle stores. 
(d)  Book, stationery, camera or photographic supply stores. 
(e)  Confectionery stores. 
(f)  Drug stores. 
(g)  Ice cream parlors. 
(h)  Florists, nursery, and gift shops. 
(i)  Jewelry stores. 
(j)  Convenience type grocer, fruits, vegetables, meat markets, delicatessens, catering but not including produce stands. 
(2)  Any of the following service businesses: 
(a)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(b)  Neighborhood groceries. 
(c )  Dressmaking, tailoring, and upholstering shops. 
(d)  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, and self-service laundry. 
(e)  Shoe repair shops. 
(f)  Cafes, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants but not including nightclubs, bars and taverns, or drive-in restaurants. 
(3)  Office buildings. 
(4)  Dry cleaners. 
(5)  Multifamily dwellings provided the area requirements of article VIII and section 9.22 are met. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incident thereto, provided the requirements under article IX are met. 
(7)  Swimming pools associated with apartment complexes. 
(8)  Fallout shelters provided the requirements under article IX are met. 
(9)  Signs as permitted in article IX. 
(10)  Existing commercial buildings containing an apartment(s). 
(11)  Public uses. 
7.2.2  C-2 general commercial district. 
7.2.2.1  Required conditions. All businesses, servicing, storage, or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, as, for example: off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, miniature golf courses, and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. Uses, processes or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reasons of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibrations. Uses are limited to those which will serve as convenience centers to serve the needs of their immediate neighborhoods and maintain economic compatibility. All uses permitted shall be architecturally harmonious with the surrounding area. 
7.2.2.2  Permitted uses. Within the C-2 general commercial district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any retail business or commercial use in which there is no processing, storage, if the storage is the primary use of the building, or treatment of materials, goods or products except as provided for, including: 
(a)  Appliance stores, including radio and television services. 
(b)  Art and antique shops. 
(c)  Bakeries employing no more than ten persons. 
(d)  Banks and drive-in banks. 
(e)  Bicycle or motorcycle stores. 
(f)  Book, stationery, camera or photographic supply stores. 
(g)  Cafes, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants. 
(h)  Confectionery stores. 
(i)  Clothing, shoe, millinery, dry goods, and notions. 
(j)  Drug stores. 
(k)  Ice cream parlors. 
(l)  Florists, nursery, and gift shops. 
(m)  Furniture, home furnishings, including office furniture and equipment. 
(n)  Groceries, fruit, vegetable or meat markets, delicatessens, catering and supermarkets, but not including produce stands or the selling of produce from vehicles. 
(o)  Hardware and paint stores. 
(p)  Jewelry stores. 
(2)  Any of the following service businesses: 
(a)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(b)  Cafes, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants. 
(c)  Dressmaking and tailoring shops. 
(d)  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, and self-service laundry. 
(e)  Shoe repair shops. 
(3)  Office buildings. 
(4)  Bowling alleys and billiard rooms. 
(5)  General farming and horticulture. 
(6)  Bus and railroad terminal facilities. 
(7)  Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incident thereto, provided the requirements under article IX are met. 
(8)  Dry cleaners. 
(9)  Fallout shelters provided the requirements under article IX are met. 
(10)  Signs as permitted in article IX. 
(11)  Automobile service stations provided the requirements in article IX are met. 
(12)  Temporary tents for revivals. 
(13)  Theaters, but not including drive-in theaters. 
(14)  Mini-storage warehouses. Said warehouses shall be defined, for purposes of this section, as a group of buildings divided into separate units or areas used to meet the temporary storage needs of businesses, apartment dwellers, and other individuals, with the units being available to the general public on a self-service basis. 
(a)  No retail or wholesale business activities shall be conducted on the premises. 
(b)  No storage of flammable, toxic or combustible materials shall be permitted within the buildings or upon the premises. 
(15)  Churches and other places of worship with attendant education and recreational buildings. 
(16)  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers and homes. 
(17)  Golf, swimming, tennis or country clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks and recreational areas. 
(18)  Private clubs, fraternal orders or lodges. 
(19)  Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, convalescent or nursing homes. 
(20)  Commercial parking garages or lots provided no entrance or exit be on the same side of the street and within the same block as a school and that curb breaks be limited to two for each 100 feet of street frontage, each not to exceed 30 feet in width and not located closer than 30 feet to a street intersection. 
(21)  Temporary uses including sale of Christmas trees, carnivals, church bazaars, sale of seasonal fruit and vegetables from roadside stands, provided such use is not permitted for a period to exceed two months in any calendar year. 
(22)  Bottling works for soft drinks. 
(23)  Printing, blueprinting, book binding, photostating, lithography and publishing establishments. 
(24)  Undertaking or mortuary establishments, and ambulance services. 
(25)  All uses of predominantly retail nature, including: 
(a)  Electrical supplies. 
(b)  Heating and plumbing equipment. 
(c)  Dairy products. 
(d)  Bakeries. 
(e)  Tires, batteries, and other automotive accessories. 
(f)  Sporting goods. 
(g)  Farm and garden supplies. 
(h)  Finance, insurance, and real estate offices. 
(26)  Public utility structures and buildings, including electric and natural gas substations, telephone exchanges, radio and television stations, and similar structures for the storage of supplies, equipment or service operations when properly screened as required in section 6.7. 
(27)  Private schools and libraries. 
(28)  Motels, hotels, and apartment hotels. 
(29)  Food locker plant renting lockers for the storage of food, including sale or retail, delivery, and cutting of package meats but not including slaughtering. 
(30)  Automobile repair garages, mechanical and body, provided all operations are conducted in a building which shall not have any opening, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district and which shall not store or otherwise maintain any parts or waste material outside such buildings. 
(31)  Drive-in restaurants. 
(32)  Milk bottling and distribution and ice cream manufacture. 
(33)  Places of assembly, including auditoriums, stadiums, coliseums and dance halls. 
(34)  Produce and farmers markets. 
(35)  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
(36)  Trade shops including sheet metal, roofing, upholstery, electrical, plumbing, Venetian blind, cabinetmaking and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning and sign painting provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any opening, other than stationary windows, within 100 feet of any residential districts. 
(37)  Taxi stands and dispatchers. 
(38)  Residential. 
(a)  Minimum floor space requirements and maximum number of occupants. 
(1)  The upper dwelling unit shall be limited to between three [hundred] and eight [hundred] square feet of heated living area. If the upper unit is located within an existing building, the mayor and council may allow increased size in order to efficiently use all of the existing floor area, so long as all other standards are met. 
(b)  Building codes. All residential renovations shall comply with all existing commercial building codes and fire codes (NEPA Life Safety Code, 1990 Edition, Southern Building Code, Standards Fire Prevention Code) with fire walls. 
(c)  Restrictions. 
(1)  All window treatments must be color coordinated with other window treatments in the residential apartment. No signs, drawing or photographs incorporated into the window treatments. 
(2)  No outside mailboxes are permitted except for a wall mounted mailbox which is mounted to the exterior wall at the rear entrance of the residential unit. 
(3)  No outside television or radio antennas are permitted. Satellite reception equipments and cable TV connections are permitted if located at the rear of the building. 
(4)  Daily or weekly boarding rooms are prohibited. Only full-time renter or owner occupied dwelling units are permitted. 
(5)  Each dwelling unit shall be furnished with a washer and dryer connection. 
(6)  No drying of clothes is permitted on the outside of any building. 
(7)  Entry to the unit or to a hallway serving one or more units shall be provided by a stairway opening directly to the outside of the rear of the building; except where the owner occupies both the ground level and the residential apartment, then entry may be through the ground floor. No dwelling unit shall occupy street level frontage. 
(8)  No window unit air-conditioning unit shall be visible from the front street. 
(9)  Washing or waxing of vehicles is not permitted in the parking area for the dwelling unit. 
(10)  No recreation, entertainment, public gathering or placement of furniture is allowed on the sidewalks unless permitted by the mayor and council. 
(11)  No garage sales or yard sales are allowed. 
(d)  Parking. 
(1)  Each residential unit shall be restricted to two vehicles. No vehicle shall park on the public streets or alleys in those areas designated as "two hour parking zones" during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday or from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Saturday. All parking shall be restricted to off-street parking whenever possible. 
(2)  Violations of this requirement shall be prosecuted the same as violation of the two-hour parking restriction set forth in the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  A separate residential approved trash container shall be furnished for each dwelling unit. The container shall be located at the rear of the building. 
(4)  A copy of this ordinance shall be made a part of each lease agreement. 
7.2.2.3 Conditional uses. Within the C-2 general commercial district, residential dwelling may be permitted on a ground floor behind storefront commercial or retail space, provided the applicant for such a use is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council and after a public hearing. Conditional use applications may be approved or denied as submitted or may be approved subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2006, § I; Ord. of 12-9-2008, § 1) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 7.3. - Wholesale and industrial district. 
7.3.1  M-1 wholesale and light industrial district. Within the M-1 wholesale and light industrial district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All permitted uses in a C-2 general commercial district except residential structures. 
(2)  Ice plants. 
(3)  Automobile laundries or car washes provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain a number of vehicles (at 200 square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines and provided that curb breaks be limited to two, each not to exceed 30 feet in width, and located no closer than 20 feet to an intersection. 
(4)  Contractor's storage and equipment yards when located entirely within a building or fenced area required in section 6.7. 
(5)  Building and lumber supply establishments provided entire storage area is properly screened as required in section 6.7, or of a greater height as required to adequately screen such areas, and that any machine operations be conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any opening, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district. 
(6)  Establishments for manufacture, repair, assembly, or processing including: 
(a)  Confectionery manufacturers. 
(b)  Clothing and garment manufacturers. 
(c)  Laboratories for testing materials, chemical analysis, photography processing. 
(d)  Manufacturers and assemblers of scientific, optical and electrical equipment. 
(e)  Manufacturers of musical instruments and parts. 
(f)  Manufacturers of souvenirs and novelties. 
(g)  Manufacturers of toys, sporting, and athletic goods. 
(7)  Wholesale warehouses. 
(8)  Drive-in theaters provided acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movement, and provided that the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, arterial, or collector street located within 2,000 feet of such screen. 
(9)  Truck terminals provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet are provided for trucks entering or leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
(10)  Trade shops, including sheet metal, roofing, upholstery, electrical, plumbing, Venetian blinds, cabinetmaking and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning, and sign painting provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any opening, other than stationary windows, within 100 feet of any residential district. 
(11)  Food processing plants, such as bakeries, meat packers, fish and poultry houses. 
(12)  Frozen dessert and milk processing plants. 
(13)  Any other establishments for the manufacture, repair, assembly, or processing of materials, which are not objectionable by reason of smoke, dust, odors, bright lights, noise, or vibration, or which will not contribute to the congestion of traffic shall be permitted in the M-1 wholesale and light industrial district upon approval by the mayor and council. 
7.3.2 No residential structure shall hereafter be erected in the M-1 zoning district. 
Sec. 7.4. - RM group development district. 
The RM group development district is designed to accommodate high density developments such as apartment complexes, mobile home parks, and condominiums. When such development is proposed, the party or parties must petition for rezoning to RM. If rezoning is granted after a public hearing, the following uses require the submittal of complete site development plans and are permitted only by a conditional use permit from the mayor and council. 
Sec. 7.5. - Public institutional. 
This district is intended for government and utility owned and/or operated land, such as county and city government offices, library, school, law enforcement, emergency services, utility facilities, and other areas owned or operated by city or county government or utilities. Any cell tower use shall be governed by the requirements set forth in exhibit A hereto. 
Exhibit A  Telecommunications Tower and Antenna 
(1)  Notwithstanding setback regulations, the required setback to any public right-of-way or residence or any other property where people regularly gather or travel is equal to the height of the tower. The setback shall be measured from the base of the tower. 
(2)  Telecommunications towers and antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration or Federal Communications Commission, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. No advertising sign or logo is permitted on any tower or antenna. 
(3)  Radio, television or other electromagnetic transmission or reception on other properties will not be disturbed or diminished. 
(4)  The tower will have lighting which consists of a red or bright white light at night and strobes in daylight, when lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration. The lighting shall be oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding residential property. The owner shall submit documentation from the FAA that the lighting is the minimum required by the FAA. 
(5)  Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be entirely enclosed by a security fence not less than six feet tall. Towers shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. This requirement shall not apply to alternative tower structures provided equivalent alternative security measures are installed. 
(6)  In addition to any other landscaping or buffer requirements that may apply, telecommunications towers and antennas shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant material that effectively reduces the visual obtrusiveness of the tower site from adjacent uses. Existing tree growth and natural land forms on site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. At a minimum, a buffer strip ten feet in width shall be provided around the perimeter of the site. The tower compound shall be surrounded by a tight evergreen vegetative screen not less than six feet tall and shall consist of evergreen trees and/or shrubs that will normally obtain a height of eight feet within five years. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
(7)  Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be constructed to the minimum height necessary to accomplish their required telecommunications purpose. 
(8)  Output power levels from the tower and/or associated antennas shall not exceed the current federally approved levels for exposure to electromagnetic radiation. 
(9)  Each applicant requesting a conditional use permit shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the building and code official to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance. Any information of an engineering nature shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(10)  Each applicant for a tower and/or antenna shall also provide an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the city or one-quarter mile thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for land use approvals and permits under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the city. However, the city is not, by sharing such information, representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(11)  The planning commission and council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit for a telecommunication facility: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c.  Type of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Design of the tower, particularly as to visual obtrusiveness; 
f.  Proposed ingress and egress; 
g.  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed above; and 
h.  Whether the tower is designed to accommodate additional antennas. 
(12)  All decisions by the city or its officials regarding a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications tower or antenna shall be in writing and supported by a written record documenting the reasons for the denial and the evidence in support thereof. All such decisions shall be made within a reasonable time from the date a completed application is duly filed with the appropriate department. Applications in all cases where the telecommunications tower or antenna is an authorized use shall be made to and decided by the mayor and council upon review and recommendations of an engineer pursuant to all standards and requirements herein. 
(13)  Co-location of antennas is encouraged. Each applicant for a telecommunications tower or antenna shall provide to the city an inventory of existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of Union Point or within one-quarter mile of the boundaries thereof, including information regarding the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this ordinance or with other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of Union Point, provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of Union Point that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence shall be submitted at the time of application which demonstrates that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna and may consist of the following: 
a.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. 
f.  The applicant demonstrates other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(14)  All transmission towers installed after the effective date of [this section] shall be structurally and mechanically capable of accommodating the antenna or array of antennae of more than one user/transmitter, unless the tower is incapable of supporting more than one user/transmitter due to the design of the tower which is incorporated into another structure in compliance. Monopoles shall accommodate a minimum of two total users, lattice or other types of towers shall accommodate a minimum of three total users. To ensure structural integrity, towers and antennas shall be maintained in compliance with the building code and the current applicable standards published by the Electronic Industries Association. If the city concludes that a tower or antenna fails to comply and/or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice to the owner, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower or antenna into compliance. If the owner fails to do so, the city may remove such tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17. 
(15)  To further encourage co-location, additional users and associated equipment which do not add to the tower height, may be added without additional approval. However, additional building code regulations may apply. Site plans must show the locations for at least two equipment buildings, even if the tower is proposed for a single user. 
(16)  Installation of an antenna on an existing alternative tower structures (a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free-standing nonresidential structure) 50 feet tall or greater is permitted, subject to zoning district restrictions. 
(17)  The placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment necessarily required in connection with an otherwise authorized telecommunications tower or antenna is authorized. 
(18)  Any telecommunications tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice by the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2011, § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VIII. - AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 
This article is established to show the minimum size, width, and height requirements for the land uses within each designated district. At all times be it understood that the minimum lot sizes cited in this article shall be increased in all individual situations where the county sanitarian advises (requires) a larger lot size for proper septic tank operation. 

Sec. 8.1. - Minimum lot size. 

 
Sec. 8.2. - Duplexes and apartments. 
Duplexes and apartments may be placed on lots in a cluster type arrangement provided that the lots are zoned for such use and the building and lot areas comply with the requirements of section 8.1. 
Sec. 8.3. - Minimum yard requirements, minimum square footage per dwelling unit, and maximum building heights. 

 
*Front building line shall conform to the average building line in a developed block, but in any event no less than the indicated distance. 
**On corner lots in a commercial or industrial district which abuts a residential district, there shall be a required side yard on the side street equal in depth to the required front yard of the residential district. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1994(2), § 3; Ord. of 4-12-1994, § 1) 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9.1. - Manufactured homes, mobile homes, and travel trailers. 
All owners of manufactured or mobile homes shall apply to the Union Point City Clerk for a mobile or manufactured home permit prior to any utility hookups. Said permit fee shall be $0.07 per square foot. 
9.1.1  Travel trailer parks. In any district where travel trailer parks are permitted, the applicant shall submit to the building inspector a layout of the park subject to the following conditions: 
9.1.1.1 No travel trailer park shall be located except with direct access to a city, county, state or federal highway, with a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for the portion used for entrance and exit. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
9.1.1.2 The minimum lot area per park shall be three acres. 
9.1.1.3 Spaces in travel trailer parks may be used by travel trailers, provided they meet any additional laws and ordinances of the mayor and city council and shall be rented by the day or week only, and an occupant of such space shall remain in the same trailer park for a period of not more than 30 days. 
9.1.1.4 Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a travel trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided: 
A.  Such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park. 
B.  Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the parks. 
C.  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
9.1.1.5 No space shall be so located that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purpose shall be within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway, arterial street, collector street, or of any minor street. 
9.1.1.6 In addition to meeting the above requirements, the travel trailer park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the Greene County Health Department. 
9.1.1.7 The travel trailer park shall be adequately lighted with outdoor lighting facilities located no more than every 200 feet along interior access roads. 
9.1.2  Manufactured home parks. In any district where manufactured home parks are permitted, a manufactured home park permit shall be obtained from the City of Union Point. In order to obtain a manufactured home park permit, a layout of the park, drawn to a scale of not more than 400 feet per inch, containing the following information shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval. 
9.1.2.1 The minimum lot area for a park shall be ten acres. The minimum road frontage for an entrance and exit shall be 50 feet; and the minimum lot width for the portion of the park containing manufactured home spaces, or stands, shall be 40 feet. 
9.1.2.2 All roads or streets within the park shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 36 feet, and a pavement width of 20 feet. 
9.1.2.3 All roads or streets within the park shall have a base consisting of six-inch crusher run stone or four-inch compacted asphaltic concrete, and shall have paving consisting of double surface treatment of tar and gravel or 1½ Type E plant mix. 
9.1.2.4 No space shall be rented for a period of less than 30 days. 
9.1.2.5 At least ten percent of the park area must be set aside as open area for recreation purposes. 
9.1.2.6 All streets within the park shall be lighted. Lights shall be spaced at a minimum of 200 feet each. 
9.1.2.7 All spaces shall be rental only. No space may be sold and all manufactured homes shall be occupied by the owner of said manufactured home. 
9.1.2.8 At least 30 spaces must be approved before the manufactured home park can be approved for occupancy. 
9.1.2.9 The maximum number of spaces allowed per acre shall be 2.5, unless a community or city water and sewerage system approved by the Greene County Health Department and/or City of Union Point is provided. If such a system is provided, the maximum number of spaces per acre shall be six. Manufactured homes may be placed in a clustered manner with excess area used for recreation or open area. 
9.1.2.10 All spaces for manufactured homes shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  Minimum area of 7,000 square feet and a minimum of 70 feet in any one direction. 
b.  Access to streets within the park. 
c.  On-site parking of 400 square feet minimum. This parking area shall be finished in gravel or pavement. 
d.  Water and sewerage disposal hookups approved by the Greene County Sanitarian and/or City of Union Point. 
e.  Electrical hookup facilities approved by the City of Union Point Inspection Department and appropriate fees paid. 
9.1.2.11 A copy of the park management rules and regulations must be submitted to the city building inspection department for approval. The park operator will be responsible for compliance with these regulations by all tenants. Failure to abide by these regulations or any of the City of Union Point manufactured home subdivision requirements will be considered a valid reason for revoking the manufactured home park permit required to operate a manufactured home park in the City of Union Point. 
9.1.2.12 Manufactured homes placed within the park shall meet the following conditions before they can be approved for occupancy: 
a.  Manufactured homes must meet the setback requirements of article VIII. 
b.  Manufactured homes must be connected to approved water and sewerage disposal systems and have electrical connections that comply with the City of Union Point Electrical Code. 
c.  Manufactured homes must be blocked and set up in accordance with article IX. 
d.  Manufactured homes must be enclosed by a curtain wall of manufactured home skirting material, metal or other material painted to match the exterior of the manufactured home, or masonry construction. 
e.  Manufactured homes shall be at least 30 feet from any other structure, including other manufactured homes. 
f.  Manufactured homes must bear the approval seal of either H.U.D. or Georgia D.C.A. 
9.1.2.13 Convenience establishments of a commercial nature, including stores, laundry and dry cleaning establishments, pick-up laundry and dry cleaning agencies, beauty shops, and barber shops may be permitted in manufactured home parks, provided that such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operations meet the following conditions: 
a.  Shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park. 
b.  Shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the park. 
c.  Shall be located, designed and intended to serve frequent trade or service needs of persons residing in the park. 
d.  Shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character from any portion of any residential district outside the park. 
9.1.3  Single manufactured homes and industrial buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family. 
9.1.3.1 Manufactured homes or industrial buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family shall be compared to site built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home or industrialized building is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to: (i) site built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this ordinance or (ii) existing development or (iii) proposed development in the same zoning district or area. 
All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
At each exterior door there must be a permanent landing that is a minimum of 36 inches by 48 inches. 
9.1.3.2 Manufactured homes or industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on-site; however, the building inspector may approve deviations from the definitional or compatibility standards or architectural standards set forth in paragraph numbers 3, 4, and 5 of the definition of "dwelling, single-family" found in section 3.2 of this ordinance. 
9.1.4  Single mobile homes or single manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family. Single mobile or manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family shall be subject to the following conditions: 
9.1.4.1 In no case shall the unit be located within 30 feet of any permanent type building. 
9.1.4.2 The mobile or manufactured home unit shall preferably be oriented parallel to the contour of the land and in no case shall the foundation be more than six blocks high, except where a solid foundation is provided. 
9.1.4.3 The mobile or manufactured home unit must be supported by piers as prescribed by the manufacturer, NFPA, 105A, with solid concrete footing. These piers shall be spaced at intervals of 12 feet or less. 
9.1.4.4 The foundation described in [subsection] 9.1.4.3 must be enclosed by a curtain wall of manufactured mobile or manufactured home skirting material, metal or other material painted to match the exterior of the mobile or manufactured home, or masonry construction. 
9.1.4.4[a] The mobile or manufactured home must be connected to water and sewerage and the electric service must be wired in accordance with the National Electric Code. 
9.1.4.5 Only one mobile or manufactured home will be permitted on a lot. 
9.1.4.6 Prior to the establishment of any mobile or manufactured home under the provisions of this section, a building and occupancy permit shall be obtained under the provision of article IX of this ordinance. 
9.1.5  Temporary usage. A single mobile or manufactured home unit, or travel trailer may be used for an office by the developer, except in a residential subdivision, for temporary residence during construction of a permanent residence or for other special purposes for a period not to exceed six months upon written approval from the building inspector. 
9.1.6  Nonconformance. Any travel trailer or mobile or manufactured home which does not meet the requirements in the above paragraphs shall be removed after receipt of notice of its nonconformance from the building inspector. 
9.1.7  Manufactured home subdivisions. Manufactured home subdivisions hereafter developed or expanded shall comply with the following requirements: 
9.1.7.1 Any manufactured home subdivision shall comply with the requirements of the City of Union Point Subdivision Regulations and shall have the approval of the mayor and council. 
9.1.7.2 No manufactured home subdivision shall be developed on a site of less than ten acres. 
9.1.7.3 No more than one residence shall be permitted on each lot. 
9.1.7.4 All manufactured homes located within the subdivision shall be blocked and tied down according to manufacturer's specifications and shall have a curtain wall of brick or masonry construction. 
9.1.7.5 All manufactured homes located within the subdivision shall comply with the requirements numbered 1 [9.1.3.1] and 2 [9.1.3.2] as specified in section 9.1.3 of this ordinance. 
9.1.7.6 All residences, other than on-site built houses, located within the subdivision shall bear the H.U.D. seal or the Georgia D.C.A. seal, and the overall appearance shall be such as will not detract from the overall appearance of the subdivision. 
9.1.7.7 Tie downs: All manufactured homes placed in Union Point, Georgia at or after the adoption of this ordinance shall have tie downs with provisions for distributing the load of these tie downs and provisions for the attachment to ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding as imposed by the respective design loads of this section. 
(a)  Each tie down shall be designed to resist an allowable working load equal to or exceeding 3,150 pounds and shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload without failure. 
(b)  Unless the tie down system is designed by a registered professional engineer or architect, tie downs shall be placed as follows: not more than 24 feet on center beginning from the front wall (first stud and/or first cross member). Not more than six feet open-end spacing shall be provided at the rear wall of the mobile or manufactured home unless additional tie downs are installed. 
(c)  Provisions for diagonal ties between ground anchors and the manufactured home shall be made in conjunction with each vertical tie down. 
(d)  Tie downs exposed to weathering shall be resistant to weathering deterioration at least equivalent to that provided by a coating of zinc on steel of not less than 0.30 ounces per square foot of surface coated. Type 1, Class B, Grade 1, steel strapping 1¼ inches wide and 0.035 inches thick, conforming with federal specification QQ-S-781-F, is judged to conform with this section. 
9.1.7.8 Ground anchors shall be installed at each manufactured home stand or pad when a mobile or manufactured home is located thereon, pursuant to the following requirements: 
(a)  Each ground anchor shall be capable of resisting an allowable working load equal to or exceeding 3,150 pounds applied in the direction of the tie down. In addition, each ground anchor shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload without failure. 
(b)  Ground anchors shall be resistant to weathering deterioration at least equivalent to that provided by a coating of zinc on steel strapping of not less than 0.30 ounces per square foot of surface coated. 
Sec. 9.2. - Townhouses, condominiums, apartments, and multifamily dwellings. 
9.2.1  Townhouses and condominiums. 
9.2.1.1 No more than six or fewer than three continuous townhouses or condominiums shall be built in a row with approximately the same front line. Density shall not exceed eight units per acre. 
9.2.1.2 No side or rear yard as such is required in connection with any townhouse or condominium, except that the front yard shall be no less than 20 feet in depth from the street right-of-way of a minor or local residential street, including cul-de-sacs, and where the parking is not directly in front of each dwelling unit. If the parking for the dwelling unit is in front of said dwelling unit, front setback from the centerline of the street shall conform to article VIII. Corner lots shall have the same side yard as established in article VIII, and the end buildings in any townhouse or condominium grouping shall conform to the side yard requirements of that district. Each townhouse shall have its own lot yard, private and reasonably secluded from view from the streets or from neighboring property. Such yard shall not be used for any accessory building. 
9.2.1.3 No more than 50 percent of the lot area shall be occupied by buildings. 
9.2.1.4 Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks; and no off-street parking space shall be more than 50 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it intends to serve. 
9.2.1.5 All townhouse or condominium complexes shall be required to tie into the public sanitary sewer system. No other means of waste disposal shall be permitted or authorized. 
9.2.1.6 All other requirements within the district in which the townhouses are located shall prevail. 
9.2.1.7 All townhouse or condominium complexes shall be approved by the City of Union Point. 
9.2.1.8 Any development must contain a minimum of three acres. 
9.2.1.9 Useable open space must be provided at a ratio of one-third the minimum space requirements for each dwelling unit. Said space must be collectively provided within the development area. 
9.2.1.10 A 20-foot-wide densely planted buffer strip which will attain a height of 20 feet is provided between the structure and abutting properties. 
9.2.2  Apartments and multifamily dwellings. 
9.2.2.1 Apartments and multifamily dwellings arranged in cluster type developments shall meet the density requirements of article VIII. 
9.2.2.2 All parking shall be off-street parking and shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to the street or in interior of blocks; and an off-street parking space shall not be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it intends to serve. 
9.2.2.3 All streets, drives or alleys in the development shall have a pavement width of 20 feet, and have a bituminous or concrete or asphalt surface. 
9.2.2.4 Minimum building setback shall be the minimum setback for the zone in which the apartments are located provided that in no case shall it be less than 25 feet. 
9.2.2.5 All other requirements within the districts in which the apartments and multifamily dwellings are located shall prevail. 
9.2.2.6 All apartments and multifamily dwellings shall be required to tie into the public sanitary sewer and water system. No other method of waste disposal shall be authorized or permitted. 
9.2.2.7 All apartment and multifamily dwellings shall be approved by the City of Union Point. 
9.2.2.8 Apartments shall meet the requirement of sections 9.2.1.7 through 9.2.1.10. 
Sec. 9.3. - Accessory and temporary buildings. 
9.3.1  Accessory buildings. The location of accessory buildings and uses in residential districts must meet the following requirements: 
9.3.1.1 Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof, and therefore meet requirements applicable to the main building. 
9.3.1.2 A detached accessory building shall not be closer than 20 feet to the main building, nor closer than five feet to the lot line. 
9.3.1.3 A detached accessory building shall not be more than two stories in height, and shall not be constructed on more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
9.3.1.4 No detached accessory building may be located on the front yard of a lot. 
9.3.1.5 Mobile or manufactured homes shall not be used as accessory buildings in any district. 
9.3.2  Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district provided that no temporary building shall be used for a residential purpose and said building shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
Sec. 9.4. - Fallout shelters. 
Fallout shelters are permissible as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the following conditions: 
9.4.1 If any portion of the structure extends above the ground, that portion above the ground must comply with the yard and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the building inspector. 
9.4.2 If the structure is completely underground, it need not comply with yard requirements or percentage of lot coverage requirements. 
9.4.3 A fallout shelter, underground to above ground, shall be confined to a side or rear yard and shall not be located in the front yard between the main building and street on which it fronts. 
9.4.4 Fallout shelters may contain or be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately. 
9.4.5 Fallout shelters may be used for any permissible use in the district where situated. 
Sec. 9.5. - Home occupation. 
9.5.1  Special requirements. Home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
9.5.1.1 The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the home occupation is to be located, or must have written approval of the owner of the property if the applicant is a tenant. 
9.5.1.2 The home occupation shall be operated only by the members of the family residing on the premises and no article or service shall be sold or offered for sale except as may be produced by members of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
9.5.1.3 The home occupation shall be restricted to the main building only and shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area within said building. 
9.5.1.4 The home occupation shall not generate excessive traffic or produce obnoxious odors, glare, noise, vibration, electrical disturbance, or radioactivity, or other conditions detrimental to the character of the surrounding area. 
9.5.1.5 The building in which the home occupation is to be located must be an existing structure ready for occupancy and not a proposed structure. 
9.5.1.6 Any business sign placed on the premises shall not be larger than two square feet in sign area. 
9.5.1.7 Only professional or personal services shall be rendered. 
9.5.1.8 No stock in trade or commodities shall be sold on the premises. 
9.5.1.9 The dwelling shall not be extended to permit home occupation. 
9.5.2.0 [9.5.2.10] The entrance to the home occupation portion of the dwelling shall not be through a new outside entrance. 
9.5.2  Expiration. A permit for home occupation shall expire under the following conditions: 
9.5.2.1 Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation was issued, no subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation until he/she shall has [have] been issued a new permit after proper application. 
9.5.2.2 Whenever the holder of such a permit fails to exercise the same for any period of six consecutive months. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 9.6. - Automobile service stations. 
Within the districts permitting automobile service stations, the following requirements shall apply: 
9.6.1  Location. The property on which an automobile service station is located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district, or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, institution for children or dependents. 
9.6.2  Site requirements. An automobile service station shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of 120 feet and a minimum area of 12,000 square feet. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from all street right-of-way lines and all canopies shall be set back 15 feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
9.6.3  Access to site. Vehicular entrances or exits at an automobile service station: 
9.6.3.1 Shall not be provided with more than two curb cuts for the first 120 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 
9.6.3.2 Shall contain an access width along the curb line of the street of not more than 40 feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and shall not be located closer than 20 feet to a street intersection or ten feet to the adjoining property. 
9.6.3.3 Shall not have any two driveways any closer than 20 feet at both the right-of-way line and the edge of the pavement along a single street. 
9.6.4  Gasoline pump islands. All gasoline pump islands shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line, and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line, the pumps shall be at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of an arterial street, 55 feet from the right-of-way line of a collector street, and 45 feet from the right-of-way line of other streets. 
9.6.5  Off-street parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces are required with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 
9.6.6  Other site improvements. In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
9.6.6.1 A raised curb of at least six inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines, except for driveway openings. 
9.6.6.2 A solid fence or wall six feet in height shall be erected along all adjacent property lines facing any adjacent residential lot. 
9.6.6.3 Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and streets. 
9.6.6.4 Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within the public right-of-way and shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
9.6.6.5 All drives, parking storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
9.6.7  Storage of inflammable products. Outside above ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil or other inflammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any automobile service station in all zoning districts. All used motor oil shall be stored in underground tanks. 
Sec. 9.7. - Signs. 
The provisions of this section shall govern the location, size, setback and height of signs in each of the use districts established in this ordinance in order to insure safe construction, light, air and open space, to reduce hazards at intersections, to prevent the accumulation of trash, and to protect property values of the entire community. In addition, the provisions set forth in the building code adopted by the mayor and council, including all revisions and amendments thereto, shall also be adhered to. 
9.7.1  General provisions. 
9.7.1.1 All types of signs, except outdoor advertising signs, shall be allowed in all zoning districts without a permit. 
9.7.1.2 All outdoor advertising signs shall be subject to the same side yard and height limitations imposed upon other buildings or structures in the use district in which said sign is located, except as otherwise provided herein. 
9.7.1.3 For the purpose of computing sign area only one side of a "V-type" or double faced outdoor advertising sign shall be considered. 
9.7.1.4 Rooftop outdoor advertising signs or sign structures shall not extend more than 30 feet above the roof line. Rooftop outdoor advertising signs or sign structures shall not extend beyond or overhang any exterior wall of the building upon which secured. 
9.7.1.5 No outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be located in such a manner as to materially impede the view of any street or highway with a railroad grade crossing. 
9.7.1.6 No outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window, or fire escape. 
9.7.1.7 No portion of any outdoor advertising sign shall be less than ten feet above the level of a sidewalk or other pedestrian thoroughfare, nor shall be less than 16 feet above the level of a public driveway, alley or street. 
9.7.1.8 Within the C-1 and C-2 districts, no building owner, lessor, or owner's agent shall display more than one sign per storefront which contains substantially the same message. Total signage per storefront wall area cannot exceed ten percent of the storefront wall area. The percentage figure means the percentage of the area of the wall of which such sign is a part or to which each such sign is most nearly parallel. 
9.7.1.9 Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted signage for each street frontage, but signage cannot be accumulated and used on one street in excess of that allowed for lots with only one street frontage. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995(1)) 
9.7.2  Outdoor advertising signs as permitted uses. Outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted in the following classification districts provided the specified requirements are adhered to. However, no outdoor advertising sign shall be placed in the right-of-way. 
9.7.3[2].1 R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3. 
(a)  Unilluminated real estate sales and lease signs in all but single-family dwelling districts must be removed at the owner's expense within 30 days of lease or sale. Such signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, and such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area. 
(b)  Unilluminated real estate sales signs in single-family dwelling districts must be removed at the owner's expense within 30 days of the lease or sale. Such signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage and shall not exceed 16 square feet in area along state or federal highways, or six square feet where adjacent to all other streets. Subdivisions in which fewer than 80 percent of the lots have been sold shall be entitled to one such 16-square-foot sign per access-providing street. 
(c)  No outdoor advertising signs, with the exception of 9.7.3[2].1(a) and (b), shall be permitted in a residential district. 
9.7.2.2 C-1, C-2, commercial districts. One outdoor advertising sign for each lot of 100 feet or less of lot frontage with one additional sign for each additional 100 feet or less of lot frontage under single ownership at the time of the passage of this ordinance, provided said sign does not exceed 400 square feet in area per structure facing. Where there are two signs, each not exceeding 300 square feet in area per structure facing, supported by the same sign structure, one above the other, they shall be considered as a single outdoor advertising sign. 
9.7.3[2].3 M-1 wholesale and light industrial district. One outdoor advertising sign for each lot of 75 feet or less of lot frontage with one additional sign for each additional 75 feet or less of lot frontage under single ownership at the time of the passage of this ordinance, provided said sign shall not exceed 400 square feet in area per structure facing. Where signs, each not exceeding 300 square feet in area per structure facing, are supported by the same sign structure, one above the other, they shall be considered as a single outdoor advertising sign. 
9.7.3[2].4 Manufactured home subdivision. One identification sign per street frontage not to exceed 60 square feet shall be permitted for each entrance to the mobile or manufactured home subdivision. No other outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted. 
[9.7.3  Reserved. ] 
9.7.4  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all use districts: 
9.7.4.1 Any sign erected or painted upon a sloping roof, fence, tree, stand-pipe, fire escape or utility pole. 
9.7.4.2 Any sign which uses the word "Stop" or "Danger" prominently displayed and/or which is a copy or imitation of official traffic control signs. 
9.7.4.3 No flashing, blinking, fluctuating, or otherwise animated sign shall be permitted within 150 feet of a public right-of-way. Any sign which contains flashing or intermittent red, green or amber illumination (excluding official traffic control devices) shall be strictly prohibited. 
9.7.4.4 Flags (not meeting the requirements of section 9.7.2), banners, balloons, streamers, air or gas filled figures shall be prohibited, except that conforming businesses may exhibit such signs announcing a grand opening for a new business for no more than one 14-day period. This applies to any business under one ownership unless a new location or branch facility is established. 
9.7.4.5 Twirling, sandwich-type, sidewalk or curb-type signs, and portable displays. 
9.7.4.6 No series, lines or rows of electric, neon, or other lights shall be installed, whether supported by cables or other physical means, within a distance of 115 feet of a public right-of-way. 
9.7.4.7 No sign shall exceed the height limitation of the zone in which it is located except by special use permit. 
9.7.4.8 No signs other than those belonging to local state governments, public service agencies, railroads and the like shall be located in a public right-of-way or on utility poles. 
9.7.4.9 Any sign not specifically provided for in this ordinance shall be deemed unlawful. 
9.7.4.10 No sign shall be erected on any property which advertises or relates to any business or activity other than that business or activity which is located on the premises where such sign is erected. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1999) 
9.7.5  Maintenance and removal of outdoor advertising signs. 
9.7.5.1 All outdoor advertising signs and sign structures shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation. All unsafe signs must adhere to the provision of the building code adopted by the mayor and council, including all revisions and amendments thereto. 
9.7.5.2 Outdoor advertising signs which are no longer functional, or are abandoned, shall be removed or relocated, at the owner's expense, in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance within 30 days following dysfunction. 
9.7.5.3 Any legally established nonconforming outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be permitted without alteration in size or location, provided that the requirements of section 6.1 of this ordinance are adhered to and provided that nothing herein shall prevent maintenance, repairing, or posting of legally established nonconforming signs. 
9.7.5.4 In the event of the destruction, partial or complete, of an outdoor advertising sign, the owner thereof shall have the right to reconstruct, rebuild, renovate, or repair said sign substantially to the same condition as before said destruction, provided the provisions in section 6.1 of this ordinance are adhered to. 
Sec. 9.8. - Cemeteries. 
Within the districts permitting cemeteries, the following requirements shall apply: 
9.8.1 The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare. 
9.8.2 Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 20 acres. 
9.8.3 All structures shall be set back no less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
9.8.4 All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway or freeway right-of-way line. 
9.8.5 The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 
Cross reference— Cemeteries, ch. 26. 
ARTICLE X. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 10.1. - Existing lots and variances. 
Where the owner of a plot of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots of record at the time of the enactment of this ordinance did not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this ordinance; or if the topography, physical shape, or other unique features of such lots of record prevent reasonable compliance with the setback used as a building site upon approval of the building inspector, the yard and other space requirements of the district in which the property is located may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit reasonable uses of the property as a building site. Such reduction of these space requirements shall constitute a variance. However, in no case shall the building inspector permit any lot in a residential district to be used as a building site which is less than 75 percent of the district's minimum area and yard requirements as set forth in article VIII of this ordinance. Further, the building inspector shall grant variances only upon finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
*  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
*  The application of this ordinance to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
*  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this ordinance; and 
*  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property; and 
*  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; and 
*  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which is not permitted [by] right or by conditional use permit in the district involved. 
Upon approval of the mayor and council of the City of Union Point the minimum side yard and rear yard requirements of the district in which the property is located may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit reasonable uses of the property as a building site. However, in no case shall the mayor and city council of the City of Union Point permit any lot in a residential district to be used as a building site which is less than 75 percent of the district's minimum area or front yard requirements or 33 percent of the district's minimum side and rear yard requirements. Further, the mayor and city council shall grant variances only upon finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
*  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
*  The application of this ordinance to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
*  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this ordinance; and 
*  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property; and 
*  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; and 
*  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which is not permitted [by] right or by conditional use permit in the district involved. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 10.2. - Front yard setback of dwellings. 
The front yard setback requirement of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings is located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setbacks of the adjoining buildings. In no case shall the setback be less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way upon which said lot fronts. 
Sec. 10.3. - Height limits. 
The height limits of this ordinance shall not apply to structures not intended for human occupancy such as church spires, flag poles, chimneys, monuments, radio or television towers or aerials, water towers or similar structures. The height limits shall apply to signs. 
Sec. 10.4. - Corner lots. 
The side yard setback requirements for corner lots shall be the same as the front yard requirement for adjoining lots on the same street. 
Sec. 10.5. - Vision clearance. 
In all use districts except the C-1 neighborhood commercial, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of 2½ feet and 15 feet above the finished grade of streets shall be erected, permitted or maintained within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way lines of streets or of streets and railroads. 
Sec. 10.6. - Access to public streets. 
Access to public streets shall be maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
10.6.1 Each principal use shall be located on a lot or parcel which provides frontage on a public street having a right-of-way of not less than 50 feet. 
10.6.2 Any additional dwelling shall have access to a public street by means of a passageway open to the sky at least 15 feet in width. 
Sec. 10.7. - Conditional use. 
Conditional uses shall be permitted in those districts herein provided, where such use is deemed to be in harmony with the overall pattern of development of the area in which it is proposed and where such use shall not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use, and where it will not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood. 
Proposed conditional uses shall be approved by the mayor and council, following an advertised public hearing, where the mayor and council find that: 
1.  Adequate provision will be made on the proposed site for setbacks, fences, screening, or other improvements to protect adjacent properties from possible adverse effects, such as glare, noise, dust, vibration, odor, electrical disturbances, or similar factors. 
2.  Vehicular and pedestrian traffic on adjacent streets will not be hindered or endangered. 
3.  Off-street parking and loading and the exits and entrances of the proposed use will be adequate in terms of location amount, and design to serve the use. 
4.  Adequate public facilities are available to the site. 
5.  The proposed use will not adversely affect the property values or general character of the area. 
Sec. 10.8. - Development of regional impact. 
For new developments proposed within the city which meet or exceed the minimum thresholds identified in the department of community affairs' procedures and guidelines for the review of development of regional impact (DRI), the city will comply with these intergovernmental review procedures. The city shall be allowed up to a maximum of 30 days to complete the review process for large development projects that are likely to create impacts in other local jurisdictions. The city will not take any official action to further any such developments until the DRI review process is completed or a maximum of 30 days has transpired from the date the completed DRI request for review form was forwarded [to] the Northeast Georgia Regional Development Center. 
ARTICLE XI. - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 11.1. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector. The building inspector's duties shall include (a) applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy; (b) issuing building permits and certificates of occupancy; (c) inspecting premises for compliance with the terms of this ordinance; and (d) notifying the owner of any violation. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 11.2. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any building to be located, erected, moved, added to or structurally altered in excess of $500.00 building or alteration cost without obtaining a building permit issued by the building inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 11.3. - Application for building permit. 
All applications to the building inspector for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth of an inch equal to one foot, showing: 
11.3.1 The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
11.3.2 The street(s) which abut the property; 
11.3.3 The size of the building on the lot; 
11.3.4 The location of the building on the lot; 
11.3.5 The location of existing structures on the lot, if any; 
11.3.6 The existing or proposed use of each building or part of the building; 
11.3.7 The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots; 
11.3.8 The layout of off-street parking and loading space; and 
11.3.9 Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. 
One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner or agent when such plans shall have been approved by the building inspector. The lot and location of the building thereon shall be staked out on the ground and approved by the building inspector before starting any construction. 
If the proposed excavation, filling or construction as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and other ordinances of the city then in force, the building inspector shall issue a building permit upon payment of the required fee. 
If a building permit is refused, the building inspector shall state the cause of the refusal in writing within three working days after such refusal. Construction shall be started within six months from the date of issuance of the building permit or the permit shall be revoked. Record of application and plats or plans shall be kept by the building inspector. 
Sec. 11.4. - Construction progress. 
Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by the permit shall have been commenced within six months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
Sec. 11.5 - Certificate of occupancy required. 
A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
[1]  A building hereafter erected; 
[2]  A building hereafter altered so as to affect the front, side or rear yards thereof or its height; 
[3]  A building or premises in which there is a change of use; 
[4]  A building moved from one location to a second location where that building will house persons or property. 
[5]  A building which has not been occupied within the preceding 12 months; or 
[6]  Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance or an amendment thereto that is changed, extended, altered, or rebuilt thereafter. The certificate of occupancy shall state specifically where the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of the ordinance. 
Within three working days after the application for a certificate of occupancy, a final inspection of the property in question shall be made. 
The building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the building is found to conform to the provisions of this ordinance and if the final construction complied with the plans submitted for the building permit. 
A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
Sec. 11.6. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense according to law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered as a separate offense. 
Sec. 11.7. - Remedies. 
In the event any building is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the building inspector, or any appropriate town [city] authority or any person who would be damaged by such violation may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each building or land use. 
Sec. 11.8. - Inspections. 
The building inspector has the power to make inspections of buildings (their construction and use) and the land (its use development and subdivision) to determine if they conform to the requirements of this ordinance. If the building inspector shall determine that any such building or land does not conform to this ordinance, he/she shall notify the owner thereof in writing of the manner in which such building or land does not conform and the owner shall have 60 days in which to remedy the conditions therein specified; provided, however, that the building inspector may, at his/her discretion, extend the time for compliance with any such notice. 
ARTICLE XII. - APPEAL PROCEDURES 
This article is established to identify the procedure whereby any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the building inspector. 

Sec. 12.1. - Appeal to the city attorney. 
Any party aggrieved because of the alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector in enforcement of this ordinance may appeal in writing to the city clerk for a hearing by the city attorney for an interpretation. The city attorney may, in conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector. 
Sec. 12.2. - Appeal from the city attorney. 
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the city attorney may seek review of such decision by a court of record, as provided by law. If the action is not taken within 30 days, the city attorney's decision shall be final. 
Sec. 12.3. - Public hearings. 
The city attorney shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it, and give public notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Union Point, at least 15 and no more than 45 days before the hearing. Upon a hearing, all parties shall appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
Sec. 12.4. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal to the city attorney stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies to the city attorney after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him/her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. 
ARTICLE XIII. - AMENDMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— App. A, Art. XVI, policies and procedures to govern the calling and conducting of a zoning hearing 

Sec. 13.1. - Amendment procedure and jurisdiction. 
This Ordinance, including the Official Zoning Map of Union Point, Georgia approved April 13, 1993, as amended, may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council, but no rezoning or amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first submitted to the Union Point mayor and council for review pursuant to the polices and procedures to govern the calling and conducting of a zoning hearing, as adopted by the Union Point mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § I; Amend. of 4-10-2007, § 1) 
Editor's note— The Amend. of 4-10-2007, § 1, changed the title of § 13.1 from amendment procedure jurisdiction to amendment procedure and jurisdiction. 
Sec. 13.2. - Request for amendment or rezoning. 
All requests for amendment or rezoning shall be heard subject to the hereinbelow policies and procedures to govern the calling and conducting of a zoning hearing. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § II; Amend. of 4-10-2007, § 2) 
ARTICLE XIV. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST IN ZONING DECISIONS 

Sec. 14.1. - Disclosure of financial interests. 
A city official who: 
(1)  Has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action upon which that official's local government will have the duty to consider; 
(2)  Has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action upon which that official's local government will have the duty to consider; or 
(3)  Has a member of the family having any interest described in paragraph (1) or (2) of this section, 
shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the mayor and council. The city official who has an interest as defined in paragraph (1) or (2) of section 14.1 of this ordinance shall disqualify himself from voting on the rezoning action. The disqualified city official shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or any other person to influence action on the application for rezoning. Disclosures provided for in the section shall be a public record and available for public inspection at any time during normal working hours. 
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15.1. - Conflict with other laws. 
When the regulations of this ordinance impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any statute of other legal document, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. When the provisions of any statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
Sec. 15.2. - Separability. 
If any portion or provision of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect any other portion of this ordinance. 
Sec. 15.3. - Repeal of conflicting regulations. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are herewith repealed. 
Sec. 15.4. - Legal form and sufficiency. 
"This document has been approved as to its legal form and sufficiency." ____________ City Attorney 
Sec. 15.5. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and shall be in force from and after the 13th day of April, 1993. 
Adopted and approved by the mayor and council after a public hearing on the 13th day of April, 1993. 
ARTICLE XVI. - POLICIES AND PROCEDURES TO GOVERN THE CALLING AND CONDUCTING OF A ZONING HEARING 

Sec. 16.1. - Amendment procedure jurisdiction. 
The Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map of Union Point, Georgia may be amended for time to time by the mayor and council pursuant to the policies and procedures set out herein. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(2), § 1) 
Sec. 16.2. - Definitions. 
When used in these policies and procedures, words and phrases shall have the meaning given pursuant to Article III of the "Zoning Ordinance for the City of Union Point, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(2), § 2) 
Sec. 16.3. - Application for map or text amendment (rezoning application). 
An application for amendment must be filed with the city clerk no later than 45 days prior to the date on which the application will be heard by the mayor and council and all fees shall be paid at the time of filing. An application for amendment must contain the following information: 
(1)  A survey of the property prepared by a licensed surveyor showing existing and proposed structures and uses, access drives, easements, utilities, buffers, and existing zoning; 
(2)  Current zoning of the subject property and a description of suitability for development under existing and proposed zoning and a description of all existing uses and structures; 
(3)  A statement of intent explaining in detail the requested change, the proposed use, and any special or unusual parts of the request; 
(4)  The duration of vacancy or non-use if the property is unused at the time the application is submitted; 
(5)  Any other supporting documentation reasonably required by the Union Point city clerk to assist the mayor and council in rendering a decision, including a site plan drawn to scale showing the proposed use, including at a minimum information on proposed improvements, including parking and traffic circulation, areas of required landscaping, stormwater, detention structures, amenities, buildings, and buffers; 
(6)  For any applications for commercial or industrial uses, the site plan shall also identify the square footage of structures, the square footage of landscaped area, the maximum height of any structure, the square footage of parking and drive areas, and the proposed number of parking spaces, landscaping and buffers, and stormwater retention structures; 
(7)  For any application for single-family residential uses, the site plan shall also identify the number of residential dwelling units, the height of any structure, the square footage of landscaped area, the square footage of structures, and the proposed number of parking spaces; 
(8)  For any application for multi-family residential uses, the site plan shall identify the details in the foregoing paragraph plus shall also identify the location of amenities and buffer areas; 
(9)  A list of adjoining property owners as shown on the tax rolls, and current zoning of the adjoining properties, and description of all existing uses of adjoining properties; 
(10)  A statement explaining why the subject property is not suitable for development under existing zoning, as well as an explanation of the hardship which will result if the amendment is not granted; 
(11)  Any relevant additional information the applicant or the city clerk reasonably believes to be pertinent; 
(12)  Additionally, the applicant, if other than the City of Union Point, must pay the standard application fee, as determined by the Union Point City Council, to cover the administrative and advertising costs of the application and sign a statement certifying he/she or the owner represented by the applicant has at least a 51 percent ownership interest in the property; 
(13)  Incomplete applications will not be processed. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(2), § 3; Amend. of 4-10-2007, § 3) 
Editor's note— Amend. of 4-10-2007, § 3, changed the title of § 16.3 from application for amendment (rezoning application) to application for map or text amendment (rezoning application). 
Sec. 16.4. - Application analysis. 
The city clerk shall present the application and all its supporting documents, along with a written analysis of the requested zoning's impact on the zoning standards, to the mayor and council at its advertised public hearing. The written analysis shall show that the city clerk has considered the proposed change in relation to the applicable zoning standards in section 16.6. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(2), § 4; Amend. of 4-10-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 16.5. - Public hearing, procedures, and rezoning standards. 
a.  Public hearing required. Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, one public hearing must be held by the mayor and council. 
b.  Applicant notification. The city clerk must notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearing. 
c.  Publication of notice. Not less than 15 days, and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the city clerk shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Union Point. The notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
d.  Sign. In addition to the newspaper notice, not more than 45 days and not less than 15 days prior to the mayor and council's public hearing, the city clerk shall have posted in a conspicuous place on the lot or parcel to be rezoned or which will be utilized under a requested text amendment, one or more signs, which shall provide adequate notice of the zoning action. 
e.  Hearing. A public hearing of the mayor and council shall be conducted by the city clerk. Such hearing shall be governed by the following sections, which are adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5(a). 
f.  Administrative record. Minutes of the meeting will be taken by the city clerk or his/her delegate. A complete tape recording of a public hearing may be requested and will be available at the expense of a party making a timely request. 
g.  Call to order and summarize requirements. The public hearing shall be called to order by the presiding officer, who shall summarize the requirements as to speakers' conduct and time limits, and other matters of procedure. 
h.  Report. The city clerk shall present the application and all its supporting documents, along with a written analysis of the requested zoning's impact on the zoning standards. 
i.  Speakers' conduct. All speakers shall speak only from the podium, shall address only the merits of the pending application, and shall address remarks only to the mayor and council. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker, any discussion irrelevant to the pending application, or any other inappropriate behavior. No debate or argument between speakers or with council members will be allowed. Speakers shall not repeat previous comments, as repetition deprives other speakers of valuable time to provide new information. The presiding officer or his/her designee shall refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after once being cautioned, continues to violate any section of this ordinance. Speakers should provide supporting documentation prior to the date of the hearing. Speakers shall sign the speaker list prior to the hearing. 
j.  Applicant's initial presentation. The applicant or applicant's representative shall present and explain the application after being permitted to proceed. The applicant will be allowed not less than ten minutes combined total to make an initial presentation and subsequent rebuttal, but the applicant and all supporters shall have a combined time limit of no more than 15 minutes. 
k.  Other interested parties. After the applicant's presentation, interested persons who support the application, after being permitted to speak by the presiding officer, may address the proposed application by standing and stating their name, address, and interest and any comments on the pending application. Persons other than the applicant who support the application are allowed to speak in support of the pending application for no more than two minutes each, and are also subject to the 15 minute combined total time limit. 
l.  Opponents. Persons opposing an application are allowed at least ten minutes total as a group (and in no event less than the combined time used by the applicant and supporters), to address their opposition to the application. The opponents shall have a combined total time limit of no more than 15 minutes. It is suggested that supporters and opponents each obtain one spokesperson to present their views. No individual except the applicant, or an attorney, or a designated representative of a group, shall speak longer than two minutes or more than one time. 
m.  Applicant's summary. The applicant may make brief summary remarks using any reserved time, after which the presiding officer shall close the public hearing. 
n.  Withdrawal. If an application for amendment to the zoning ordinance or official zoning map is withdrawn in writing by the applicant at any time after the publication of the newspaper notice and posting of the required sign but prior to a decision by the mayor and council, then the same property or application may be not considered for zoning by the mayor and council until the expiration of at least 60 days immediately following the withdrawal of the rezoning application. The withdrawal must be in writing and signed by the applicant. The application will be considered to have been withdrawn if the applicant, his/her authorized agent or his/her attorney fails to appear at the mayor and council's hearing. By withdrawing in this manner, the same property or application may not be considered by the mayor and council until the expiration of at least 60 days from the date of the scheduled public hearing for which the applicant failed to appear. 
o.  Mayor and council action. The mayor and council shall review the record, consider the zoning amendment criteria of section 16.6, and vote on the application. The mayor and council may approve, approve with conditions, table for further action, or deny the application. Within seven days of its decision, the city clerk shall so notify the applicant in writing. 
p.  Denial. If the zoning ordinance amendment or official zoning map amendment is denied by the mayor and council, then the same property may not be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the rezoning. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(2), § 5; Amend. of 4-10-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 16.6. - Zoning amendment criteria. 
In the adoption of a zoning ordinance, an amendment to an existing zoning ordinance or amendment to the official zoning map, the mayor and council shall consider factors relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morals or general welfare against the individual's use of property and must specifically consider the following factors as they may be relevant to the application: 
1.  The existing land use pattern; 
2.  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
3.  The population density pattern and possible increase or over-taxing of the load on public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets; 
4.  The cost to governmental entities in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and other public safety measures; 
5.  The possible impact on the environment, including but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality; 
6.  Whether the proposed zoning map amendment will be a deterrent to the value or improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
7.  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing regulations; 
8.  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
9.  The extent to which the proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
10.  The possible effect of the proposed zoning map amendment on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community; 
11.  The relation that the proposed zoning map amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme, with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of these zoning regulations; 
12.  The consideration of the preservation of the integrity of residential neighborhoods shall be considered to carry great weight; 
13.  In those instances in which property fronts on a major thoroughfare and also adjoins an established residential neighborhood, the factor of preservation of the residential area shall be considered to carry great weight. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(2), § 6; Amend. of 4-10-2007, § 3) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code. Ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 