CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF DOUGLAS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted September 13, 1993  Effective June 14, 1993 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DOUGLAS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Derward Buchan 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ronnie Anderson 
Art Davis, Sr. 
Elisha Harrell 
Clinton Lott, Jr.  Robert "Bob" Moore  Johnnie Lee Roper 
City Commission 
____________ 
W. Danny Lewis 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jerome Adams 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Hayvene McFall 
City Clerk-Treasurer 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DOUGLAS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
James H. Dennis 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ronnie Anderson 
Dennis Josey 
Olivia C. Pearson 
Marty Swain  Robert "Bob" Moore  Richard Hutchinson 
City Commission 
____________ 
Terrell Jacobs 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jerome Adams 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Wynetta J. Bolder 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1978 Code, as supplemented through April 24, 1989, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1978 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. W. Danny Lewis, City Manager, Mr. Jerome Adams, City Attorney, and Ms. Hayvene McFall, City Clerk-Treasurer, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
Adopting Ordinance  Ordinance No. 09-13.1-93 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Douglas; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Commission of the City: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Douglas, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 27, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 27, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective June 14, 1993. 
Passed and adopted by the City of Douglas this 13th day of September, 1993. 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city commission of the City of Douglas of ____________ held on the 13th day of September, 1993. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter for the City of Douglas, Georgia as adopted and set forth in 1993 Ga. Laws, page 4022. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Section number designations of the original act have been retained. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Douglas in Coffee County is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Douglas." References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Douglas. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the official map area at the Douglas, Georgia, City Hall and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Douglas, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the clerk-treasurer shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The city commission may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Section 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures not inconsistent with general law; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governments and entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and parks in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, natural gas, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(20.1)  Telecommunications. The City shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, including cable television services (CATV), to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of consumers and other provides, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the City of Douglas, Georgia, to finance form time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the City. 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Ordinances, rules, and regulations. To make, establish, and adopt such bylaws, ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city commission deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and fire-fighting agency; 
(26)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts or provide direct services for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right of way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(34)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(36)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(37)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvement; 
(38)  Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(39)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(40)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(41)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 12-10.02-01, § 1, 12-10-01) 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.10. - City commission creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city commission to be composed of a mayor and six commission members. The mayor and commission members shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter. 
Section 2.11. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
Beginning with the term of office of the mayor to be elected in 1999, the mayor shall be elected at large and serve for a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months immediately preceding his or her election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of his or her service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. The mayor shall forfeit his or her office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for commission members. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for commission members. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 3855) 
Section 2.12. - Mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote, the city commission shall elect a commission member to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. 
Section 2.13. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city commission; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Vote on matters before the city commission and be counted toward a quorum as any other commission member; and 
(6)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city commission shall by ordinance establish. 
Section 2.14. - City commission members; terms; qualifications. 
Beginning with the terms of office of members of the city commission to be elected in 1999, the members of the city commission shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as commission member unless that person shall have been a resident of the ward he or she seeks to represent for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or commission members; each such person shall continue to reside within the ward he or she is representing during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 3855) 
Section 2.15. - Vacancies; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  In the event that the office of mayor or commission member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city commission or those remaining shall appoint a qualified individual to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such individual. 
(b)  Upon the suspension from office of the mayor or a commission member in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city commission or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and the city commission or those remaining shall appoint a qualified individual to fill the remainder of the unexpired term, if any. 
Section 2.16. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and commission members shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with Chapter 35 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 2.17. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the mixing of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city commission. The mayor or any commission member who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city commission shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city commission, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city commission or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city commission. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any commission member shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive city office or other city employment during the term for which elected. No former mayor and no former commission member shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until after the expiration of the term for which he or she was elected. 
(f)  Penalties for violation of this section are as follows: 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or position; and 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his or her office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Section 2.18. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city commission may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city commission shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.19. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city commission shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
Section 2.20. - Eminent domain. 
The city commission is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public rights of way, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, public buildings, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Section 2.21. - Organizational meetings. 
The city commission shall hold an organizational meeting after each municipal election on or before January 1. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor and the oath of the office shall be administered by the city attorney to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (commission member) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Section 2.22. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city commission shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city commission may be held on call of the mayor or any member of the city commission. Notice of such special meeting shall be served by the city manager or clerk-treasurer on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to commission members shall not be required if the mayor and all commission members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a commission member in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such commission member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city commission shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as fully as reasonably possible 24 hours prior to such meetings. 
Section 2.23. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city commission shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city commission shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 2.24. - Voting. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, four commission members or the mayor and three commission members shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city commission. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city commission shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of four commission members or the mayor and three commission members shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of commission members holding office, then the remaining commission members in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city commission. A vote of a majority of the remaining commission members shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Section 2.25. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Douglas, Georgia, hereby ordains …" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any commission member and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city commission. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city commission in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 2.27 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk-treasurer shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each commission member and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk-treasurer and at such other public places as the city commission may designate. 
Section 2.26. - Effect of ordinances. 
Acts of the city commission which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.27. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city commission may convene on call of the mayor and three commission members or four commission members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four commission members shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 90 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance shall also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.28. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The clerk-treasurer shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the commission. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city commission by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city commission may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Douglas, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city commission. 
(c)  The city commission shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city commission. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city commission shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 2.29. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city commission shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his or her compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications and shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission. Any vacancy in the office of city manager shall be filled by the city commission. 
Section 2.30. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city commission for the administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this charter. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Subject to approval of the city commission, the city manager shall appoint and, when deeming it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove any or all city employees and administrative officers he or she appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  The city manager shall attend all city commission meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but he or she may not vote; 
(4)  The city manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city commission, subject to enforcement by him or her or by officers subject to his or her direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual operating and capital budget to the city commission; 
(6)  The city manager shall prepare and submit to the city commission and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  The city manager shall make such other reports as the city commission may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his or her direction and supervision; 
(8)  The city manager shall keep the city commission fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city commission concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable; and 
(9)  The city manager shall perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city commission. 
Section 2.31. - Commission interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.18 of this charter, the city commission or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the manager, and neither the city commission nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city commission by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each department head or superintendent and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and department heads or superintendents shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a department head or superintendent of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each department head or superintendent shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department or agency. 
(e)  All department heads or superintendents under the supervision of the city manager shall be employed by the city manager with approval of appointment by the city commission. The city manager may suspend or remove any employee under his or her supervision only with approval of the city commission. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city commission shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city commission deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city commission for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city commission, by budgetary measures, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, any member of the city commission can be appointed to the Douglas-Coffee County Industrial Authority as well as any other board, commission or authority created by the city or Georgia General Assembly. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the city commission during a regular or called meeting of the city commission. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Subject to approval by the city commission, each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk-treasurer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02232004.01, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city commission shall appoint a city attorney and shall provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the city commission as directed, shall advise the city commission, city manager, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position of city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk-treasurer. 
Subject to the approval of the city commission, the city manager shall appoint a city clerk-treasurer who shall not be a commission member. The city clerk-treasurer shall: 
(1)  Be custodian of the official city seal; 
(2)  Maintain city commission records required by this charter; 
(3)  Collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city; 
(4)  Enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city; 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager; and 
(6)  Be responsible directly to the city manager. 
Section 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager and personnel director shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city commission for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. 
Section 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
The city commission shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by the city commission. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by the city commission. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city commission. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by the mayor and city commission. 
(d)  Judges shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission. 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $500.00 or 30 days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or as provided by state law or imprisonment for not more than six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Section 4.14. - Appeal and certiorari. 
(a)  A review on a decision of the municipal court, in the case of traffic violations, may be by direct appeal to the superior court, and any bond as may be required to secure the costs of appeal to the Superior Court of Coffee County, Georgia, from the municipal court shall lie as prescribed by law. An appeal to the superior court shall not be a de novo proceeding. 
(b)  The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Coffee County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city commission, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city commission may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Section 5.10. - Election date. 
On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1993, and on that day biennially thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor and six commission members. 
Section 5.11. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city officers and all names of candidates for city officers shall be listed without party designations. 
Section 5.12. - Election by majority. 
The person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 5.13. - Compliance with Election Code. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.14. - Continuation in office. 
The mayor and commission members who are in office on January 1, 1993, shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they are elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Section 5.15. - Notice of candidacy. 
No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or commission member unless such person shall file a written notice with the clerk-treasurer that he or she desires his or her name to be placed on said ballot as a candidate either for mayor or commission member. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or commission member unless such person shall file the above notice within the time provided for in Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." Each person seeking election as a city commissioner shall designate the post for which he or she seeks election at the time of filing of said notice. 
Section 5.16. - Wards designated; ward boundaries. 
(a)  For the purpose of electing members of the city commission, the City of Douglas shall be divided into three wards consisting of two posts each, to be designated as follows: 

 
(b)  An official description of the ward boundaries from which city commissioners are elected shall be maintained in the official map area of the Douglas, Georgia, City Hall. 
Section 5.17. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city commission shall by ordinance prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.18. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, any city commissioner, the city clerk-treasurer, city manager, or other appointed officers, municipal court judges, the city attorney, or board members provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Conviction of a felony; and 
(4)  A change of residency whereby the mayor moves beyond the city limits or a commission member moves beyond the boundaries of the ward he or she was elected to represent. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of four commission members after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city commission, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city commission to the Superior Court of Coffee County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Coffee County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city commission may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city commission in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city commission by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city commission by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city commission by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city commission may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city commission by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. The city commission by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city commission shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city commission shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city commission shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city commission may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.15. - Sewer charges. 
The city commission by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city commission by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city commission by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city commission shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city commission as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
The city commission shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.23. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city commission shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city commission shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 6.24. - Submission of operating budget to city commission. 
On or before a date fixed by the city commission but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city commission a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the mayor may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.25. - Action by city commission on budget. 
(a)  The city commission may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city commission by resolution or ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than first day of July of each year. If the city commission fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city commission adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.26. - Tax levies. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city commission shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city commission by resolution or ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 6.28. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city commission. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing standards; in compliance with the guidelines, as required, of the United States General Accounting Office's "Standards for Auditing Government Organizations, Programs, Activities, and Functions." Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.29. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city commission and such approval is entered in the city commission journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.24 of this charter. 
Section 6.30. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city commission shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.31. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city commission or city manager may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city commission may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city commission may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city commission shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city commission. 
Section 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 30 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Section 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city commission. 
Section 7.14. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 7.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independently of each other. 
Section 7.16. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Douglas in the County of Coffee, approved December 20, 1899 (Ga. L. 1899, p. 177), as amended, is repealed in its entirely and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Section 7.17. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on July 1, 1993. 
Section 7.18. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS/ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location herein of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
ORDINANCES 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter of amendments thereto. The Charter is derived from 1993 Ga. Laws, page 4022. 

 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws of Georgia Acts. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 2; Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; exemplification of municipal minutes and other records, O.C.G.A. § 24-7-21; authority to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Douglas, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1978, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
Board, board of commissioners, city commission, commission or governing body. "Board," "board of commissioners," "city commission," "commission" or "governing body" shall mean the board of commissioners of Douglas, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
City. "City" shall mean the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Charter. "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Code. "Code" shall mean this Code of Ordinances, City of Douglas, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. "Corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the City of Douglas. 
County. Whenever the words "county," "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to Coffee County, Georgia. 
Court. "Court" shall mean the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month, year. "Month" and "year" shall mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Douglas" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. "Person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. "Preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. "Property" includes real and personal property. 
Schedule of fees and charges. "Schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city commission, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the words "state," "the state" or "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. "Street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Writing. "Writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. 
(Code 1978, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1978, § 1-3) 
Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1978, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Douglas, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Douglas, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows: …." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1978, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, unless otherwise provided by state law, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, and by imprisonment in the city or county jail not to exceed six months, and to work on the city streets and public works not exceeding 60 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1978, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Penalty to be imposed in certain criminal and traffic cases and upon violation of bond, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; alternative punishments for violations of municipal ordinances involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); confinement of violators of ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; authorization to impose any punishment up to the maximum specified by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-13. - Technology fee. 
(a)  Any person against whom a fine is imposed by the municipal court of the city, formerly known as the recorder's court of the city, for the violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city or of the laws of the state shall be subject to court costs in the amount of $3.00 per violation. 
(b)  Any person against whom a fine is imposed by the municipal court of the city, formerly known as the recorder's court of the city, for the violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city or of the laws of the state shall be subject to additional costs in the amount of $10.00 per violator to be used for the improvement or enhancement of information technology of the department of police. 
(Ord. No. 07122004.01, § 1, 7-12-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07122004.01, adopted July 12, 2004, did not specify a manner of inclusion of its provisions within the Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 1-13 herein was as the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 34. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative affairs, § 3.10 et seq. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Depositories. 
The depositories for regular funds of the city, excluding funds that are held in connection with sinking funds that have to be deposited in designated banks, shall be deposited in such banks as shall be designated by the board of commissioners. The city clerk-treasurer shall deposit all funds of the city, not otherwise designated, in the bank or banks designated as the depository for that year, on such conditions, as to bond, etc., as may be fixed and directed by the city manager and the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-99) 
Secs. 2-2—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Government structure, § 2.10 et seq. 

Sec. 2-26. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city commission shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the city commission. 
(b)  Meetings shall be at city hall, 224 East Bryan Street, Douglas, Georgia. 
Charter reference— Organizational meetings, § 2.21; regular and special meetings, § 2.22. 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of city council, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-27. - Appointment of departmental advisors; duties. 
At the first meeting in January of each year of the board of commissioners, the mayor shall appoint a commissioner as advisor to each of the city departments. It shall be the duty of the commissioner appointed as advisor to each department to discuss matters of concern from time to time that may arise; discuss such problems and matters that may concern that department with the city manager; and report from time to time to the board of commissioners on the operation of that department and make recommendations in regard to that department. 
(Code 1978, § 2-25) 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.11. 
Sec. 2-28. - Parliamentary procedure. 
The proceedings of the city commission shall be generally governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, so far as applicable and not inconsistent with the special rules of the city commission, the charter and this Code. 
Charter reference— Rules of procedure, § 2.23. 
Sec. 2-29. - Presiding officer. 
(a)  The mayor shall preside at all commission meetings, preserve order and decorum, and shall appoint all committees, unless the commission shall otherwise direct in which case they shall be appointed by ballot. 
(b)  In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside; and in the absence of both, a chairman shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and he shall be vested with all the powers of the mayor or mayor pro tem during their absence. 
(Code 1978, §§ 2-31, 2-32) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of mayor, § 2.13. 
Sec. 2-30. - Reading, correction and approval of minutes. 
At the commencement of each regular meeting the clerk-treasurer shall present the minutes of the last regular meeting and of any special meetings held since the last regular meeting; and when the same have been corrected of any errors, deletions or omissions, they shall be approved by vote of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-31. - Voting on questions. 
All questions shall be put by the mayor, or by the member presiding. The members shall vote by voice, the majority determining all questions, unless otherwise provided. The mayor may, at his discretion, call any member to take the chair, to allow him to address the board or make a motion, and the mayor shall have equal vote with the other commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-34) 
Charter reference— Quorum; voting, § 2.24. 
Sec. 2-32. - Submitting of questions and measures. 
It shall not be necessary to have a second to any motion, resolution, ordinance or question to be voted on, and all such motions, resolutions, ordinances or questions shall be submitted to the board of commissioners by the mayor or presiding officer, when made or submitted by any member of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-33. - Recording vote. 
Whenever it shall be required by any one or more commission members, the yeas and nays shall be recorded. 
(Code 1978, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-34. - Methods of electing. 
All elections shall be by ballots upon request of any member of the board of commissioners; but unless such request is made, elections may be by voice vote. 
(Code 1978, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-35. - Reports and resolutions in writing. 
All reports and resolutions of the board of commissioners, unless for adjournment, must be in writing. 
(Code 1978, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-36. - Interruptions not permitted. 
No interruptions shall be permitted while a member is speaking on such matters as may be before the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-37. - Decision on questions of order; appeal. 
The mayor, or member presiding, shall decide all questions of order, but any member dissatisfied with a decision may appeal to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-38. - Communications to be in writing, referred to committee, advisor, etc. 
Applications, petitions or other communications to the board must be in writing; and in all cases the same must be referred to the proper committee or advisor to the department head before any action is taken thereon, unless the board shall otherwise direct. 
(Code 1978, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-39. - Motion to reconsider matters in minutes of previous meeting. 
Before the minutes of any preceding meeting of the board of commissioners are confirmed, any member may move to reconsider any question, motion, resolution or other matter or thing contained in the minutes of such previous meeting; and if such reconsideration is voted by a majority of the members present, the subject matter of such reconsideration shall be first business in order of disposition. 
(Code 1978, § 2-44) 
Secs. 2-40—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY OFFICIALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Salary of the mayor and board of commissioners. 
The mayor of the City of Douglas shall receive compensation in the amount of $400.00 per month. Each member of the board of commissioners other than the mayor shall be compensated in the amount of $300.00 per month. 
(Ord. No. 05-12.03-97, § 1, 5-12-97) 
Note— This section 2-61 shall become effective January 1, 1998. 
Secs. 2-62—2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City manager, §§ 2.29, 2.30. 

Sec. 2-71. - Qualifications, powers, duties. 
The city manager shall qualify as prescribed by the charter and shall have such powers, duties and responsibilities as are set out in the charter and by action of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-72. - Official bond. 
The city manager, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, shall give bond for the faithful performance of his duties in some bonding company to be approved by the board of commissioners in such amount as the board shall require, the premiums on the bond to be paid by the city. 
(Code 1978, § 2-62) 
Sec. 2-73. - Compensation. 
The salary of the city manager shall be fixed by the board of commissioners and shall be such amount as the board of commissioners may determine and fix from time to time, which salary shall be paid out of the city treasury. 
(Code 1978, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-74. - Power to fix salaries of officers and employees. 
The city manager shall fix the salaries for the ensuing year of all officers of the city to whom salaries are paid. 
(Code 1978, § 2-64) 
Secs. 2-75—2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLERK-TREASURER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk-treasurer, § 3.13. 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 2; discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; disposition of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-86. - Bond. 
The city clerk-treasurer shall give bond in the sum of $50,000.00, conditioned and with security as prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-87. - Attendance, record keeping of board meetings; recording ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk-treasurer to attend all meetings of the board of commissioners; to record regularly and fairly all proceedings of the same in a book to be kept by him for the purpose, and to keep the same properly indexed. He shall also keep a book to be called the ordinance book, in which he shall record all the city ordinances, and all the alterations of, and amendments to, the same hereafter enacted; and shall keep the ordinance book properly indexed. 
(Code 1978, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-88. - Custodian of city seal and records. 
The city clerk-treasurer shall be the custodian of all the records and other papers belonging to the city; shall be responsible for their safekeeping; and shall turn over all books, paper or other property of the city in his hands to the successor in office. 
(Code 1978, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-89. - Depositing funds in depositories. 
The city clerk-treasurer shall deposit all funds belonging to the city and coming into his hands as clerk-treasurer with the official depositories of the city for safekeeping. 
(Code 1978, § 2-98) 
Secs. 2-90—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— City attorney, § 3.12. 

Sec. 2-101. - Designation; term; salary. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by the board of commissioners, for a period of one year beginning July 1 and shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. The commission shall designate the salary to be paid to the city attorney. 
(Code 1978, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-102. - Duties. 
The duties of the city attorney shall be as follows: He shall be the legal advisor of the city manager and the board of commissioners, and have charge of all matters pertaining to the legal business of the city; he shall be entrusted with the preparation of all papers pertaining to such business; he shall attend in person or by deputy to all suits and litigations affecting the city; shall keep full and plain records of all such suits or litigations with all information as to each case; he shall be advised of all accidents, claims or liabilities; shall investigate, collect the evidence, and keep a record of them, and take such action as may be necessary for the city's interest; he shall furnish his opinion when required by the mayor or city manager and, when requested by the mayor or city manager, shall furnish his opinion in writing. He shall also do and perform such other services affecting the city's interest as he may be requested by the mayor, city manager or the board of commissioners. He shall make annual reports of all such matters as may pass through his office, showing the disposition of all cases disposed of and the status of those pending, and turn over to his successor all records, papers and information pertaining to each case. 
(Code 1978, § 2-8) 
Secs. 2-103—2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FINANCE DIRECTOR[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, § 6.10 et seq. 

Sec. 2-116. - Custodian of municipal properties. 
The custodian of municipal properties shall be the finance director. 
(Code 1978, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-117. - Inventory and reports. 
It shall be the duty of the finance director, immediately upon his appointment, to inventory all properties of the city, both real and personal, and make a report thereof, and of the estimated value thereof, and of the condition thereof, to the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-118. - Jurisdiction. 
The finance director shall have full control, subject to the supervision of the city manager, of all properties, both real and personal, of the city, except where such control conflicts with authority heretofore delegated for the control of specific properties, with full authority, in a like manner, to permit or restrict the use thereof under such terms and conditions as to him may seem proper. 
(Code 1978, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-119. - Maintenance of property. 
It shall be the duty of the finance director, subject to the supervision of the city manager, to make all necessary repairs on the properties in his care and custody, or to cause the same to be done, and make all necessary provisions for the maintenance, preservation and protection thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-120. - Turning over properties, etc., to successor. 
It shall be the duty of the finance director, at the expiration of his term of office, to deliver all properties, inventories of property, muniments of title, policies of insurance, and every article and thing belonging to the city, and belonging to the office, to the city manager to be delivered to his successor. 
(Code 1978, § 2-89) 
Sec. 2-121. - Keeping books; preserving orders or warrants. 
The finance director shall keep a systematic set of books and duly and correctly enter, in an itemized manner, all receipts of funds or moneys of the city paid to him by anyone, and in like manner enter an account of all moneys paid out by him. He shall preserve all orders or warrants paid by him as his vouchers. 
(Code 1978, § 2-92) 
Sec. 2-122. - Keeping, receiving and paying out money; separate accounts. 
The finance director shall receive, safely keep, and pay out all money belonging to the city, and keep regular books, accounts and vouchers, showing his receipts and payments of the same, and keep separate accounts of all funds arising for any general or special purpose. 
(Code 1978, § 2-93) 
Sec. 2-123. - Giving receipts; restrictions on paying out funds. 
The finance director shall in all instances give his receipt for all money paid to him to the party paying it and shall not pay out any sum, except on the presentation of a warrant or order drawn on him duly signed by the city manager and the city clerk. He shall state on his receipts the source of such money paid to him, and keep a separate account of the source of all such funds paid to him or disbursed by him. He shall not pay any money to any person who is indebted to the city; but in all such cases the amount of the claim against the city, when properly audited, must be placed as a credit on the indebtedness or claim to such person. 
(Code 1978, § 2-94) 
Sec. 2-124. - Quarterly reports of receipts and disbursements; producing books. 
The finance director shall make out and submit to the board of commissioners and the city manager for their inspection, quarterly reports of his receipts and disbursements, and when required to do so by the city manager or the board of commissioners he shall produce at any meeting of the board, books, accounts and vouchers to be examined by the city manager or the board. His books, accounts and vouchers, at all times, shall be open to the city manager and the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-97) 
Secs. 2-125—2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CITY MARSHAL 

Sec. 2-136. - Code enforcement officer. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby changed the position of City of Douglas Code Enforcement Officer to City of Douglas Marshal Office. 
(b)  Recognition and certification. The City of Douglas Marshals shall do all things necessary in order to be recognized as a law enforcement officer of the state and certified within the standards of the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act (POST ACT), as provided in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. In the event the City of Douglas Marshal Officer is not POST-certified, then he shall have 12 months from his hiring date in which to become POST-certified. 
(c)  Power of arrest. The City of Douglas Marshal Officers shall have the power of arrest in the enforcement of all ordinances of the City of Douglas, Georgia, and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. The primary duties and responsibilities of the City of Marshal Officers shall be as follows: 
(1)  To enforce all ordinances enacted by the mayor and commission of the City of Douglas; 
(2)  To enforce all laws, rules and regulations of the State of Georgia 
(3)  To issue warnings, notices of ordinance violations, and citations for court appearances for the violation of ordinances and state laws; 
(4)  To investigate and collect evidence of city ordinance violations; 
(5)  To investigate and collect evidence of violation of state laws. 
(6)  To respond to complaints of alleged ordinance violations or violations of state laws; 
(7)  To appear and testify in court; 
(8)  To do any follow-up work that may be necessary; 
(9)  To coordinate enforcement efforts with the building inspection office, planning division office, public works department and any other department or division of the City of Douglas as may be deemed necessary. 
(e)  Position. The Chief Executive Officer, for the City of Douglas Marshal's Office will be known as the Chief Marshal. Each additional officer will be Deputy Marshal. 
(Ord. No. 100807, 10-8-07; Ord. No. 07242017(2) , 7-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 100807, adopted Oct. 8, 2007, repealed and replaced § 2-136 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2-136, pertained to collecting and paying over moneys, and derived from Code 1978, § 2-145. 
Sec. 2-137. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 100807, adopted Oct. 8, 2007 repealed § 2-137, which pertained to levy and sale under execution, and derived from Code 1978, § 2-146. 
Secs. 2-138—2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative and service departments, § 3.10. 
State Law reference— City's power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of all municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-161. - Established; enumerated. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to the board of commissioners by the city's charter, the following departments of the city are established: 
(1)  City clerk-revenue collections department. 
(2)  Community development department. 
(3)  Community services department. 
(4)  Electric department. 
(5)  Finance department. 
(6)  Fire department. 
(7)  Gas department. 
(8)  Personnel department. 
(9)  Police department. 
(10)  Purchasing department. 
(11)  Street and sanitation department. 
(12)  Vehicle maintenance department. 
(13)  Water, wastewater and wastewater treatment department. 
Sec. 2-162. - City manager's authority. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby vested with full power and authority to maintain and operate each of the departments created in this article and each director or superintendent shall be under the direct supervision of the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall have full authority, in cooperation with each director or superintendent, to hire employees of the department at such salaries as the city manager may deem adequate with the advice of the board of commissioners; and shall have, when not in conflict with the city charter or this Code, full power to remove employees of the department. 
Sec. 2-163. - Directors and superintendents. 
There shall be a director or superintendent of each of the departments created in this article who shall be the head of the department and who shall have jurisdiction over all employees employed in the department who are not under the jurisdiction of the city manager. The director or superintendent shall be under the direct supervision of the city manager. The clerk-treasurer shall be the head of the city clerk-revenue collections department. 
Sec. 2-164. - Promulgation of regulations. 
(a)  The director or superintendent of each of the departments enumerated in section 2-161 may propose written regulations or amendments thereto to organize and operate the department of the city for which he is responsible in the most efficient manner reasonably possible consistent with the charter and this Code. 
(b)  These regulations shall become effective only after approval by the city manager. 
(c)  Violation of department regulations may be grounds for reprimand, demotion, suspension or discharge for department employees. 
(d)  Each officer and employee of the departments created in this article shall be furnished with a copy of the department regulations. 
Sec. 2-165. - Records. 
Each director or superintendent shall, subject to the jurisdiction of the city clerk-treasurer, be in charge of all records of the department and shall keep a full and complete record of all documents as well as receipts and disbursements of all monies paid to and disbursed through the department and shall keep the records available at all reasonable times to the inspection of the city manager, city clerk-treasurer, board of commissioners and state and federal grantor agencies. 
(Code 1978, § 2-235) 
Sec. 2-166. - Funds for operating; enforcement of laws. 
It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to provide each year for the budgetary allocation of funds for the operation of each of the departments created in this article as in its judgment it shall deem best; and it shall be the duty of the director or superintendent of each of the departments created in this article, in cooperation with the city manager, to see that all ordinances, regulations and conditions relating to such department are properly observed and enforced. 
(Code 1978, § 2-236) 
Sec. 2-167. - Salaries. 
The director or superintendent of each of the departments created in this article shall be paid such salary as may be fixed by the city manager, with the advice of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-222) 
Secs. 2-168—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK-REVENUE COLLECTIONS DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-181. - Mission. 
The mission of the city clerk-revenue collections department is to collect all revenues due the city and to deposit same in a timely manner to the scheduled bank depository so designated by the board of commissioners. This division also is charged with the responsibility of assuring that all appropriate fees/rates for utilities are billed to each user. 
Sec. 2-182. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the city clerk-revenue collections department are to: 
(1)  Collect and receipt all revenues. 
(2)  Make daily bank deposits. 
(3)  Generate work and service orders for utility customers. 
(4)  Follow up on work and service orders. 
(5)  Collect data from meter reading devices and generate billing accordingly. 
Secs. 2-183—2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Grants of state funds to municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-3 et seq.; city business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-3 et seq.; Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; area planning and development commissions, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 

Sec. 2-196. - Mission. 
The mission of the community development department is to accept the responsibility for and administer, in the most efficient and effective manner, the five different divisions of the community development department: grants administration, building inspection, code enforcement, planning and zoning, and economic development. These areas are staffed by six employees. 
Sec. 2-197. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the community development department are as follows: 
(1)  Grants administration includes seeking out, obtaining and administering grants and loans in all areas of housing, public works, utility, recreational and economic development programs for the city. 
(2)  Building inspection includes the application and enforcement of all federal, state and local ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to building construction and zoning in the city. 
(3)  Code enforcement is responsible for the update and enforcement of the technical codes adopted in section 18-31. 
(4)  Planning/zoning is responsible for the planning, zoning and subdivision activities for the city which includes the comprehensive plan update requirements. It also includes secretarial duties for the Douglas-Coffee County planning commission. 
(5)  Economic development assists with plans for future economic growth of the city and works with industrial prospects and industrial development authority on economic development projects. 
Secs. 2-198—2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-211. - Composition and mission. 
(a)  The community services department shall consist of the following divisions: 
(1)  Building maintenance. 
(2)  Cemetery. 
(3)  Grounds maintenance. 
(4)  Parks and recreation. 
(5)  Tourism/promotion. 
(b)  The department is dedicated to providing the citizens and employees of the city a better quality of life, better working conditions and to promote the city and county while encouraging nonresidents to visit our community. 
Sec. 2-212. - Building maintenance division—Supervision. 
The building maintenance division shall be under the direct supervision of the director of community services. 
Sec. 2-213. - Same—Objectives. 
The objectives of the building maintenance division are to inspect and maintain all city vertical properties to a very high standard and to work with other departments to determine their carpentry, electrical and plumbing needs and provide necessary assistance in a timely manner. 
Sec. 2-214. - Same—Superintendent of building maintenance. 
(a)  Position established.There shall be a superintendent of building maintenance who shall work directly under the director of community services. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the superintendent of building maintenance are to: 
(1)  Maintain and operate the building maintenance division. 
(2)  Work with all department heads within the city structure, in cooperation with the director of community services, to set schedules and priorities for projects (concerning city property) which will offer visual improvements, safety factors, implementation of general maintenance and repairs, better working conditions, etc. 
(3)  Be responsible for the inspection and recognition of needed repairs and improvements to city-owned properties; both personal and real. 
(4)  Interview and make recommendations to the director of community services to hire new or replace employees in the division. 
(5)  The superintendent will set schedules and priorities on any project under his jurisdiction. 
Sec. 2-215. - Cemetery division. 
The objective of the cemetery division is to develop and maintain the properties set aside for cemeteries by the board of commissioners. There shall be a superintendent of the cemetery division who shall be under the direct supervision of the director of community services. 
Sec. 2-216. - Grounds maintenance division—Supervision; objectives. 
(a)  The grounds maintenance division shall be under the direct supervision of the director of community services. 
(b)  The objectives of the grounds maintenance division are to: 
(1)  Work toward the preservation and maintenance of trees within the city and be responsible for the enforcement of the tree ordinance in cooperation with the director of community services, the city manager and the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Work for the establishment of protective regulations for the planting and the maintenance of trees, shrubs, plants, etc., within the public rights-of-way and within publicly owned land. 
(3)  Improve the visual image and the quality of life through the beautification and maintenance of public grounds. 
Sec. 2-217. - Same—Superintendent of grounds maintenance. 
(a)  Position established. There shall be a superintendent of grounds maintenance who shall work directly under the director of community services. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the superintendent of grounds maintenance are to: 
(1)  Maintain and operate the grounds maintenance division. 
(2)  Be responsible for the preservation and maintenance of trees within the city. 
(3)  Be responsible for the establishment of protective regulations for the planting and the maintenance of trees, shrubs, plants, etc., within the public rights-of-way and within publicly owned land. 
(4)  Be responsible for the enforcement of the tree ordinance in cooperation with the city manager and board of commissioners. 
(5)  Interview and make recommendations to the director of community services to hire new or replace employees in the division. 
Sec. 2-218. - Parks and recreation division—Supervision; objectives. 
(a)  The parks and recreation division shall be under the direct supervision of the director of community services. 
(b)  The objectives of the parks and recreation division are to: 
(1)  Provide such socially acceptable opportunities in leisure which will provide personally satisfying experiences, consistent with the varied interests, needs, and abilities of all citizens, without regard to age, sex, race, creed, or social status. 
(2)  Work with and seek guidance from the parks and recreation commission. 
(3)  Plan, acquire and maintain a park system to an optimum level that will serve all facets of the population for their active or passive leisure times. 
(4)  Plan and implement recreation programs to develop community stability by providing an environment that is conclusive to wholesome family living and community life. 
Sec. 2-219. - Same—Director of parks and recreation. 
(a)  Position established. There shall be a director of the parks and recreation division who shall be the head of the division under the supervision of the director of community services. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the director of parks and recreation are to maintain and operate the parks and recreation division. 
Sec. 2-220. - Tourism/promotion division—Supervision; objectives. 
(a)  The tourism/promotion division shall be under the direct supervision of the director of community services. 
(b)  The objectives of the tourism/promotion division are to: 
(1)  Work toward the continual development of the tourism industry for the city area, publicizing and promoting business and leisure travel within the area. 
(2)  Identify community strengths and weaknesses; develop plans and programs to complement and improve those areas identified in order to recruit additional tourists to the area. 
(3)  Serve as a goodwill ambassador for the community through promotional efforts in town and out of town. 
(4)  Identify and promote those assets which contribute to the community's quality of life, creating a need for local citizens to remain in the city and also a reason for tourists to visit. 
(5)  Serve as a communication link by providing positive public relations efforts for the city, the employees of the city and the general public. 
(6)  Strive to maintain a healthy downtown (central business district) through the Main Street Program. To work with the downtown development authority (as an advisory board set through state and local contract) to set plans and implement projects which will offer improvements and meet guidelines set by the four-point approach of the National Main Street Program: design, organization, promotion and economic revitalization. 
Sec. 2-221. - Same—Director. 
There shall be a director of the tourism/promotion division who shall be the head of the division under supervision of the director of community services. 
Sec. 2-222. - Same—Responsibilities. 
The responsibilities of the tourism/promotion division are: 
(1)  The continual development of the tourism industry for the city area, to publicize and promote travel within the area by proper utilization of funding allocated through the special option hotel/motel tax, meeting state requirements. 
(2)  The Main Street program. A Main Street coordinator, under supervision of the director of tourism/promotion and the director of community services, will be responsible for working to meet goals set by the division, the downtown development authority (advisory board as set through state contract) and the board of commissioners. Such goals and responsibilities of Main Street will be directly related to guidelines recommended by the state Main Street program: organization, economic revitalization, promotion and design of the downtown business district as designated under contract with the state department of community affairs. 
(3)  Promotional activities for the city. A promotions coordinator, under supervision of the director of tourism/promotion and the director of community services, will be responsible for promotional/public relations efforts for the city, including all departments within. 
Secs. 2-223—2-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-236. - Mission. 
The mission of the electric department is to supply a reliable source of electric service to all the residential, commercial and industrial consumers of the city's electric service, provide street lighting for the city streets and public areas, assist the other departments of the city and strive to furnish all the services in the most efficient manner at the least possible cost. 
Sec. 2-237. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the electric department are to: 
(1)  Maintain the electrical distribution system. 
(2)  Upgrade the distribution system to serve new or expanded loads. 
(3)  Work with the city's consulting engineers in performing work plans, rate reviews and system studies. 
(4)  Assist the electric consumers in correcting electrical problems and expansion of their service requirements. 
(5)  Develop specifications and requisitions for equipment, materials and supplies. 
(6)  Maintain and expand the street lighting system as needed. 
(7)  Assist and furnish expertise to other city departments as needed. 
Sec. 2-238. - Rules and regulations. 
The board of commissioners is vested with the duty to draft rules and regulations governing the price to be charged for electric service, rules and regulations to be enforced between the customers and the city, rules regulating the cutting off of delinquents, and rules regarding the collection of rents from customers, and all other regulations necessary to the operation of the electric department. 
(Code 1978, § 2-193) 
Sec. 2-239. - Sinking fund. 
It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to establish and maintain a sinking fund to retire the indebtedness of the city for bonds known as electric utility bonds now existing and unretired by the city and any bonds or certificates as may be issued in the future. The board shall invest the sinking fund as provided by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1978, § 2-195) 
Sec. 2-240. - Profits and surplus money. 
All profits and surplus money derived from the operation of the electric department shall be considered general funds of the city and may be used by the board of commissioners in any manner that the board may deem necessary in the operation of the city, provided the use is not in conflict with the charter and this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 2-196) 
Secs. 2-241—2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-251. - Mission. 
The mission of the finance department is to: 
(1)  Maintain accounting records of the city ensuring that all transactions are properly classified and recorded. 
(2)  Ensure that all expenditures are budgeted and do not exceed budgeted amounts. 
(3)  Reconcile bank checking accounts monthly. 
(4)  Maintain records of city's investments of surplus funds. 
(5)  Verify and pay all claims of creditors in a timely manner. 
(6)  Under the direction of the city manager, prepare an annual budget for all city funds. 
Sec. 2-252. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the finance department are to: 
(1)  Maintain accounting records of the city on a current basis. 
(2)  Verify and pay all claims of creditors in a timely manner. 
(3)  Reconcile bank statements to city's records each month. 
(4)  Monitor city's investment of surplus funds. 
(5)  Prepare a monthly statement of revenues and expenditures of the city with a comparison on annual budget. 
(6)  Under the direction of the city manager, prepare an annual budget of all city operations for the succeeding fiscal year and have approved by the city commission prior to the beginning of that year. 
(7)  Ensure daily operation of central computer system for users. 
Sec. 2-253. - Responsibilities. 
The responsibilities of the finance department include: 
(1)  Payment of city obligations for debts incurred in its operation. An accounts payable clerk will be appointed by the city manager. The duties of the accounts payable clerk are to receive, process and pay all claims of creditors after verification with receiving departments. 
(2)  Acquisition, operation and maintenance of a computer system for use in utility billing and general accounting functions of the city. A computer systems operator will be appointed by the city manager. The duties of the computer systems operator are the operation and maintenance of the computer system including hardware, system programs and operating programs. 
Sec. 2-254. - Audits of accounts against city. 
All accounts against the city shall be audited by the city finance director and city manager periodically and shall be audited by a competent auditing firm at least once each year. The city commission shall select such auditing firm annually. 
(Code 1978, § 2-100) 
Charter reference— Independent audit, § 6.28. 
Secs. 2-255—2-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-266. - Mission. 
The mission of the fire department is: 
(1)  To save lives and protect property. 
(2)  Fire suppression in the city and county. 
Sec. 2-267. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the fire department are to: 
(1)  Conduct a fire prevention program. 
(2)  Meet training requirements. 
(3)  Tour and inspect all business and industrial type buildings. 
(4)  Test and maintain all fire hydrants. 
(5)  Maintain all rescue and firefighting equipment and buildings. 
(6)  Ensure that all personnel meet physical fitness requirements. 
Sec. 2-268. - Position of chief. 
The fire chief shall be under the direct supervision of the city manager and shall be the head of the fire department of the city. The fire chief can be removed from office by the city manager, with the consent of the board of commissioners, after stating in writing to the board the reasons and causes for such removal. 
(Code 1978, § 2-160) 
Sec. 2-269. - Officers. 
The officers of the fire department shall consist of chief, assistant chief, a captain for each company, and such other officers as may, from time to time, be designated by the city manager or the department, with the approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-162) 
Sec. 2-270. - Command of department; authority at fires. 
The chief of the department shall at all times have absolute command of the department and the entire apparatus that may be employed for the extinguishment of fires, and shall have authority to require any of the force to work at such place and with or on such apparatus as may seem to him to be conducive to best results. In the absence or disability of the chief, the control and authority shall devolve upon the senior officer present. No officer being present at a fire, the city manager shall appoint some competent and efficient firefighter to act instead. 
(Code 1978, § 2-163) 
Sec. 2-271. - Inspection, repairs of buildings and equipment. 
The fire chief shall examine or cause to be examined, four times a year or more often if necessary or required, the condition of the houses in which are stored the reels or wagons, trucks and other apparatus, hose, etc., and also the fire hydrants belonging to the city; and if same or any part thereof are not in condition to be used in case of fire, he shall at once report the same to the city manager. If any immediate repairs are required he shall cooperate with the committee and the foreman of the companies in having such additions or repairs made, but no expensive additions or repairs shall be made without the approval of the city manager or board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-164) 
Sec. 2-272. - Rules and regulations. 
The fire chief is authorized and empowered to prescribe rules and regulations for the government of the fire department, not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 2-166) 
Secs. 2-273—2-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - GAS DEPARTMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency natural gas curtailment procedure, § 30-51. 

Sec. 2-286. - Mission. 
The mission of the gas department is to perpetuate quality living in the city by serving the community with an environmentally safe heating fuel at an economical rate. 
Sec. 2-287. - Objective. 
The objective of the gas department is to maintain efficient supply of natural gas to the city. 
Sec. 2-288. - Profits and surplus money. 
After all bonds outstanding against the gas system of the city have been retired and after all indebtedness against the gas system have been retired, all profits and surplus money derived from the operation of the gas system shall be considered general funds of the city and may be used by the board of commissioners in any manner that the board of commissioners may deem necessary in the operation of the city, provided the use is not in conflict with any bond issue that might be outstanding or any other indebtedness that might be outstanding against the gas system and provided such use is not in conflict with the charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 2-205) 
Secs. 2-289—2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Regulations pertaining to city employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits, holidays and leaves of absence, travel and employee appraisals are contained in the city's personnel policies and procedures manual which is compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of that manual is on file in the clerk-treasurer's office. 
An official copy of the joint trust agreement and the contract with the Joint Municipal Employees Benefit System for the administration of the retirement plan for the employees of the city is on file in the clerk-treasurer's office where it is available for reference and review. 
Charter reference— Personnel administration, § 3.16 et seq. 

Sec. 2-301. - Mission and functions. 
(a)  The purpose of the personnel department is to assist the departments within the city by advertising job vacancies, accepting applications, screening, interviewing and helping to select the most qualified applicant for the job. The personnel department sets up drug tests, completes all new employee forms and first injury reports for all accidents, files worker's compensation claims, designs and updates policy and procedures manuals, calculates city payroll and reviews all employee performance evaluations. Through training sessions the personnel department teaches employees to be more productive, safety conscious and more committed to becoming an efficient workforce striving to serve the citizens of the city better. 
(b)  The personnel department is also responsible for maintaining and updating all insurance coverages for the city. The personnel department holds pre-bid conferences, writes all bid specifications for insurance coverages, advertises RFP's (Request For Proposals), receives and tabulates all bids and presents bid tabulations to members of insurance committee and the mayor and board of commissioners for approval to award insurance coverages. 
(c)  The head of the personnel department shall be known as the director of personnel. 
Secs. 2-302—2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-311. - Mission. 
The mission of the police department is to maintain social order within prescribed ethical and constitutional limits. To attain this objective, the department's role is to enforce the law in a fair and impartial manner, recognizing both the statutory and judicial limitation of police authority and the constitutional rights of all persons. 
Sec. 2-312. - Primary objectives. 
The primary objectives of the police department are: 
(1)  To protect the lives and property of the citizens we serve. 
(2)  The prevention, detection and investigation of criminal activity. 
(3)  Apprehension of offenders. 
(4)  The recovery of property and its return to rightful owners. 
(5)  To develop highly trained officers. 
(6)  Maintenance of ethical standards. 
(7)  Traffic control. 
(8)  Performance of community services. 
(9)  To serve and to protect. 
Sec. 2-313. - Chief of police. 
The chief of police shall be appointed by and under the direct supervision of the city manager. The chief of police shall be the head of the police department. 
(Code 1978, § 2-110) 
Sec. 2-314. - Acting chief. 
During the sickness or absence from the city of the chief of police, or upon the chief's death, suspension or removal from office, the city manager shall designate one of the police officers to act as chief temporarily, or until the appointment of a chief for the vacancy. 
(Code 1978, § 2-111) 
Sec. 2-315. - Official oath. 
The chief and each member of the police force shall take and subscribe the following oath: 
"GEORGIA—Coffee County. 
"You ____________ , do swear that you will faithfully and impartially discharge the duties imposed on you as (Chief of Police, or as police officer for The City of Douglas, as the case may be) by law and the city ordinances, so help you God." 
The oath may be administered by the mayor or any judicial officer of this state. The oath shall be filed with the clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 2-112) 
Sec. 2-316. - Enforcement of law by chief. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police at all times, day or night, to preserve the public peace; prevent the commission of crime and arrest offenders; to prosecute offenders before the superior and city courts of the county and municipal court for all crimes committed within the city; to protect the rights of persons and property; to regard the public health; to report nuisances in the streets, alleys and other places; to provide proper police force at fires; to protect the firefighters and property thereat; to protect strangers and travelers at carrier stations; to see that the police officers patrol all portions of the city; to attend himself, or to designate some member of the force to attend all meetings of the board of commissioners, and all sessions of the municipal court. He shall enforce obedience to all ordinances of the city which are applicable to police or health. 
(Code 1978, § 2-113) 
Sec. 2-317. - Disposition of fees. 
All fees collected by the police department shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1978, § 2-142) 
Secs. 2-318—2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - PURCHASING DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-331. - Mission. 
The mission of the purchasing department is to purchase supplies, materials and equipment for all departments of the city. It is also the mission of this department to warehouse supplies and materials that each department has deemed necessary to operate their department efficiently. 
Sec. 2-332. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the purchasing department are to: 
(1)  Purchase supplies, materials and equipment for all departments. 
(2)  Warehouse the necessary supplies and equipment for all departments. 
(3)  Receive all supplies and materials, unless safety consideration will not allow. 
(4)  Issue supplies to all departments at their request. 
Sec. 2-333. - Purchasing manual. 
Procurement and purchasing procedures shall be approved by the board of commissioners in accordance with the city's purchasing manual. Such manual shall include procedures for bidding, acquisition, advertisements and disposal of surplus property. 
Sec. 2-334. - Travel reimbursement. 
Reimbursement for travel on official city business shall be in accordance with travel regulations approved by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-335. - Vehicle usage. 
City vehicle assignments and reimbursement for use of privately owned vehicles shall be in accordance with city vehicle policy as approved by the board of commissioners. 
Secs. 2-336—2-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - STREET AND SANITATION DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-346. - Mission. 
The mission of the street and sanitation department is to: 
(1)  Keep the city streets and rights-of-way clean and safe. This includes, but is not limited to, replacing and repairing street signs, pot holes, street sweeping, mowing right-of-way, etc. 
(2)  Collect and dispose of all household, commercial and industrial garbage and trash on a timely basis; also, to ensure that dumpsters and street containers are always in good condition. 
(3)  Be responsible for the animal control shelter for the city. 
Sec. 2-347. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the street and sanitation department are to: 
(1)  Maintain city rights-of-way. 
(2)  Maintain city streets. 
(3)  Install and repair street signs. 
(4)  Spray for mosquitoes. 
(5)  Pick up residential trash and garbage. 
(6)  Pick up commercial and industrial garbage. 
(7)  Operate animal control shelter. 
Secs. 2-348—2-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - VEHICLE MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-361. - Mission. 
The mission of the vehicle maintenance department is to maintain the entire fleet of automobiles, trucks, tractors, mowers and miscellaneous equipment for the city and to keep such in an operable manner. It is the summary goal to perform this task in the most efficient and effective manner. 
Sec. 2-362. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the vehicle maintenance department are to: 
(1)  Maintain the equipment of the city. 
(2)  Assist in developing specifications on vehicles and equipment. 
(3)  Determine replacement schedule and make recommendations to the city manager. 
(4)  Determine cost effective moves for the city in the area of vehicles and equipment. 
Secs. 2-363—2-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - WATER, WASTEWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT DEPARTMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency water curtailment procedure, § 30-76. 

Sec. 2-376. - Mission. 
The mission of the water, wastewater and wastewater treatment department is to supply, maintain and expand a safe dependable water and wastewater service to the public at a reasonable cost. 
Sec. 2-377. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the water, wastewater and wastewater treatment department are to: 
(1)  Maintain all water and wastewater department's deep wells and lift stations. 
(2)  Assist in the upgrading and extension of lines and equipment. 
(3)  Keep updated evaluations of the operations of the system. 
Sec. 2-378. - Rules and regulations. 
The board of commissioners is vested with the duty to draft rules and regulations governing the price to be charged for water and wastewater service, rules and regulations to be enforced between the customers and the city, rules regulating the cutting off of delinquents, and rules regarding the collection of rents from customers, and all other regulations necessary to the operation of the water, wastewater and wastewater treatment department. 
(Code 1978, § 2-193) 
Sec. 2-379. - Maintenance, operation, etc. 
The city manager is vested with full power and authority to maintain, extend, improve, modify and operate the water, wastewater and wastewater treatment department and shall have full authority to do all things necessary to successfully and properly operate the department with the advice of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-194) 
Sec. 2-380. - Sinking fund. 
It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to establish and maintain a sinking fund to retire the indebtedness of the city for bonds known as water and wastewater bonds and water and wastewater revenue certificates now existing and unretired by the city and any bonds or certificates as may be issued in the future. The board shall invest the sinking fund as provided by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1978, § 2-195) 
Sec. 2-381. - Profits and surplus money. 
All profits and surplus money derived from the operation of the water, wastewater and wastewater treatment department shall be considered general funds of the city and may be used by the board of commissioners in any manner that the board may deem necessary in the operation of the city, provided the use is not in conflict with the charter and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 2-196) 
Secs. 2-382—2-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.11. 
Cross reference— Airport commission, § 14-41. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-401—2-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 66. 

Sec. 2-411. - Established. 
There is hereby established the community services board for the purpose of advising the board of commissioners on administrative matters through the community services department head, parks and recreation director, and the city manager, and advising the city commission committee responsible for legislative matters concerning the commission's purposes. 
(Ord. No. 07-26.01-99, 7-26-99) 
Sec. 2-412. - Membership; terms; appointment; organization; vacancies. 
(a)  The community service board shall consist of 20 citizens of the city, 18 years of age or older. The twenty-first member of the community services board shall be the elected city commissioner appointed to the community services board by the mayor of the city and confirmed by the city commission. 
(b)  Members shall serve without compensation for a term of three years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members completing their term are eligible for reappointment. 
(c)  Appointments to the board shall be made by the mayor and approved by the board of commissioners by December 31 of each year. 
(d)  Each year immediately after appointments are made to the board, the board shall meet, reorganize and elect new officers. 
(e)  Vacancies on the board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the mayor and approved by the board of commissioners for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 07-26.01-99, 7-26-99) 
Sec. 2-413. - Authority to establish rules and regulations. 
(a)  The community services board is authorized to establish rules and regulations pertaining to facilities and programs under the direction of the community services department. 
(b)  Such rules and regulations shall relate to such subjects as the community services board and its committees deem necessary and appropriate. 
(c)  An official copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the administrative office of the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 07-26.01-99, 7-26-99) 
Sec. 2-414. - Functions. 
The community service board shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws for the proper performance of its functions. These bylaws may not conflict with this article. 
(2)  Advise the board of commissioners in the development of sound financial plan. 
(3)  Advise the board of commissioners in the development of a variety of innovative and quality programs and a variety of facilities to meet the needs of all of the citizens of the city. 
(4)  Assist the board of commissioners by keeping the public informed and educated as to the importance of and need for recreation programs, facilities and services. 
(5)  Advise and aid the board of commissioners in maintaining an effective and efficient public relations program. 
(6)  Advise the board of commissioners concerning public needs and desires for recreation programs, facilities and services. 
(7)  Assist the board of commissioners in securing financial contributions and physical properties for the advancement of community services. 
(8)  Set the fees for the use of city facilities and programs. Fee amounts shall be as set forth in the city's schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. No. 07-26.01-99, 7-26-99) 
Sec. 2-415. - Deposit and use of funds. 
All money received by the community services board from whatever source derived, shall be deposited with the finance officer of the city to the account of the community services department to be used for the financing of the city community services programs. 
(Ord. No. 07-26.01-99, 7-26-99) 
Secs. 2-416—2-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAYOR'S YOUTH COUNCIL[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07242017(1) , § 3.11, adopted July 24, 2017, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore said provisions have been included as Art. V, Div. 3, §§ 2-421—2-426, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-421. - Created. 
There is created a board to be known as the City of Douglas Mayor's Youth Council, which shall consist of nine members, serving as an advisory youth council to City of Douglas Mayor and Commission. The youth members will be city residents who are actively enrolled in a public, private, or home school, in grades ninth through twelve, between the ages of 14—19. The youth members shall be appointed annually by the city commission and each member by one four-year term, at which time the position shall be declared vacant. Unlike other boards, the term of the members will expire in August and be appointed in September or October of each year. The commissioners will attend board meetings and, along with staff, coordinate activities. 
(Ord. No. 07242017(1) , § 3.11, 7-24-17) 
Sec. 2-422. - Election of officers. 
The youth council shall elect a chairman to conduct meetings and a vice-chairman to conduct meetings in the absence of the chairman. Elections shall be held at the first regular meeting after annual appointments are made by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 07242017(1) , § 3.11, 7-24-17) 
Sec. 2-423. - Vacancies. 
Irregular vacancies on the youth council shall be filled as they occur and regular vacancies shall be filled by appointment in September or October of each year. 
(Ord. No. 07242017(1) , § 3.11, 7-24-17) 
Sec. 2-424. - Meetings; records. 
The youth council shall hold at least one regular meeting per month, with the option to meet more often as needed or desired. Public record of such meetings shall kept by the office of the city clerk. All meetings shall be public under ____________ . 
(Ord. No. 07242017(1) , § 3.11, 7-24-17) 
Sec. 2-425. - Absences from meetings. 
Absences from three consecutive regular meetings of the youth council shall cause a member to be removed from their seat, unless such absence is excused by a majority vote of the board, with such excuse duty entered upon its minutes. 
(Ord. No. 07242017(1) , § 3.11, 7-24-17) 
Sec. 2-426. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The youth council shall have the duty and responsibility to: 
(1)  Evaluate and review problems facing youth in the city. 
(2)  Facilitate neighborhood meetings with youth to discuss problems, needs, recommendations for community improvements. 
(3)  Meet regularly with the mayor and city commission to share ideas and discuss issues, concerns, and needed improvements. 
(4)  Attend city commission meetings and participate in vision and goal sessions. 
(5)  Present recommended projects and programs to the city commission and city manager of public projects and programs. 
(6)  Assist in planning youth/recreation activities. 
(7)  Evaluate and advise the city commission and/or city manager on issues forwarded to the Douglas Youth Council for advice. 
(Ord. No. 07242017(1) , § 3.11, 7-24-17) 
Secs. 2-427—2-435. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference— Elections and removal, § 5.10 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-436. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The provisions of the 1978 Code set forth in section 2-1 pertaining to the supervision and control of elections, election dates, and date of taking office are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 2-437. - Voting places. 
There shall be three voting places or election precincts for all municipal elections held within the city, one for each ward, and residents of each ward shall be allowed to vote only at the voting place or election precinct located in the ward of their residence. The following shall be the voting place or election precinct for each ward, as designated: 
(1)  Ward I residents. Willie Mae Roundtree Center, 801 Gaskin Avenue. 
(2)  Ward II residents. City Hall, 224 East Bryan Street. 
(3)  Ward III residents. C.E. Weir Senior Citizens Center, 307 East Bryan Street. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2; Ord. No. 05-28.1-91, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference— Duty of governing authority to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163. 
Sec. 2-438. - Nonpartisan municipal elections. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-3-95(b), no political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for municipal elections. 
Secs. 2-439—2-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11232009, adopted Nov. 23, 2009, repealed the former Art. VII., §§ 2-461—2-480, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 2-461. - Policies. 
The public trust requires public servants to fulfill their duties faithfully and honestly and to subordinate any personal interest which conflicts with the public interest. A public servant is a trustee of the people and should strive to further the general welfare and not use public office in order to improve his or her own private standing. The principle policies which form the foundation of this code of ethics are: 
(1)  The trust of citizens in their government is cultivated when individual public servants act with integrity and when the public is aware that its servants act with integrity. 
(2)  The Constitutions, laws and regulations of the United States and State of Georgia and ordinances of the City of Douglas should be upheld as a de minimus standard of conduct. 
(3)  The most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act with the highest moral principles and to consistently react appropriately to the ethical decisions of others. 
(4)  Elected officials should exercise sound judgment and apply ethical principles in making decisions that in any manner reflect upon their elected office. 
(5)  All citizens should be treated with courtesy, impartiality and equality. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-462. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this code of ethics that the mayor or member of city commission shall not knowingly engage in any activity which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her judgment or actions in the performance of his or her official duties. Furthermore, members of the mayor and commission should avoid any action which might result in or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain. 
(2)  Impeding city efficiency or economy. 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of those who conduct the affairs and business of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-463. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
Benefit shall mean anything regardless of its monetary value, perceived or intended by either the one who offers it or the one whom it is offered or which, under circumstance, a reasonable prudent person would recognize as being sufficient in value or likely to be intended to influence a member of mayor and commission in the performance of nonperformance of an official action. 
City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-464. - Prohibition. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Douglas, Georgia, nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the City of Douglas, Georgia, on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-465. - Acceptance of gifts. 
Members of mayor and commission shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any benefit from any person, corporation or group which has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-466. - Financial interests. 
(a)  A member of mayor and commission may not: 
(1)  Have a direct or indirect financial interest that conflicts with his or her responsibilities and duties as a trustee of the public good. 
(2)  Either directly or indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained in the course of his or her office or received due to his or her position. 
(b)  A member of mayor and commission shall be deemed to have financial interest in transactions involving the following: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediately family. 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits. 
(3)  Any business in which the member of mayor and commission is director, officer or shareholder. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-467. - Use of public property. 
A member of mayor and commission shall not use city property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for other than official purposes. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-468. - Use of confidential information. 
A member of mayor and commission shall not directly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, city information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-469. - Coercion. 
(a)  A member of mayor and commission shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any benefits to him or her or to persons with his or her family, or for those with whom the member of commission has business of financial ties. 
(b)  A member of mayor and commission shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a city employee, an appointed official of the city or a contract employee to provide any benefit to him or her or to persons with his or her immediate family. 
(c)  A member of mayor and commission shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a municipal court judge in the outcome of matters before the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-470. - Purchases. 
A member of mayor and commission shall not order any goods or services for the city or on behalf of the city without prior authorization from the mayor and commission or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-471. - City employees. 
A member of mayor and commission shall not use a city employee for personal or private business during regular business hours or during the employee's scheduled shift. A member of mayor and commission shall pay just compensation and shall not receive or expect a discount or special rate. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-472. - Travel expenses. 
A member of mayor and commission shall not draw per diem or expense money from the city to attend a seminar, convention, conference or similar meeting and then fail to attend the classes at the seminar, conference, convention or similar meeting. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-473. - Commitments. 
A member of mayor and commission shall not act or create the appearance of acting on behalf of the member of commission by promising to authorize or prevent any future official action of any nature, without prior authorization from the mayor and commission or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-474. - Candidates. 
No person who has qualified seeking to become an elected official shall make a false or materially misleading statement or in any manner commit fraud or conceal wrong doing or withhold information regarding wrong doing in relation to any city or public business. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-475. - Disclosure. 
A member of mayor and commission shall disclose the nature of any interest or benefit he or she has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and commission for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this code of ethics, the member shall not participate in any ex-parte communications with other members regarding the matter at hand. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-476. - Deliberation and vote prohibited. 
No member of mayor and commission shall participate in the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision-making process on any agenda item, any official act or action in which he or she has a conflict of interest. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-477. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-478. - Duty to leave meeting. 
To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after any member of mayor and commission is determined to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, the member of mayor and commission shall leave his or her regular seat as a member of the commission and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-479. - Ethics committee. 
The mayor and commission shall appoint an ethics committee consisting of three persons. At least one member shall be an attorney in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia. All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve a three-year term. Members of the ethics committee must be approved by at least a four-fifths vote of the mayor and commission and shall be appointed initially in such manner as to permit one term to terminate each year. The members of the ethics committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-480. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against a member of mayor and commission shall be filed in writing with the city manager and referred to the ethics committee in such form as may be prescribed by the ethics committee. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall: 
(1)  Review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary action or is to be considered for further investigation. 
(2)  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the member of mayor and commission: provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he or she might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(3)  Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add to the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(4)  Be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings. 
(5)  Make recommendations to the mayor and commission to invoke disciplinary action as described in section 2-481. The mayor and council shall take action upon the recommendation of the ethics committee at the next regular meeting of mayor and commission following receipt of the recommendation. 
(6)  All actions taken by the ethics committee shall be taken within 30 days of receipt of the complaint. The decision by the ethics committee shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties at interest within five days of reaching a decision. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-481. - Right to appeal. 
Decisions of the mayor and commission pursuant to this code of ethics for members of mayor and commission shall be reviewable by the superior court of the county upon notice in writing filed within 30 days of receipt of notice of the decision of the ethics committee. Review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the mayor and commission which supported the decision of the mayor and commission. Provided, however, no action of the mayor and commission refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-482. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this code of ethics shall subject the offender to: 
(1)  Disciplinary action which may include private reprimand, public reprimand, or reimbursement up to $2,000.00. 
(2)  A fine up to $600.00. 
(3)  Forfeiture of three months' salary. 
(4)  All the above. 
(5)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 11232009, 11-23-2009) 
Secs. 2-483—2-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11012008, Pts. 1—7, adopted Nov. 1, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore said provisions have been included as Art. VIII, §§ 2-501—2-508, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-501. - Purpose. 
The creation and implementation of an identity theft prevention program at City of Douglas, Georgia that will identify, detect, mitigate, and update red flags that signal the possibility of identity theft in connection with the opening of a covered account or any existing covered account. 
(Ord. No. 11012008, 11-01-08) 
Sec. 2-502. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this policy, the term city means the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
(b)  For purposes of this policy, the term covered account means an account that city offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions and any other account that city offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or the safety and soundness of the city from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
(c)  For purposes of this policy, the term identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using the identifying information of another person without authority. 
(d)  For purposes of this policy, the term red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. Section 2-504 provides a specific description of which red flags are applicable to this policy. 
(Ord. No. 11012008, Pt. 1, 11-01-08) 
Sec. 2-503. - Incorporation of existing policy and procedure. 
The following policies and procedures already in effect that are specifically incorporated herein (see attached) and will continue to operate in conjunction with the identity theft prevention policy to achieve its stated purpose: 
____________ Utility billing procedures ____________ (see attached copy of policy—This policy will change as needed). 
____________ Tamper-theft procedures ____________ (see attached copy of policy—This policy will change as needed). 
(Ord. No. 11012008, Pt. 2, 11-01-08) 
Sec. 2-504. - Identification of relevant red flags. 
After careful examination of our accounts, including the methods by which we open and access accounts, and past experience with identity theft, the following events/occurrences reasonably indicate the potential for identity theft and should be considered "red flags" for purposes of this policy: 
(1)  Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from consumer reporting agencies or service providers, such as fraud detections services. For the purposes of this policy the city will be utilizing the online utility exchange as their service provider to identify the "red flags" listed below: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert is included with a consumer report. 
b.  A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report. 
c.  A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of address discrepancy (See: Section 2-508). 
d.  A consumer report indicates a pattern of activity that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  The presentation of suspicious documents, such as: 
a.  Documents provided for identification appear to have been altered or forged. 
b.  The photograph or physical description on the identification is not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the identification. 
c.  Other information on the identification is not consistent with information provided by the person opening a new covered account or customer presenting the identification. 
d.  Other information on the identification is not consistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check. 
e.  An application, rent/lease agreement appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  The presentation of suspicious personal identifying information, such as a suspicious address changes: 
a.  Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when compared against external information sources used by the city. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the Social Security Number range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information provided is associated with known fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by city. For example: 
1.  The address on an application is the same as the address provided on a fraudulent application; or 
2.  The phone number on an application is the same as the number provided on a fraudulent application. 
d.  Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly associated with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop, or a prison; or 
2.  The phone number is invalid, or is associated with a pager or answering service. 
e.  The Social Security Number provided is the same as that submitted by other persons opening an account or other customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of other persons opening accounts or other customers. 
g.  The person opening the covered account or the customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the city. 
i.  If the city uses challenge questions, the person opening the covered account or the customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a covered account: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a covered account, the city receives a request for a new, additional, or replacement card or a cell phone, or for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  A covered account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in account balance patterns; 
3.  A material change in electronic fund transfer patterns; or 
4.  A material change in telephone call patterns. 
d.  A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably lengthy period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's covered account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized transactions in connection with a customer's covered account. 
(5)  Notice from customers, victims of identity theft, law enforcement authorities, or other persons regarding possible identity theft in connection with covered accounts held by the city: 
a.  The city is notified by a customer, a victim of identity theft, a law enforcement authority, or any other person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 11012008, Pt. 3, 11-01-08) 
Sec. 2-505. - Detection, prevention and mitigation. 
(a)  Detection. In an effort to ensure proper detection of any red flags, all customers (consumers) must provide at least the following information/documentation before any new covered account will be opened: 
(1)  Full name; 
(2)  Date of birth (individual); 
(3)  Address, (a residential or business street address for an individual; for an individual who does not have a residential or business street address, an army post office (APO) or fleet post office (FPO) box number, or the residential or business street address of next of kin or of another contact individual; or for a person other than an individual (such as a corporation, partnership, or trust), a principal place of business, local office, or other physical location; and; 
(4)  Identification number, which shall be a Social Security/Taxpayer Identification Number. 
(5)  Must complete required application. 
(6)  Application must be accompanied by a rental/lease, or purchase agreement with applicant's name listed (name must match that of utility application's name). 
(7)  All applications must be processed through a third-party system to verify names, Social Security Numbers, etc. 
(8)  All applications must be approved by the billing department before collection division can establish an account. 
To assist with detection of red flags, the city will implement the appropriate computer programs tailored to the city's business needs to help authenticate customers, monitor transactions, and change of address requests. For the purposes of this policy the city will be utilizing the online utility exchange as their service provider to identify the "red flags" issues. 
(b)  Preventing and mitigating identity theft. In the event a red flag is detected, the city is committed to preventing the occurrence of identity theft and taking the appropriate steps to mitigate any harm caused thereby. In order to respond appropriately to the detection of a red flag, the city shall consider any aggravating circumstance(s) that may heighten the risk of identity theft. After assessing the degree of risk posed, the city will respond to the red flag in an appropriate manner, which may include: 
(1)  Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft; 
(2)  Contacting the customer; 
(3)  Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to a covered account; 
(4)  Reopening a covered account with a new account number; 
(5)  Denying utility services if rent receipts have been forged; 
(6)  Filing charges with law enforcement if applications, social security cards, rent receipts, and/or other documents are forged and/or fraudulent in other ways. 
(7)  Not opening a new covered account; 
(8)  Closing an existing covered account; 
(9)  Allowing only the account holder to sign and/or conduct business for that account; 
(10)  Accepting only current federal/state government issued ids and/or ids recognized by the federal/state government; 
(11)  Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not selling a covered account to a debt collector; 
(12)  Notifying law enforcement; or 
(13)  Determining that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances. 
In an effort to mitigate the damage caused by identity theft, the following programs/software are being used, and city's continued use thereof is incorporated and made part of this policy: 
____________ VeriSign (software to protect credit card theft) ____________ . 
For the protection of our customers, all service providers hired by the city to perform any activity in connection with any covered account must also take appropriate steps to prevent identity theft. To this end, the city will only contract with service providers that have implemented and follow a similar identity theft prevention policy. 
(Ord. No. 11012008, Pt. 4, 11-01-08) 
Sec. 2-506. - Program updates. 
The city is committed to maintaining an identity theft prevention policy that is current with the ever-changing crime of identity theft. To that end, the city will reassess this policy on a periodic (annual) basis. In reassessing this policy, the city will add/delete red flags in section 2-504, as necessary, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city from identity theft. The determination to make changes to this policy will be within the discretion of the responsible parties, identified in section 2-508 of this article, but after careful consideration of the following: 
(1)  City's past experience(s) with identity theft; 
(2)  Changes in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Changes in methods to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Changes in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Changes in the business arrangements of the city, including mergers, acquisitions, alliances, joint ventures, and service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 11012008, Pt. 5, 11-01-08) 
Sec. 2-507. - Additional legal requirements (if necessary). 
(a)  Consumer addresses. 
(1)  Address confirmation. The city shall furnish the consumer's address that the city has reasonably confirmed is accurate to consumer reporting agencies as part of the information that the city regularly furnishes for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the consumer. In an effort to ensure that the city maintains accurate address information for its consumers and to ensure the city provides accurate address information of our consumers to reporting agencies, at least one of the following steps must be taken prior to providing the consumer's address to the consumer reporting agency: 
a.  Verify the address on file with the consumer; 
b.  Confirm the address being sent to the consumer reporting agency matches the address the city has on file for that particular consumer; 
c.  Compare the address with information received from any third-party source; or 
d.  Verify by other means that are reasonably available at the time. 
(2)  Address discrepancies. Because the city is a user of consumer reports, at least one of the following steps must be taken when the city receives notice from any consumer reporting agency that a substantial difference exists between the address for the consumer that the city provided and the address(es) in the consumer reporting agency's file for that particular consumer: 
a.  Compare the differing address with the city 's file, by either (1) confirming that the address information provided by the city to the consumer reporting agency is the same information the city obtains and uses to verify the consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program (CIP) rules (31 USC 5318(1) (31 CPR 103.121»; or (2) comparing the differing addresses with the city's records and files, including applications, change of address notifications, other customer account records, or retained CIP documentation; or (3) comparing the differing addresses with information the city may have received from a third-party source; or 
b.  Verify the information in the consumer report provided by the consumer reporting agency with the consumer. 
(b)  Other requirements should be addressed below based on entity type. 
Examples: 
(1)  For financial institutions and creditors that are subject to 31 U.S.C. 5318(g), filing a suspicious activity report in accordance with applicable law and regulation; 
(2)  Implementing any requirements under 15 U.S.C. 1681c-l(h)regarding the circumstances under which credit may be extended when the financial institution or creditor detects a fraud or active duty alert; 
(3)  Implementing any requirements for furnishers of information to consumer reporting agencies under 15 U.S.C. 1681s-2, for example, to correct or update inaccurate or incomplete information, and to not report information that the furnisher has reasonable cause to believe is inaccurate; and 
(4)  Complying with the prohibitions in 15 U.S.C. l681m on the sale, transfer, and placement for collection of certain debts resulting from identity theft. 
Disclaimer: There may be additional requirements, such as the examples provided above. However, the above examples are not intended to be an exhaustive list. 
(Ord. No. 11012008, Pt. 6, 11-01-08) 
Sec. 2-508. - Administration. 
By signing below, (I/this) individual(s)/committee/board 1 the city acknowledge(s) that (I/we) will be responsible for overseeing the implementation, management, and updating of this new policy and shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Assign specific responsibility for the program's implementation, including appropriate training for staff; 
•  At least annually, the assistant city manager or city manager must report to the city council and provide an update on the policy's effectiveness, any service provider arrangements, significant incidents involving identity theft and the city's response, and recommendations for ways to improve the program. 
(2)  Review reports prepared by staff to ensure that the city remains compliant with its legal responsibility to maintain an identity theft prevention program; and 
(3)  Approve material changes to this program as necessary to address changing identity theft risks. 

 
(Ord. No. 11012008, Pt. 7, 11-01-08) 
Note: 1 Rules require oversight by the board of directors, an appropriate committee of the board, or a designated employee of senior management. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Applicant means any one or more persons making application for a city or state alcoholic beverage license or renewal thereof. 
Application means those forms, statements and applications authorized or required under the terms and conditions of this chapter, other applicable laws and regulations of the city and those applicable requirements of the state. 
Bowling alley/bowling center means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues either from the rental of bowling lanes and bowling equipment and the sale of prepared meals and other food products. A bowling alley/[bowling] center also includes any indoor room, space or area which is open to or frequented by the public and operated for gain and in which is located for use of one or more surface ways, usually 42 inches by 60 feet in dimension each, upon which balls are rolled towards standing pins. 
Church shall include synagogue, and any other place of permanent public religious worship which shall exist if a valid building permit has been obtained and substantial construction is underway. 
College, school mean those state, county, city, church or other colleges or schools teaching the subjects common in schools or colleges of the state, but shall not include private schools or colleges wherein only specialized subjects not including a general curriculum of education are taught. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Due cause means cause for suspension, revocation, cancellation or denial of any alcoholic beverage license which shall consist of any violation of this chapter or any laws or ordinances of the city, county or state prohibiting or regulating the business of selling, transporting or dealing in alcoholic beverages or violation of ordinances, laws or regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulation of such businesses; or for the violation of any city, state or federal law involving moral turpitude, controlled substances or violation of city ordinances other than traffic ordinances. It shall also consist of willfully false statements or conduct of applicant for an alcoholic beverage license or renewal thereof or willful concealment of material matters of fact of obtaining or preventing another from obtaining a license hereunder. 
File means that information contained in a single location and shall include but not be limited to applications, renewals, plans, registered plats, sworn statements, violations and any other information pertaining to the license deemed appropriate by the city. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Grocery store means a retail establishment which has a total retail floor space of at least 10,000 square feet of which at least 85 percent is reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items, conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space. 
Hotel/motel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests whether transient, permanent or residential, in which ten or more rooms are used for sleeping accommodations for such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge, restaurant or nightclub in their premises and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder and subject to the applicable ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations of the city and state. 
Immediate family or member of immediate family means all persons related to each other by consanguinity or affinity within the first degree, as computed according to the civil law. 
Inspector or license inspector means that person designated as license inspector of the city and his representatives. 
Interest or financial interest means a pecuniary interest and shall include any present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, direct or indirect, right, power or authority or control of or in any class I, class II or class III alcoholic beverage application for license and/or license issued; it shall apply to the outright owner, co-owner, member of a partnership, or stockholder in a corporation, organized or in the process of organizing, for pecuniary gain, which owns or is to own any financial interest in any class of alcoholic beverage application and/or license issued for any class of such license within the city and shall include any such interest in the premises from which such alcoholic beverages are sold. If any of the income from the sales of alcoholic beverages is shared, or rent, lease, etc., on which land is, or is to be paid on the basis of sales of alcoholic beverages on such land, and anyone sharing in any income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in such applications, licenses or premises shall have a financial interest therein. Also, it shall include a lender of money or other thing of value to such applicant or licensee, to anyone else for the benefit of such applicant or licensee, on interest in excess of the highest level rate allowable in this state. 
License means a license granted by the city and/or state, granted or issued upon the basis of the alleged truth of a written application therefor to sell alcoholic beverages within the city. 
License year means that 12-month period for and with respect to which licenses under this chapter shall be issued. Such license year shall commence on January 1 of each year and end at midnight on the December 31 next following. 
Licensee means that person duly licensed or having interest therein as licensed, by the city to distribute, transport, sell at wholesale, retail or by the drink, alcoholic beverages of any kind or nature within the city. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels as defined herein with all booths, tables or seating being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 20. A lounge as defined herein which is operated on a different floor in the premises or in a separate building on the premises, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits. 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
Nightclub means an establishment having a seating capacity of at least 100 persons with all booths and tables being unobstructed and open to view and providing a band and/or other professional entertainment, a minimum of 20 days per month, every month with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. All such nightclubs shall be equipped with air conditioning and shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for their patrons, provided that nightclubs located in hotels having dining room and kitchen facilities may be excluded from maintaining a connection with such nightclub. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment, and the serving of food and of distilled spirits shall be incidental thereto. 
Off-premises sales of alcoholic beverages means the sale of alcoholic beverages of any type, kind or class in sealed, unbroken containers for consumption not on the premises of the licensee. 
On-premises sales of alcoholic beverages means the sale, giving or dispensing of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of the licensee. 
Original/initial, when used in connection with an application for an alcoholic beverage license, means the first license granted for a given location or first use or application for use or change of use of a given application for use of a location previously licensed or approved for a license hereunder. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Park means city-owned, occupied or leased property utilized for passive and/or active recreational use by the public and shall include all properties so designated on the official map of the city. 
Premises means those lots, plots or tracts of land upon which any structure, building, store, mobile trailer, etc., is located from which alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed, stored, consumed or given to the public including but not limited to that building, structure, room or closed or partitioned-in locality whether a room, shop, structure or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed, stored, consumed or given to the public. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation at least six months immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 50 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly or semiannual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing body out of the general revenue of the club. 
Private dwelling means a house or dwelling or structure wherein one or more persons reside. 
Renewal, when used in connection with an application for a license or a location, means an unrevoked alcoholic beverage license issued hereunder to a designated licensee for a designated location, on expiration of which unrevoked license the identical owners thereof, but no others, may be entitled to a new annual license for the same, but no other location. 
Residence means domicile. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales are derived from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Satisfactory proof means adequate or sufficient evidence to convince an unbiased, impartial, enlightened judge of the existence or nonexistence of a fact, situation or condition. 
Store; distilled spirits store means a room or area wherein only the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages in the original unbroken packages, bottles, containers, etc., may be authorized under this chapter and the Revenue Tax Act to legalize and control alcoholic beverages and liquors. 
Wholesale distributor of alcoholic beverages means that license issued by the city enabling the licensee to distribute, sell, offer to sell to a bona fide class II and class III license holder, at wholesale prices, alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages or containers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Code 1978, § 5-1; Ord. No. 06102013, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 09122016, 9-12-16 ; Ord. No. 12122016(2), 12-12-16 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
The violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter by any applicant, licensee, his manager, director, operator, agents, assigns or employees for which such applicant and/or licensee is deemed responsible shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the city/county jail for a period not to exceed ten days in the discretion of the court and shall be subject to sections 6-166 and 6-167. 
(Code 1978, § 5-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Illegal acts on licensed premises. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city, nor any agent, representative or employee of such licensee, shall perform any of the acts following which are hereby declared illegal: 
(1)  Sell alcoholic beverages to a minor. 
(2)  Sell alcoholic beverages to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit consumption thereon, on any day or at any time when such sales or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(4)  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct; breach of peace; or any lewd, immoral, improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
(5)  Dispense in any way to minors. It shall be unlawful for the licensee to sell, attempt to sell, give, distribute or dispense alcoholic beverages to a minor. 
(6)  Purchase for minor. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase alcoholic beverages on behalf of a minor. 
(7)  Possession by minor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to have in his possession, care or custody any alcoholic beverage. 
(8)  Spurious credentials. It shall be unlawful for any minor to exhibit fake, forged, borrowed or otherwise illegal credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages in any manner to which he is not legally entitled. 
(9)  Class III license. Permit the entry of a minor into a licensed class III business. Those class III establishments meeting the definition of a restaurant and/or a bowling alley shall be exempt from the conditions of this subsection. 
(10)  Acquiesce, permit or allow, knowingly or unknowingly, the bringing into, use of, sale, possession, dispensing, storing or in any other manner condone the presence of controlled substances/illicit drugs, narcotics, cocaine, crack, marijuana or any other substances declared illegal by the city, state or U.S. government. Failure of the owner, operator, manager, representative, agents or employees of same to insure compliance with this section shall, within 24 hours of such finding by the governing body, the state or the U.S. government, result in immediate revocation of the alcoholic beverage license and closing of the business so licensed. 
(11)  Permit or allow any person to bring into licensees' place of business any form of alcoholic beverages and/or consume the alcoholic beverages brought into the licensed premises. The intent and purpose of this prohibition is to prohibit what is commonly referred to as brown bagging. 
All violations of this section are, in addition to the above, subject to all penalties provided for in this chapter and/or ordinances, laws, regulations of the city, state and U.S. government. 
(Code 1978, § 5-3; Ord. No. 06-13.1-94, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 06102013, 6-10-13) 
State Law reference— Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification; proper identification for sale of alcoholic beverages; dispensing, serving, etc., of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age in the course of employment; seller's duty to request proper identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8; prohibited conduct on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; age of legal majority, O.C.G.A. § 39-1-1. 
Sec. 6-4. - Enforcement personnel; right of entry. 
The police department of the city as well as those personnel of the alcoholic beverage enforcement division of the state, and of the U.S. government, are hereby authorized to enter into or upon the premises of any class I, II and III alcoholic beverage licensed location at any time the enforcement agencies herein noted deem necessary in the enforcement of this chapter or other city, state or U.S. government, laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Sale to minors, intoxicated or incompetent persons. 
No licensee shall give, sell, offer to sell, dispense or otherwise permit the same to any person under 21 years of age or those otherwise defined as minors under the laws of the state or to anyone who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind. 
(Code 1978, § 5-130) 
Sec. 6-6. - Employment of persons under 18 years of age. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, markets, convenience stores, gas stations, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Code 1978, § 5-131) 
Sec. 6-6.1. - Dispensing, serving, selling or handling by persons under 21 years of age in the course of employment. 
If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to code section 6-6, nothing contained in this Code section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: (1) Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; (2) Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or (3) Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the minimum age set by state law from time to time for the purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages to have alcoholic beverages in his possession in the city, except that the handling or possession of alcoholic beverages by a person under the minimum age set by state law in connection with his employment shall not be considered a violation of this section. However, such underage person shall not sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 12102012, 12-10-12) 
Sec. 6-7. - Days, hours of sale. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, give, dispense or distribute alcoholic beverages on the following named days and times: 
(1)  Thanksgiving Day from 12:00 midnight of the previous day to 8:00 a.m. of the day following. 
(2)  Christmas Day from 12:00 midnight of the previous day to 8:00 a.m. of the day following. 
(3)  Sundays from 1:30 a.m. on Sunday to 8:00 a.m. the following day. 
(4)  Class I license (distributors) from 8:00 p.m. Saturday to 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
(5)  Class II license (retail sales) from 11:45 p.m. each day, excepting those days and times noted herein to 8:00 a.m. the following day. 
(6)  Class III license (consumption on premises) from 1:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. each day, except those days and hours noted herein. 
(Code 1978, § 5-132; Ord. No. 04082013, 4-8-13) 
Sec. 6-7.1. - Exceptions to days, hours [of] sale. 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and meets the definition of a restaurant in this section. 
(2)  Class II license (retail sales) on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(3)  Bowling alley/bowling center on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
( Ord. No. 12122016(2), 12-12-16 ) 
Sec. 6-8. - Closing, clearing of premises. 
All owners, managers, operators, representatives, agents or employees of a holder of a class III alcoholic beverage license shall cease the sales, offer to sell, give, dispense or distribute any alcoholic beverages on or from the premises for which a class III license has been issued by the city and/or the state as of 1:30 a.m. of each day of the week except those days and hours noted in section 6-7 and shall require all patrons, parties or persons to vacate the premises from which a class III alcoholic beverage license has been issued by 2:30 a.m. of the same day. In addition, the sale of distilled spirits, beer and wine in restaurants and private clubs for on-premises consumption shall be permitted only during the hours when food service is offered between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday and must be removed from the tables one hour after the sale of food ceases, or by 2:00 a.m. if food is served beyond 12:00 midnight, and all patrons will be out of such establishments and they will be closed by 2:30 a.m. 
(Code 1978, § 5-133; Ord. No. 12102012, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 04082013, 4-8-13) 
Sec. 6-9. - Penalty for sales during closed days and hours. 
Violation of section 6-7 or 6-8 shall result in a cause for revocation of any and all alcoholic beverage licenses held by the owner, lessee or renter of the premises found in violation hereof and shall subject same to all penalties contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 5-134) 
Sec. 6-10. - Display of license. 
The city license under this chapter shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view at the place of business of the licensee. 
(Code 1978, § 5-135) 
Sec. 6-11. - Sales in licensed premises only. 
No alcoholic beverage licensee shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverage to any person except in the licensee's place of business. 
(Code 1978, § 5-136) 
Sec. 6-12. - Means and places of receipt of delivery to retail licensee; place of sale. 
Alcoholic beverages shall be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by no means other than conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the governing body to make deliveries in the city. Transportation of alcoholic beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of a retail license and/or wholesale permit. No retail sales or deliveries of alcoholic beverages shall be made except in the place of business in which such sales and deliveries are authorized. 
(Code 1978, § 5-138) 
Sec. 6-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12102012, adopted Dec. 10, 2012, repealed § 6-13, which pertained to licensee identification signs and derived from Code 1978, § 5-139. 
Sec. 6-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12102012, adopted Dec. 10, 2012, repealed § 6-14, which pertained to display of prices and/or penal sections generally and derived from Code 1978, § 5-140. 
Sec. 6-15. - Outside display of prices prohibited. 
No sign advertising any brand or price of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the exterior or in the window of any licensed premises, and no placard or sign visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall refer to the price of any alcoholic beverages for sale therein. 
(Code 1978, § 5-141) 
Sec. 6-16. - Interior visibility, class III license. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of a class III licensed premises which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such premises from the street or road at all times and no booths, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of such licensed premises that blocks such view which shall plainly permit visibility from the street or road day and night. 
(Code 1978, § 5-142) 
Sec. 6-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12102012, adopted Dec. 10, 2012, repealed § 6-17, which pertained to interior light switch, proximity to front door, class II license and derived from Code 1978, § 5-143. 
Sec. 6-18. - Front entrance location, class III license. 
No license shall be granted for class III alcoholic beverage sales hereunder unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street, and the premises around the building of the licensee shall be on all corners thereof, lit with a minimum of 250-watt high pressure sodium lighting. 
(Code 1978, § 5-144) 
Sec. 6-19. - Gambling devices, slot machines, etc. 
Within the premises of a class II and class III license holder there shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, vending machines, lotteries or tickets of chance and the like, therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensee's place of business or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by licensee. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of license. Nothing contained herein shall restrict the presence of amusement games and/or video machine games in the businesses in which sales of class III alcoholic beverages are conducted. 
(Code 1978, § 5-145) 
Sec. 6-20. - Sales in Town Center district. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, distribute or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverage whether the same is a class I, class II or class III license as defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Code within the Town Center business district. 
(b)  The board of commissioners may authorize the sale of alcohol by the drink under a class III license in the Town Center district provided the business meets the definition as a restaurant as defined in section 6.1 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code or during any special event or catering event that is approved by the board of commission. 
(Ord. No. 12-23.1-91, § 1, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 12122016(2), 12-12-16 ) 
Sec. 6-21. - Entry by minors prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to enter a class III establishment other than law enforcement personnel or persons associated with regulatory agencies. Those class III licensed establishments meeting the definition of restaurant shall be exempt from this section. 
(b)  Bowling alleys. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6-21 to the contrary, a bowling alley which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues either from the rental of bowling lanes and bowling equipment, or from the combination of the rental of bowling lanes, bowling equipment and the sale of prepared meals and other food products is exempt from the provisions of this article which prohibits the entry by minors in a class III licensed establishment. 
(c)  Entry of minors is prohibited in the areas, space or rooms of the bowling alley where the primary purpose is for consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.2-94, 6-29-94; Ord. No. 06102013, 6-10-13) 
Secs. 6-22—6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Permit or license from county or municipality required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; powers of local governing authorities as to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-46. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverages where such person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale such beverages. 
(Code 1978, § 5-16) 
Sec. 6-47. - Compliance with all applicable provisions. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued or granted to the premises of an applicant that does not comply with all codes, ordinances and laws of the state and of the city, whether it is an initial license, renewal or transfer of applicant or location. 
(Code 1978, § 5-17) 
Sec. 6-48. - Classification. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses shall henceforth be classified as follows: 
(1)  Class I license means that license granted to any person by the city to an applicant for the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages sold at wholesale to any valid alcoholic beverage licensee. 
(2)  Class II license means that license granted to any persons by the city to an applicant for package sales of alcoholic beverages sold at retail to the public, off-premises. 
(3)  Class III license means that license granted to any person by the city to an applicant for an on-premises alcoholic beverage consumption license. 
(b)  All applications and licenses issued hereafter shall be in keeping with the above classifications. 
(Code 1978, § 5-18) 
Sec. 6-49. - Separate licenses required. 
A separate alcoholic beverage license is hereby required for each place of business when such application includes various classes of licenses (class I, II, III). 
(Code 1978, § 5-19) 
Sec. 6-50. - Prohibited interests. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued wherein the applicant or any of the beneficial owners of the proposed business has any financial interests in any distillery, wholesale liquor business or any other class II license; provided holders of a class III license may own one retail package liquor business; and provided further, the board of commissioners may issue to the same applicant of the same business group holding a class III license more than one retail package liquor license (class II) where it can be shown that the sale of alcoholic beverages is not the principal business to be engaged in by such applicant pursuant to such license. 
(Code 1978, § 5-20) 
Sec. 6-51. - Appointed officers, employees or family members to have no interest in license. 
No appointed officer or employee, or a member of his immediate family, this state or any political subdivision thereof whether a full- or part-time, casual or temporary officer or employee, shall own a financial interest in any alcoholic beverage application/license for a class I wholesale, class II retail off-premises or class III on-premises liquor application or license in this state or be employed in such establishment. 
(Code 1978, § 5-21) 
Sec. 6-52. - City to maintain files. 
It shall be the responsibility of the city through its license department (code enforcement) to accumulate and maintain a complete file of licenses granted under the terms and conditions of this chapter. Such file shall contain, but not be limited to applications, investigative reports, licenses issued, incidents involving licensee and/or place of business, code and/or building violations, hearings/results, premises inspections, photographs and other such information and data that will assist the board of commissioners in the determination of the decision to grant, renew, transfer, name change or other license actions required and/or applied for within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 5-22) 
Sec. 6-53. - One-day license. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  To qualify as a "charitable organization" as used herein, an organization must: 
a.  Either be incorporated as a nonprofit corporation, or must be formally organized, with a constitution and bylaws, and with a central governing body such as a board of trustees or directors to be directly responsible for the one-day license; and 
b.  Said organization must also have been granted approved tax-exempt status by United States Internal Revenue Service. 
(2)  The term "charitable purposes" as used herein shall include the following: relief of the indigent, medical research, education, including youth education; historical preservation, preservation and encouragement of the fine arts; crime prevention and rehabilitation; libraries; zoos; scientific research and development; community development; industrial and commercial recruitment; and recreation. 
(3)  The term "proceeds" as used herein means the gross proceeds from the sale of licensed beverages after payment of all of the expenses of the particular activity in connection with which the license is issued. 
(b)  License; fee. In addition to the other alcoholic beverage licenses provided for in this article, the board of city commissioners may issue a consumption license valid for one day only to any charitable organization, authorizing the holder to sell, at one location only, over one dispensing facility, spirituous liquors, alcoholic beverages, wines and malt beverages, by the drink for consumption on the premises; provided, that the proceeds from the sale of such beverages shall be used only for charitable purposes. The fee for such license shall be $25.00, and the fee shall not be waived under any circumstances. 
(c)  Application. Any charitable organization desiring to obtain a one-day alcoholic beverage license shall make application with sufficient evidence to satisfy the board of city commissioners that the organization is a nonprofit charitable organization and that the proceeds will be used for charitable purposes. The organization shall designate one person resident in the city who shall be responsible for the lawful and proper conduct of the alcoholic beverage license, giving the name, address and other information sufficient to identify such person. 
(d)  Final report. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the activity, the license holder shall file a final report and accounting with the board of commissioners, said report and accounting to include a statement of the gross receipts, the amount of expenses paid, the net proceeds remaining, and how and to whom and for what purpose said net proceeds were distributed. 
(e)  Suspension or revocation. The chief of police shall have the right at any time to suspend or revoke the one-day license on any ground which constitutes a ground for suspension or revocation of licenses generally under the alcoholic beverage ordinances of the City of Douglas. Any aggrieved organization shall have the right of appeal to the city manager. 
(f)  Applicability of chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the one-day license. 
(Ord. No. 010905, 1-9-05) 
Sec. 6-54. - Temporary permit for special events. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application and payment of an application filing fee of $100.00 and a permit fee of $500.00 per day, up to a maximum of $1,500.00, and after investigation by the code enforcement officer and the review by the chief of police, the mayor and commission may issue a permit to a person or organization for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only during a special event under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant must already hold a valid annual license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption that has been issued by the City of Douglas. 
(2)  The permit will allow sale of alcoholic beverages beyond the premises described in the annual license only in the area specifically described in the application and only during the special event named. 
(3)  Food must be served, at the event, during any period of time that alcoholic beverages are served. 
(4)  The application for such permit must have been filed with the code enforcement department at least 30 days prior to the date of the special event. 
(5)  The hours of any such special event must be between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Alcoholic beverages may not be sold on Sundays. 
(6)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all city ordinances, state statutes and state regulations governing the sale of alcoholic beverages and all sections of this Code and other city ordinances governing such sales, including but not limited to sections of this Code and other ordinances relating distance requirements. 
(7)  Each special event shall last a maximum of three consecutive days, and no more than two special event permits shall be issued to any applicant in any calendar year. 
(8)  If the special event is a City of Douglas sponsored event, the mayor and commission may waive the fees associated with the special event permit. 
(9)  A special event permit may allow consumption of alcoholic beverages at the outdoor event or festival in a city park or on city property and shall require that alcohol consumed at the special event or outdoor festival be purchased or obtained from only the person or organization named on the special event permit. 
(b)  A special event permit may be immediately revoked by the chief of police for due cause for a violation of any city ordinance, state laws or when an emergency situation in which continued operation of the premises by the licensee endangers the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
( Ord. No. 02242014, 2-24-14 ) 
Sec. 6-55. - Catered events. 
(a)  Annual licenses to cater alcoholic beverages by the drink on premises at authorized catered events may be obtained only by those persons, firms or corporations currently licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages. The type alcoholic beverage catering license is restricted to the type of annual alcoholic beverage license that has been issued. 
(b)  Any licensee desiring to obtain a license to be an alcoholic beverage caterer in the city shall submit, in person, a written and signed application on forms provided by the city. Only a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may distribute or sell alcoholic beverages by the drink at an authorized catered event, after the application and issuance of a catered event permit. 
(c)  Before a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered function, such caterer shall apply for a catered event permit from the city code enforcement officer or his designee at least 30 working days prior to the event. 
(1)  The application for a catered event permit shall include the name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, the caterer's license number, and the date, address and time of the event. 
(2)  If the catered event permit is granted, it shall be good only for the specific event at the specified address and times set forth in the application, not in excess of four hours, unless otherwise approved by city commission. 
(3)  The permit shall be kept in the vehicle used to transport alcoholic beverages to the event at all times during which the permit is in effect. 
(d)  Caterers licensed by the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported for each event, and shall make report and remittance of such taxes with their regular monthly reports to the city. 
(e)  No alcoholic beverages shall be transported, distributed, or sold to other than licensed locations in the city, except to authorize catered events, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter or by state law. 
(f)  No licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall employ any person under 21 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages at authorized catered functions. 
(g)  No catered event permit will be issued for an event at any location with respect to which any alcohol license has been denied or revoked within the past 12 months; nor for any location with respect to which the conduct set forth in this chapter has previously occurred. 
(h)  The hours and days of sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages at an authorized catered event shall be conducted in compliance with this chapter. Except as set forth above in this section, an off-premises permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 03272017(2), 3-27-17 ) 
Secs. 6-56—6-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION 

Sec. 6-66. - General prerequisites for approval. 
No pending or future application for a city alcoholic beverage license shall be approved by the board of commissioners unless it appears that all material and valid requirements of this chapter have been met by the applicant and that the applicant is qualified for and entitled to such license under this chapter, the laws and ordinances of this city, the state and the U.S. government. 
(Code 1978, § 5-31) 
Sec. 6-67. - New license, approval required. 
No new alcoholic beverage license shall be issued until first having received approval of the license application by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 5-32) 
Sec. 6-68. - Procedure. 
All applicants for an alcoholic beverage license shall comply with the following application procedure: 
(1)  All applications for an alcoholic beverage license shall be submitted on forms provided for that purpose by the licensing division of the city and shall be approved by the board of commissioners prior to the issuance of the license applied for. 
(2)  All applications for an alcoholic beverage license shall contain a sworn, certified statement as to the information contained in the application and to any other information required or contained within the application and accompanying information and by this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 5-33) 
Sec. 6-69. - Minimum qualifications. 
(a)  Any applicant for an alcoholic beverage license or manager of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall meet the minimum qualifications upon the submission of an application for same, as follows: 
(1)  Be 21 years of age. 
(2)  Must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or a legal permanent resident or an otherwise qualified alien or non-immigrant under the Federal Immigration and Nationality Act and lawfully present in the United States. Any such alien shall have been lawfully admitted for permanent residence for at least one year prior to application. 
(3)  Meet all minimum requirements for such license imposed by the state. 
(b)  The license applicant and all employees thereof shall not have been convicted within ten years of the date of application of any felony, misdemeanor, excepting minor traffic violations, or any violations of the laws or ordinances of the city, state or United States relating to the distribution, sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages or any crime involving moral turpitude. A plea of nolo contendere for any felony or misdemeanor of any city, state or federal court, or a forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime is hereby considered a conviction under this chapter; provided, however, where the violation is for a misdemeanor or the forfeiture of bond involves a municipal ordinance, the board of commissioners in its discretion may waive such disqualification. 
(Code 1978, § 5-34; Ord. No. 10252010, 10-25-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10252010, adopted Oct. 25, 2010, amended § 6-69 title to read as herein set out. Former § 6-69 title pertained to minimum applicant qualifications. 
Sec. 6-70. - Statement of qualifications by applicant. 
The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to the terms and conditions of this chapter, and shall file same with the city clerk prior to any approval of application or license issuance. 
(Code 1978, § 5-35) 
Sec. 6-71. - Misstatement, concealment of fact. 
Any misstatement or concealment of fact by the applicant shall be grounds for revocation of license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws or ordinances of the city, state and/or United States government. 
(Code 1978, § 5-36) 
Sec. 6-72. - Ownership of premises. 
The applicant/licensee shall be the owner of the premises for which application is made or the holder of a lease thereon. 
(Code 1978, § 5-37) 
Sec. 6-73. - Illegal to lease on percentage-of-profit basis. 
It shall be unlawful for the applicant/licensee to contract, written or verbal, with the owner of premises on which any class II license is located to provide for the payment of rent on a percentage or profit sharing basis, except for a nonprofit corporation upon approval of the board of commissioners, for the owner of the leased or rented premises in any way to share directly or in any other way in the profits of the applicant/lessee activity in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages; and further, the lessor shall not be in or have any other connection with the alcoholic beverage business. 
(Code 1978, § 5-38) 
Sec. 6-74. - Applicant/licensee responsible for operation of business. 
The applicant/licensee shall be active in and responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the alcoholic beverage application/license is made and granted and shall be responsible for the qualifications and conduct of his employees. 
(Code 1978, § 5-39) 
Sec. 6-75. - Delegation of management. 
If the applicant/licensee for an alcoholic beverage license shall assign, allow, direct or permit the management, operations or conduct of the alcoholic beverage business by a party or parties other than himself, the party and/or parties managing, directing, conducting or operating such business shall be deemed equally responsible and subject to all conditions of this chapter in every respect in the same manner and degree as the owner. 
(Code 1978, § 5-40) 
Sec. 6-76. - Duties of manager, operator or designee. 
(a)  The manager, operator or designee shall be that person designated by the licensee as responsible for the management and/or conduct of business connected with the operation of a licensed alcoholic beverage establishment, class I, class II and class III. The manager, operator or designee shall devote and be on the premises of the licensee a minimum of 30 hours per workweek and shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the alcoholic beverage licensee to notify the city code enforcement division within 48 hours in writing of any change made by the licensee in the manager, operator or designee for the operation of the licensed premises. 
(Code 1978, § 5-41) 
Sec. 6-77. - City's right of rejection of manager, designee; investigation; notice. 
The city shall have the right to accept or reject such manager, operator and/or designee based upon the results of an investigation of the record of the individual. The licensee shall be notified, in writing, by the code enforcement division of the city as to the results of such investigation within 48 hours of such determination. 
(Code 1978, § 5-42) 
Sec. 6-78. - Partnership, corporation as applicant. 
If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and make a sworn statement of those qualifications as required by this chapter. If the applicant is a corporation, all principal officers of the corporation must meet all requirements of an individual applicant. 
(Code 1978, § 5-43) 
Sec. 6-79. - Name in which license issued; signatures and oaths of partners, stockholders. 
Where the applicant is a corporation or private club the license, if issued, shall be issued in the name of the corporation or club and its chief officer or principal stockholder having the citizenship, residence and other qualification requirements of this chapter. If the applicant is a partnership, such requirements shall apply to all partners. An application of a partnership or similar group, of not over ten persons, shall be signed and sworn to by all of its members and of a corporation by its principal officer or stockholder who meets the citizenship, residence and other qualification requirements of this article. Principal officers and stockholders must meet requirements herein. 
(Code 1978, § 5-44) 
Sec. 6-80. - Name change. 
If an alcoholic beverage license is issued in the name of the manager, operator or designee on behalf of the registered owner of such business, a change in the licensee may be accomplished in the following manner: 
(1)  The current licensee shall notify the city a minimum of 72 hours in advance of the anticipated change in licensee giving the following information: 
a.  Name and location and telephone number of the current licensed manager/operator. 
b.  Name, location and telephone number of the prospective manager/operator. 
c.  The prospective operator/manager shall meet all qualifications of an initial applicant with the exception of the residency and publication requirements. 
(2)  Upon successful completion of the city's background check on the prospective licensee (manager/operator), an alcoholic beverage license may be issued by the code enforcement division of the city without further action being required. 
(3)  If the license holder has been arrested for any felony or arrested for any misdemeanor drug offense the license holder shall not be permitted to seek a name change under this section. The license holder shall retain the license in his name pending the disposition of the criminal charges pending against him. This provision shall not prohibit the city from seeking a revocation of the license holder's license under other grounds of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 5-45; Ord. No. 08-26.3-91, 8-26-91) 
Sec. 6-81. - Fingerprinting and investigation—Applicants. 
All applicants for an alcoholic beverage license within the city shall be fingerprinted and have conducted, by the city, an investigation as to the qualifications of such applicant. The board of commissioners shall have the right to issue or reject such application based solely upon the results of the investigation. 
(Code 1978, § 5-46) 
Sec. 6-82. - Same—Employees. 
All businesses that possess an alcoholic beverage license are required to submit to the chief of police or his designee a current list of all employees, denoting their age, date of birth, address, and social security number, to be maintained on file by the police department. This record will be submitted at the time of license application, renewal and/or anytime employees are added or removed from employment. 
(Code 1978, § 5-47; Ord. No. 12102012, 12-10-12) 
Sec. 6-83. - Additional information. 
The applicant shall furnish such other information as the city clerk-treasurer may, upon direction of the board of commissioners, from time to time require. 
(Code 1978, § 5-48) 
Sec. 6-84. - Agreement to pay taxes. 
The applicant shall sign an agreement that, in consideration of the privilege of approval of the application/license, the applicant shall pay all taxes, fees, levies, etc., imposed upon the licensee by this chapter and will sell or hold for sale no alcoholic beverage upon which such taxes, fees, levies, etc., have not been paid. 
(Code 1978, § 5-49) 
Sec. 6-85. - Public hearing required. 
All applicants for a new alcoholic beverage license within the city shall be required to have a public hearing conducted by the board of commissioners prior to the issuance of such license. 
(Code 1978, § 5-50) 
Secs. 6-86—6-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES 

Sec. 6-96. - Original investigative fee. 
All applicants for an initial alcoholic beverage license shall, at the time of application therefor, deposit with the city clerk-treasurer a nonrefundable investigation fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges in cash or by certified check. 
(Code 1978, § 5-61) 
Sec. 6-97. - Name change fee. 
The fee charged by the city for a name change noted in section 6-80 shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1978, § 5-62) 
Sec. 6-98. - License fees. 
All applicants for an initial alcohol beverage license shall deposit with the city clerk-treasurer the license fee for such license as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. No such fees shall be prorated for any portion of a year nor shall any such fees be refundable except upon denial of the board of commissioners to grant the license applied for. 
(Code 1978, § 5-63) 
Sec. 6-99. - Schedule. 
(a)  The annual license fee for the renewal of an alcoholic beverage license once granted shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  All licenses must be purchased prior to 5:00 p.m., of the last working day before January 1. Licenses expire at midnight December 31. 
(Code 1978, § 5-64) 
Secs. 6-100—6-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LOCATION AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 6-111. - Minimum specifications for retail outlets. 
All retail liquor sales must meet the following minimum specifications: 
(1)  Must meet Standard Building Code coastal region requirements. 
(2)  Eighty percent of the front of the building must be plate glass. 
(3)  Building shall be of masonry construction. 
(4)  Lighting shall be fluorescent and shall be 100 footcandles in intensity. 
(Code 1978, § 5-71) 
Sec. 6-112. - Survey of premises to accompany application. 
No application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be approved which does not include or have attached thereto a current certificate from a registered surveyor of this state, showing a scale drawing of the premises, and the location at which applicant desires to operate, as well as the straight line distance in lineal feet from the nearest church, public park, schoolground, college campus, public library and private dwelling lot of such proposed premises. 
(1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6-112 to the contrary, "restaurants" defined in section 6-1 and subsection 6-20(b) which offers alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, are exempt from the requirements contained in section 6-112 provided that the serving of such beverages is incidental to the principal business conducted. 
(Code 1978, § 5-72; Ord. No. 12102012, 12-10-12) 
Sec. 6-113. - Distance requirements. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted or issued to any applicant for such license nor shall any person knowingly and intentionally sell or offer to sell, give or distribute: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of the front door of any church building; 
(2)  Any distilled spirits within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus; 
(3)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus; 
(4)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the State of Georgia or any county or municipal government therein. 
a.  As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690. 
(5)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. 
a.  As used in this subsection, the term 'housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Title 8, the "Housing Authorities Law." 
(6)  Nothing in this subparagraph shall prohibit a grocery store licensed for the retail sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises from selling wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(Code 1978, § 5-73; Ord. No. 04-22.1-91, § 14.01, 4-22-91; Ord. No. 052206, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 12102012, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 09122016, 9-12-16 ) 
Sec. 6-114. - Distance measurements. 
Those distance measurement prohibitions stated in section 6-113 shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  Churches, library/branch: In a straight line from the front door of the site for which an alcoholic beverage license is applied for to the premises front door of any church, library/branch or premises thereof. 
(2)  College campus, school grounds: In the nearest straight line from the front door of the structure on the premises for which an alcoholic beverage license is applied for, to the nearest property line of the college campus and/or school grounds. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 6-113 to the contrary, "restaurants" defined in section 6-1 and subsection 6-20(b) which offers alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, are exempt from the requirements contained in section 6-113 provided that the serving of such beverages is incidental to the principal business conducted. 
(Code 1978, § 5-74; Ord. No. 04-22.1-91, § 14.02, 4-22-91; Ord. No. 01-08.01-96, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 10-27.01-97, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 052206, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 12102012, 12-10-12) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campuses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-115. - Issuance during construction. 
When the license applied for under this article is for a license to be located in a building not in existence when such license application is filed or construction of such building has been commenced, but is not yet completed, a license may, if otherwise authorized hereunder, be issued for such location if the application for such license and the plans for the proposed building clearly show that such building and the distance requirements will, when completed, meet all requirements of this chapter, city law and the state law. The annual license fee shall not be discounted or reduced for time consumed in building operations after the license is approved, but no sales shall be made at such location until the building has been completed in accordance with the plans and conforms with all provisions of the law and this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 5-75) 
Sec. 6-116. - Malt beverages and wine (class II) license exception, new and renewal. 
The measurements indicated in section 6-113(1) applicable to church property shall be exempted from the applicable provisions of this division when such application is for the retail sales of malt beverages and wine (class II) license, new and renewal thereof, and the business conducted therein is primarily sales of foodstuffs (grocery) also known as supermarket, wherein foodstuffs are purchased for off-premises consumption and the total sales area of such business is in excess of 15,000 square feet. 
(Code 1978, § 5-76) 
Sec. 6-117. - Prohibited adjunct business, class II. 
No class II retail distilled spirits license shall be approved or issued for a given location, nor shall distilled spirits sales be permitted in or in connection with a restaurant, cafe or eating place, or in the same room where a bar or soda fountain is maintained for the dispensing and sale of malt beverages, wine or soft drinks. 
(Code 1978, § 5-77) 
Sec. 6-118. - Club, restaurant, lounge, etc., requirements, class III. 
In addition to all other requirements, no class III license shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a private club, restaurant, hotel, nightclub, lounge or bowling alley as defined. 
(Code 1978, § 5-78; Ord. No. 06102013, 6-10-13) 
Secs. 6-119—6-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC HEARING 

Sec. 6-131. - Required; when. 
(a)  A public hearing shall be conducted by the board of commissioners upon the application(s) for any initial alcoholic beverage license. 
(b)  No application for an alcoholic beverage license, except application for renewal thereof, shall be approved or granted by the board of commissioners until after a public hearing has been held thereon by the board of commissioners after due publication notice. 
(Code 1978, § 5-86) 
Sec. 6-132. - Publication of notice of application and hearing. 
Each applicant for an initial alcoholic beverage license within the city shall, at his expense, cause to have published in the official designated newspaper of general circulation within the city a filing of such application. The published notice shall include the notice of application; time, date and place of public hearing before the board of commissioners; as well as any other information required by the city. 
(Code 1978, § 5-87) 
Sec. 6-133. - Publication requirements. 
The publication of a notice of public hearing contained in section 6-132 above shall be made as follows: 
(1)  No more than 21 days prior to the public hearing nor less than ten days prior to the public hearing. 
(2)  No such notice of publication required herein shall be less than ten-point capital and lower case lettering with a minimum of one-inch, two-column size. 
(Code 1978, § 5-88) 
Sec. 6-134. - Time limit for license grant or denial. 
Each application on which the board of commissioners conducts a public hearing shall be granted or denied by it within 21 days from the date on which such public hearing is concluded. 
(Code 1978, § 5-89) 
Sec. 6-135. - License renewal, objections to renewal. 
Applications for the renewal of alcoholic beverage licenses shall not require a public hearing thereon unless written objections thereto are filed in writing with the city clerk-treasurer a minimum of 15 working days prior to such renewal. A hearing of such objection shall be conducted by the board of commissioners after publication of notice thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 5-90) 
Sec. 6-136. - Notice of objection to license or renewal. 
Applicants for an initial alcoholic beverage license or renewal thereof shall be notified in writing within 72 hours of receipt of any objection received by the city to such application. The notice shall be by registered or certified mail addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form or to the place of business listed under the current city license and shall include a copy of the objection. 
(Code 1978, § 5-91) 
Secs. 6-137—6-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TERM, RENEWAL, TRANSFER 

Sec. 6-146. - Term; fee nonrefundable. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for less than one calendar year. In case of a license revocation or surrender or failure to utilize a license issued hereunder prior to the expiration date, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive a refund of the license fees. 
(Code 1978, § 5-101) 
Sec. 6-147. - Deadline for filing renewal application. 
Applicants in any given license year shall file their application for license renewal under this article for the next succeeding year prior to November 30 of the current license year. 
(Code 1978, § 5-102) 
Sec. 6-148. - Objections to application; extended expiration date. 
A city alcoholic beverage license shall not be issued hereunder until the application therefor is approved or granted by the board of commissioners; however, when timely objections to such application are filed, the life of the current expired license is hereby extended to and through the date on which the board of commissioners grants or denies such application, but in no event shall such extension exceed 30 calendar days. 
(Code 1978, § 5-103) 
Sec. 6-149. - License nontransferable, nonassignable. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location without approval of the board of commissioners. If a licensed business is sold or closed for a period of 90 days or the license is revoked for any reason, it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender such license to the city. 
(Code 1978, § 5-104) 
Sec. 6-150. - Exception to section 6-149. 
An alcoholic beverage license shall not be transferable except as provided in this section. In case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferable to the administrator, executor or lawful adult heir or heirs of such deceased person who shall meet all qualifications contained in this chapter as an initial applicant and shall be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 5-105) 
Sec. 6-151. - Withdrawal or substitution of partners. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership license from retiring in favor of one or more partners in such license who were partners of the retiring partner when the application for such partnership license was filed and when such partnership license was issued; provided, such withdrawal shall not, without compliance with this article by filing a new application for an alcoholic beverage license and having it approved by the board of commissioners as an initial application, introduce or result in anyone, not already a member of such partnership, being or thereby becoming the owner, holder or controller of a financial interest in the license or place of business, who had none prior thereto. 
(Code 1978, § 5-106) 
Sec. 6-152. - New partners; new stockholders. 
A partnership licensee may take in new partners who can and do, with the former partners, qualify for an initial license hereunder; and a corporate licensee may acquire new stockholders if same can and do qualify under the provisions of this chapter as well as other laws and ordinances of the city, state and U.S. government as determined by the board of commissioners that the sole reason therefor is the necessity for additional capital furnished, or to be furnished and to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business, or for building new facilities, and where it affirmatively appears that neither such licensee nor any partner or stockholder can and will receive directly or indirectly any legal or beneficial interest in additional capital invested. Under this section, each new partner and stockholder acquiring a financial interest in the license shall be investigated by the city and a new license shall be required of a new partnership when new partners are admitted, but a corporation shall not be required to obtain a new license when it or someone else sells qualified persons stock therein. In all cases covered by this section, an investigation is required and the investigation fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged and paid in advance notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter. Such fee is nonrefundable. 
(Code 1978, § 5-107) 
Secs. 6-153—6-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, CANCELLATION 

Sec. 6-166. - Violation grounds for suspension or revocation. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license by the board of commissioners, in addition to the penalties provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 5-116) 
Sec. 6-167. - Automatic revocation. 
When any state permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city is revoked, the city license granted hereunder shall thereupon stand automatically revoked without any action by the board of commissioners or any municipal officer. 
(Code 1978, § 5-117) 
Sec. 6-168. - Forfeiture of approval; causes, exception. 
After approval of an application for a license or renewal thereof, failure of the applicant to pay the annual fee within two weeks and obtain the license, or to exercise within nine months from the date of approval of such application by the board of commissioners the privilege conferred to the licensee, the board shall automatically forfeit and cancel such unused license without refund of any fee paid, unless such failure is due to providential intervention. 
(Code 1978, § 5-118) 
Sec. 6-169. - Cancellation of license for failure to continue business. 
Every licensee who shall bring to exercise the privilege conferred by a license under this article, but who shall thereafter, for a period of nine consecutive months, fail to exercise such privilege, shall have the license, by virtue of such failure, cancelled without further notice or action from the board of commissioners, unless such failure is due to providential intervention. 
(Code 1978, § 5-119) 
Sec. 6-170. - Cancellation in case of insolvency or failure to pay tax. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, every license and renewal thereof issued hereunder shall expire and be of no further force or effect in case of bankruptcy, receivership, levy of process or failure to promptly account for and pay the excise tax levied on sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1978, § 5-120) 
Sec. 6-171. - Public hearing re suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Upon findings by the city of violation of city ordinances, state or federal laws as provided in sections 6-166 and 6-167, the board of commissioners shall at any regular or special meeting called for that purpose establish a date, time and place for the conduct of a public hearing at which the owner/holder, operator/manager or designee holding the alcoholic beverage license shall show cause why such license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  A notice of such public hearing shall be delivered by registered mail or delivered to the address shown on the alcoholic beverage license by a member of the police department of the city or other law enforcement agency or delivery to an authorized agent of the licensee, or by posting such notice on the front door of the licensed place of business, a minimum of ten days prior to the conduct of the public hearing established by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The notice referred to in subsection (b) shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  Name and address of license holder. 
(2)  Location for which the license is issued. 
(3)  A copy of the board of commissioners resolution charging the licensee, on information and belief, with violation of law or ordinance provision or violation of any U.S., state, county or city law and/or ordinance, which alleged violation if found true in the opinion of a majority of the board warrants revocation of the alcoholic beverage license of the holder of such license. 
(4)  The date, time and place at which a public hearing will be held. 
(d)  Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the board of commissioners, by majority vote, shall determine: 
(1)  The public hearing findings warrant the revocation or suspension of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(2)  The public hearing findings do not warrant revocation or suspension of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(3)  The public hearing findings require additional information in which case the public hearing shall be adjourned to a date certain. 
(e)  If upon the finding of the board of commissioners, as a result of a public hearing as provided in subsection (d), the alcoholic beverage license of any licensee is suspended or revoked, such suspension or revocation shall become effective within 48 hours of such action by the board. 
(Code 1978, § 5-121) 
Sec. 6-172. - Revocation, suspension, refusal to renew; grounds; notice; hearing; emergency situations. 
(a)  Upon a finding of due cause, as hereinafter defined, the commission shall have the authority to deny applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership, and to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee hereunder. 
(b)  "Due cause" for the denial of applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership, or for revocation, suspension or refusal to renew an existing license shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The solicitation on the licensed premises by a licensee or by any employee of the licensee for herself, or himself or for any person other than a patron and guests of a patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic, or money with which to purchase the same, the paying by a licensee of a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting the establishment of the licensee or to the agent, employee or manager of the licensee to solicit for herself, himself or for others in the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. For the purposes of this subsection, neither the licensee nor any employee of such licensee shall be considered a guest of any patron. 
(2)  The selling to or serving of any person below the age of 21 years. 
(3)  The conviction of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the licensee to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner. 
(4)  The violation of any existing state law or regulation governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or transportation of alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  The violation of any provisions of the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 337 et seq.) reasonably related to the operation of licensed establishments. 
(6)  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other illegal act where the licensee, his employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(7)  Permitting the sale or solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for the sale or use of drugs or any other controlled substance whether the licensee, his employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(8)  The selling or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee, his employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(9)  The failure to comply with any and all federal, state or municipal tax laws and regulations applicable to the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(10)  The failure to furnish any and all data, information and records related to the operation of licensed establishments, when the same has been requested by the city code enforcement or the city commission. 
(11)  The failure to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in section 6-69 of this chapter. 
(12)  The failure to obtain prior approval of the commission for changing the type of establishment operated pursuant to this chapter. 
(13)  The death or serious bodily injury of any person on the licensed premises by any act of violence, including, but not limited to, injury by firearms or knives or any other instrument ordinarily used for bodily injury. 
(14)  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and other on the licensed premises, or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including but not limited to parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(c)  In addition to those enumerations listed in subsection (b) above, "due cause" for the denial of applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership, or for revocation, suspension or refusal to renew an existing license shall also consist of the violation of any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which are reasonably related to the operation of such establishments. 
(d)  No application for new license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied, and no license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city or any licensee hereunder shall be revoked, suspended or refused renewal except upon a finding of due cause as defined in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, and after a hearing and upon a five-day written notice to the licensee, stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing and setting forth the charge or charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(e)  The commission shall conduct the hearings herein. The commission, after hearing, may deny applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership, and may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any existing license. In lieu of suspension, revocation or the failure to renew hereunder, the commission may impose a fine upon any licensee, such fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation occurring on the licensed premises. 
(f)  After denial, revocation or the failure to renew a license hereunder, the commission may refuse to accept or consider any application for a license to operate at the subject location for the sale of alcoholic beverages for a period of 12 months from the time of revocation or failure to renew such license; however, any new application for license hereunder at such location shall ask of the new applicant whether the subject location has been revoked or not renewed under this chapter. 
(g)  For due cause, in the event of a violation of this chapter which results in an emergency situation in which continued operation of the premises by the licensee endangers the health, welfare or safety of the public, the commission or its designee may suspend any license hereunder. Any such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the city commission. 
(h)  If any part of this section is for any reason declared invalid, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other portions of the section, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 05-23.2-94, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 06-13.2-94, 6-13-94) 
Sec. 6-173. - Reporting of disciplinary actions. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §3-3-2.1, the City of Douglas Police Department or code enforcement officer shall be required to provide notification to the Georgia Department of Revenue within 45 days of any officer, department, agency, or instrumentality of the municipality taking disciplinary action against any person issued a license to operate any premises at which 75 percent or more total gross annual revenue is derived from the sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  The notification required under paragraph (a) of this Code section shall be in the format for the reporting of disciplinary actions set by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(c)  For purposes of this code section "disciplinary action" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. §3-3-2.1(a)(1), which includes any citation or arrest arising out of the violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, any employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of a licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. 
( Ord. No. 09122016(1), 9-12-16 ) 
Secs. 6-174—6-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 

Sec. 6-191. - License expiration upon inability or failure to pay. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter every license and renewal thereof issued hereunder shall expire and be of no further force or effect in case of bankruptcy, receivership, levy of process, or failure to promptly account for and pay the excise tax levied on sales of alcoholic beverages within the city or state or United States. 
(Code 1978, § 5-156) 
Sec. 6-192. - Excise tax on malt beverages. 
(a)  Levied. For each license year commencing January 1 and ending December 31, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each retail and wholesale malt beverage dealer an excise tax in an amount equaling the total of $0.05 per 12 ounces. The excise tax on tap or draft malt beverages shall be in the sum of $6.00 for each container sold as hereinafter specified, containing not more than 15½ gallons and at a like rate for fractional parts where the beverage is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, such beverage being commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
(b)  Method of collection and payment. The excise tax provided for in subsection (a) shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages. Such taxes shall be paid by such dealer on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the city by the wholesale dealer. 
(c)  Stamps, decals, etc., prohibited. No decal, stamp or other marking may be required on malt beverages, designating the city wherein a sale of malt beverages is made, or wherein resides a licensed retailer to whom such beverages are delivered. 
(d)  Report of sales; remitting taxes: 
(1)  Each licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, for the month sold within each municipality and/or county. 
(2)  The wholesaler shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the tax imposed by the city. 
(Code 1978, § 5-157) 
Sec. 6-193. - Excise tax on wine. 
In addition to any license fees contained within this chapter or other laws and ordinances of the city, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter which shall be paid to the city on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the city by the wholesale distributor on all wine sold to licensees for the sale of wine in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering wine to any such licensee shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the 20th day of the month following. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any such licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which such tax has not been paid. The wholesaler shall make the reports as required in this section. 
(Code 1978, § 5-158) 
Sec. 6-194. - Excise tax on distilled spirits. 
(a)  Levied. In addition to the annual license fee charged for the issuance of a class II or III license, there is hereby assessed an excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter of distilled spirits and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter of distilled spirits sold to retail distilled spirits (class II and class III) licensees in the city by the wholesale distributor or held for sale by class II and III retailers and remitted monthly by the wholesale (class I) licensee. 
(b)  Class I licensee's reports; payment required. Every class I licensee (wholesaler) selling packaged distilled spirits to businesses (class II and class III licensees) within the city shall file with the city manager a copy of each monthly report and a copy of invoices reflecting sales of distilled spirits by such wholesale distributors within the city. 
(c)  Payment. The wholesale distributor (class I licensee) shall file the report required in subsection (b) on or before the 15th day of each month after the last day of each month for which report is made, and the tax due shall be paid at the time the report is filed. 
(Code 1978, § 5-159) 
Sec. 6-195. - Failure to report, pay excise tax. 
The failure of any class I, II or III licensee to timely report and pay the excise tax enumerated in this article shall result, after hearing before the board of commissioners, in the suspension for up to 90 days of the licensee's alcoholic beverage license or revocation of same in the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 5-160) 
Sec. 6-196. - Storage of alcoholic beverages. 
No class I, II or III licensee shall keep any alcoholic beverages stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by him are stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of alcoholic beverages at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business, his storage space for alcoholic beverages shall be immediately adjacent to the room in which he is licensed to do business. 
(Code 1978, § 5-161) 
Sec. 6-197. - Minimum container size, sale in unbroken packages, class III licensee. 
No class III licensee may purchase distilled spirits in containers smaller than one-fifth gallon. The sale of alcoholic beverages for any consumption on the premises of the licensee in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. 
(Code 1978, § 5-162) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12202012-2, adopted Dec. 20, 2012, repealed former Ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-46, and enacted a new Ch. 10 as set out herein. Former Ch. 10 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Code 1978, §§ 6-1—6-3, 6-5, 6-8—6-14, 6-30—6-33, 6-35, 6-37 and Ord. No. 12-10.01-01, adopted Dec. 10, 2001. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian, or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food, water, ventilation or shelter, for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age, and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for an animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It should also be clean, dry, and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species, and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down, and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of November through March. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate space means a sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species, and breed of animal. For dogs, adequate space means an enclosure with a minimum of 100 square feet per dog. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice, and rancid contaminated water. 
Animal means any living organism, except a plant, bacterium, or human, which can move voluntarily and has specialized sense organs, included domesticated animals and fowl. 
Animal control holding facility means and includes any vehicle, building, structure, pasture, paddock, pond, impoundment aria or premises where any animal is kept or housed by the city for the purpose of impounding or harboring stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, neglected or abused animals. 
Animal control officer. The board of commissioners may, in its discretion provide for an animal control officer, whose duty shall be to impound any livestock or domestic animals found running at large in the city and impound the same in accordance with any provisions within this chapter. 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to an animal by an act, an omission, or neglect. 
Dangerous dog means a classification made by an animal control officer for any dog that has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being or another domestic animal or, if such dog has previously been classified as a potentially dangerous dog, has aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered the safety of a human being or domestic animal without provocation. However, no dog may be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. The definition shall not be construed to include any dog that is part of a governmental organization or a trained guard dog in performance of its duties. 
Dogs running at large means any dog not under immediate control, not on a leash, not at heel, not beside a competent person, not in a vehicle driven or parked, or not confined within the property limits of his owner. Hunting and tracking dogs are deemed under the control of the owner when hunting with the landowner's permission. Working farm dogs are deemed under the control of the owner when acting in conjunction with farming operations and/or otherwise under the general command of the owner. 
Domestic animal means an animal that, through long association with humans, has been adapted to human living conditions. 
Fighting dog means any dog that is owned, possessed, kept, harbored, trained, or maintained for the purpose of fighting. Fighting dogs are illegal in the city. 
Guard or protection dog means any dog trained for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. A dog shall not be considered a guard or protection dog if it otherwise meets the criteria for being defined as a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog, or vicious dog. 
Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and transporting it to the animal control facility. 
Livestock means and includes horses, cows, goats, pigs, or any other hoofed animal used for pleasure or profit. Fowl and rabbits are expressly included within this definition. 
Necessary veterinary care means veterinary medical attention appropriate to the circumstances, whenever an animal is known or suspected to have suffered an injury, accidental or deliberate, or exhibits signs of disease process such as shock, temperature fluctuation, tremors, swelling, broken bones, open wounds, inability to eat or drink, blistering, irregular or abnormal breathing, partial or total paralysis, abnormal discharge or bleeding, mange, or other signs of health problems. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, and/or other legal entity, who or which owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, feeds, maintains, or knowingly causes or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his/her care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his/her premises. 
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any adult at whose residence a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is kept or found shall be presumed to be an owner of such dog and shall have the burden of rebutting such presumption. 
If an animal has more than one owner, any one of such owners may be prosecuted for violations whether or not any other owners are also prosecuted. 
Police officer means any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests or cause to be issued citations or summonses in this city. 
Potentially dangerous dog means a classification made by an animal control officer for any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to make unprovoked attacks, cause injuries, or otherwise threaten the safety of any human being or domestic animal. Potentially dangerous dog shall also mean any dog which, when unprovoked, inflicts a bite upon a human being or domestic animal or chases or approaches a human being or domestic animal on any public property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of an attack. A dog shall not be considered a potentially dangerous dog if the attack, injury, or threatening conduct by the dog was sustained by, or targeted at, a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A structure which is suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping; 
(2)  A structure with secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides; 
(3)  A structure whose sides are so constructed at the bottom so as to prevent the dog's escape by digging under the sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad; 
(4)  A structure which provides appropriate protection from the elements for the dog. The structure must contain adequate shelter inside it; 
(5)  A structure which is inside a perimeter or area fence; 
(6)  The gate to the structure shall be of the inward-opening type and shall be kept locked except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
Provocation means committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or possessor of the animal, or teasing, tormenting, or abusing the animal or committing or attempting to commit a crime against a person. 
Sanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area that is not contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
Severe injury means any injury which results in a broken bone, lacerations severe enough to require multiple sutures or to render cosmetic surgery necessary or appropriate, puncture wounds that intrude below the surface of the skin, or death. 
Vicious dog, consistent with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-41(6), means any dog that inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation after the owner has notice that the dog has previously bitten or attacked or endangered the safety of a human being; or any dog that is owned, possessed, kept, harbored, trained, or maintained for the purpose of fighting. Such term shall not include a dog that inflicts any injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. A dog shall not be a vicious dog if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this chapter shall be by the city governing authority. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the assistance of code enforcement persons or law enforcement persons within their jurisdiction. 
(b)  Where not specified, fees and costs shall be established from time to time by the governing authority of the city and posted publicly at City Hall and the animal shelter. Any such moneys received in connection with the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid to the city municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-3. - Conflicts. 
(a)  Where there is a conflict among articles or sections within this chapter, the article or section that is more restrictive and stricter shall apply. 
(b)  Definitions in article II of this chapter may be used to define other parts of this chapter unless the context is clear that the definition does not apply. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-4. - Bird sanctuary; wildlife. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is designated as a bird and wildlife sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any wild bird or to rob any wild bird's nest; however, if nuisance birds such as starlings are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of code enforcement, those birds may be destroyed as humanely as possible, under appropriate supervision, in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the director. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any other wild game in the city except by order of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-5. - Removal of carcasses. 
The city shall be responsible for removal of animal carcasses from city rights-of-way. It shall be the duty of the owner or person responsible for any dead animal to place the carcass in a plastic bag and notify the city within 24 hours of learning of such dead animal. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-6. - Fowl or livestock running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any domestic fowl or livestock to allow that domestic fowl or livestock to run at large within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in charge of any chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, turkeys or other similar fowl to permit the same to run at large within the city so that such fowl go upon the premises of another or the public grounds within the city, and trespass thereon; or give annoyance to the owners of other premises, or do damage to other people's premises or property, either real or personal; or do damage to any of the public grounds within the city. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-7. - Enclosures for fowl. 
Where the keeping of fowl is allowed pursuant to applicable zoning, any housing or enclosure used shall be well drained, free from accumulations of excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-8. - Impounding—Officers authorized. 
Any head of livestock found running at large in the city shall be impounded by the animal control officer of the city. If not redeemed by the owner as hereinafter provided, the animal control officer shall sell the same for case for cost and fees as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-9. - Same—Notice to owner. 
If the owner of impounded livestock is known and resides in the city he shall be notified that his livestock is impounded, within the next 12 business hours, which notice may be served by animal control officer or code enforcement officer or such person as may be designated by the city, either personally or by leaving same at his residence or place of business; such entry to be proven by person serving same. If the owner is not known, or resides out of the city, the notice must be posted at the city hall and two other public places in the city, the entry in the pound book being evidence of that fact. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-10. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
(a)  Unclaimed impounded animals may be adopted in accordance with the procedure established by the city upon payment of the adoption fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  Animals not claimed or adopted within a reasonable time will be disposed of in a humane way by the city. 
(c)  All fees derived from the operation of the pound shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-11. - Records. 
The animal control officer or other officer or person in charge of any impounded animals as herein provided shall keep a record of all livestock or domestic animals so impounded, and in which record he shall make an entry of the time each animal comes into his possession; when advertised and when sold or when and by whom redeemed; and if sold, by whom same was purchased; and what price same brought at the sale; shall enter and keep as correctly as possible the age, color, sex, marks or brand of the animals and such other matters of identification as may think proper. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-12. - Interfering with officers; unauthorized releasing of impounded animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to obstruct, resist, interfere with or in any manner interfere with any police officer of the city, animal control officer of the city, code enforcement officer of the city, impounding officer or any other officer, in the seizing, impounding, keeping or selling of any livestock running at large; or to break [into] the city's pound or place where such animals are kept, or to open the gates or take any of the animals therefrom, or to let out any of the animals therefrom, intentionally or unintentionally. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-13. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating the terms of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed: 
a.  First conviction ..... $295.00 
b.  Second conviction ..... 495.00 
c.  Third conviction ..... 695.00 
d.  Fourth conviction or more, to be determined by the court. 
(2)  In addition to the fine in subsection (1), imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(b)  The city municipal court shall have jurisdiction of all cases arising from violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Secs. 10-14—10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 

Sec. 10-41. - Enforcement and penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person violating this chapter may be issued a citation and summons to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction, and the offending animal may be immediately impounded by the animal control officer pending disposition of the citation by the court. Any person violating this chapter, may be deemed guilty of violating a city ordinance, and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and by imprisonment in the common jail of the county not to exceed six months, or both fine and imprisonment, in addition to the more stringent penalties that are provided for under state law for violations of this chapter. 
(b)  Each act or omission in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as part of any sentence, may do a combination of any of the following: 
(1)  Prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in the city any animal during the term of the sentence; 
(2)  Order that the animal be removed from the city; 
(3)  Order that the animal be surrendered to the city animal control facility; 
(4)  Order that the animal be humanely euthanized; 
(5)  Order restitution to the victim(s). 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-42. - Restraint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of any dog to fail to keep a dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section. 
(b)  A dog is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, guardian, possessor, or custodian, and to ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other proper enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended; or 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system. If using an invisible containment system, a sign must be posted on the property indications that the system is in place; or 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person, or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the dog any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsection (1) or (2) above while on the owner's property. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of any animal to restrain or anchor an animal by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord, unless the tether or other restraint is being held by a competent person. An exception shall be made for the limited purpose of allowing the animal's owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian to temporarily restrain the animal by such means to allow the animal's needs to be met, such as the time necessary to clean the animal's living quarters, feed, and water. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements in subsection 10-29(b)(1), the following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of guard or protection dogs: 
(1)  Owners, possessors, guardians or custodians of any guard or protection dog must confine all such dogs within a perimeter fence sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times. 
(2)  A "beware of dog" sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two, as well as a sign on each ingress or egress point to the enclosure. Signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(3)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall, prior to placing dogs on the property, have the dog(s) microchip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to the animal control officer. 
There shall be a fee for each guard or protection dog for the first year or any part thereof that the dog is in the city and a renewal fee for each dog every year thereafter as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The renewal fee shall be paid by January 30 of each year. 
(4)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall report to the City of Douglas Animal Control within 12 hours of any of the following except weekends or holidays, then must report first working day: 
a.  Escape of the dog; 
b.  An attack on a human or animal by the dog; 
c.  Transfer of ownership of the dog; death of the dog. 
(5)  A guard or protection dog shall be deemed under control only when the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dogs prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length. 
(d)  Dogs found running at-large or in violation of this section may be immediately impounded by animal control officers, police officer, or any law enforcement officer. 
Any animal that is impounded under this section shall not be returned to its owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian in any event without strict proof of compliance with the provisions of this section or show proof that owner is working at coming in compliance. 
If the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian has not complied with this provisions of this section within ten days of the date the dog was impounded or within ten days of the date of disposition of the charges by the court if the animal control officer has determined to hold the dog pending such disposition, said dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(e)  The animal control officer, police officer, or any law enforcement officer may pursue the dog onto private property to effect capture of a dog believed to be in violation of this section. Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-43. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or to aid in the abandonment of any animal. An animal relinquished through written agreement with Douglas Animal Control, licensed rescue group, licensed shelter, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the respective entity. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-44. - Transient dogs and cats. 
Any dog or cat shipped or transported through the city or entering the city only for the purpose of a temporary stay, when such stay shall not exceed 15 days, shall be exempt from collar, and tag sections of this article. However, all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient animals. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-45. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of cruelty towards any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally train, breed, possess, harbor, keep, and have custody or control of an animal for the purpose of animal fighting. It shall be unlawful to be a spectator at or bet on an animal fighting activity. The intentional fighting of dogs, dog and hog, and cocks is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and animal control officers or humane society who euthanize animals under the direction of the city per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, Georgia Department of Agriculture, and this article shall not be guilty of cruelty to animals. 
(d)  A person shall not be guilty of cruelty when the person is protecting his life, the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him/her or another person or animal, provided that the person being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused, or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-46. - Public nuisance animal. 
(a)  A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal, excluding livestock maintained on properly zoned property, that: 
(1)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner; or 
(2)  Attacks a human or another animal without provocation; or 
(3)  Makes any vocalizations for more than 15 minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if the vocalization is intermittent. 
These time limits do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
Officers enforcing this subsection are not required to measure the vocalizations with the use of a sound level meter. 
Upon notification of a complaint concerning such vocalizations, the owner of such animal shall be given a written warning indicating that such animal is creating a disturbance, so long as the complainant provides the officer with the address of the owner, and a physical description of the offending animal. If the disturbance is not resolved within two days or a subsequent complaint is made for such animal by a different individual, who resides at a different location from the first complainant, a court summons shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; or 
(4)  Creates unsanitary conditions or offensive and objectionable odors in enclosures or surroundings and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept; or 
(5)  Is in heat and not confined within a secure enclosure to prevent unintentional breeding; or 
(6)  Chases vehicles, bicycles, or people. 
(b)  Any such public nuisance animal may be impounded immediately by an animal control officer and the owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian may be charged for a violation of this section. The animal may remain impounded pending disposition of the charges by the court. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-47. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal shelter may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after four days or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to the animal control officer by the owner of the animal, the animal may be offered for adoption. All persons adopting animals shall be over 18 years of age and shall provide adequate and humane care, feeding, shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary treatment as required. 
Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for fighting, or profit and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research. 
The frequency with which animals may be adopted and placed in any household may be restricted in the discretion of the animal shelter. 
(b)  Any person adopting an animal from the City of Douglas Animal Shelter shall pay an adoption fee in an amount stated in the City of Douglas Animal Shelter schedule of fees, and charges will include all or part of the costs of an examination and rabies inoculation and all or part of the costs associated with neutering or spaying dogs and cats. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-48. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal, seized or impounded by an animal control officer, or any officer empowered to act by law shall be detained at the animal control facility. The animal control officer shall notify the owner of such animal, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the animal has been impounded. The owner of any animal impounded may, within four days after notice or attempted notice, reclaim the animal by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus a boarding fee for each day the animal was impounded, and the cost of rabies vaccination if the animal has not been vaccinated within the prescribed time period, unless the animal control officer has determined that the animal should be held pending disposition of charges by the court. These fees, as applicable, shall also apply to biting animals held for rabies observation at the animal control facility. 
(b)  If any animal seized or impounded by the city's police department or code enforcement department evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the animal control officer shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat the animal or humanely euthanize the animal; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the animal control officer may have the shelter director, proceed with euthanization and prepare a complete report on the reason for euthanization. 
This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. 
(c)  Upon approval of the animal control officer and at the request and expense of the owner, impoundment may be at a veterinary or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing, provided that the owner can demonstrate to the animal control officer that the owner cannot cause the animal to be released from the boarding facility without the approval of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-49. - Humane disposition. 
(a)  If an animal is not claimed by the owner within four days it shall be the duty of the director of the animal shelter to euthanize the animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible. 
An animal deemed to be highly desirable for adoption may be kept beyond the four-day limitation, provided that the animal does not evidence any apparent signs of illness, injury, contagious or infectious diseases and that space is available to house the animal, at the discretion of the director of the animal shelter. Animals may be released to approved rescue groups or to approved foster homes authorized to accept animals if not claimed or adopted as provided. Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes. 
(b)  Any animal which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to the period of confinement as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be euthanized under the direction of the director of the animal shelter in as humane a manner as possible. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of the director of the animal shelter, a diseased or injured animal, taken into custody, is in need of immediate treatment, so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals the animal shall be euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-50. - Biting animals and quarantine. 
(a)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the Coffee County Board of Health, all dogs and cats known to have bitten or scratched a person shall be confined to the animal control facility, veterinarian's hospital, or at a boarding facility approved by City of Douglas Animal Control or under home supervision with the approval of the animal control officer for a period of ten days. The Coffee County Health Department needs to be notified of the event. All expenses incurred for boarding the animal during this period of time shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animal. 
(b)  In accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of public health, all pets or wild animals, other than a dog or cat, known to have bitten a person, or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies. 
(c)  Unvaccinated or unwanted animals bitten or scratched by a known potentially rabid animal shall be euthanized immediately. 
If the owner of the unvaccinated animal is unwilling to have the animal euthanized, upon approval of the animal control officer, the exposed animal shall be placed in quarantine for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. 
The owner or possessor is responsible for quarantining the exposed unvaccinated animal in strict compliance with the policies and procedures of the animal control unit and county board of health and for all costs associated with same. 
(d)  Dogs and cats that are bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal that are current on their vaccinations shall be re-vaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. 
Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the animal control director. 
(e)  For purposes of subsections (c) and (d), any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal including, but not limited to, bobcats, raccoons, foxes, skunks, or coyotes, which are not available for testing, should be considered exposed to rabies. 
Failure to comply with the quarantine and/or confinement requirements of this section, the animal control director, or the county board of health constitutes a violation of this article and may result in the impoundment of the animal. In that event, the owner or possessor remains responsible for all veterinary, boarding, and other expenses incurred on behalf of the quarantined animal. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-51. - Livestock. 
(a)  All livestock shall be properly housed with adequate food and adequate water and confined within a fenced enclosure. The fenced enclosure shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any average livestock animal from escaping the enclosed compound and causing damage, accidents, or injury to any person or property. Owners of such livestock shall be liable for any damage, accidents, or injuries. Those who provide boarding pasturing space and/or services for hire shall have the responsibility for enclosure maintenance as described in this paragraph. 
(b)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any livestock within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place. 
(c)  Owners or possessors of livestock impounded for violation of this article or any state and/or federal laws, will be charged in accordance with actual costs of impoundment, plus impounding and boarding fees. 
(d)  Impounded livestock shall be held for a period of 21 days. If such impounded animals are not claimed by the owner during that period of time, the animals may be given to persons willing to accept them, in the discretion of the animal control director. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-52. - Wildlife. 
All complaints and matters concerning wild animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting, shall be forwarded to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Game and Fish Division or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Law Enforcement Division for proper disposition, i.e., compliance, apprehension, control and/or enforcement, as may be necessary and as provided by state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-53. - Dead animals. 
Officers of the city's animal control are authorized to remove dead animals from public property. Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal control officer or property owner or possessor in accordance with state laws and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal, its parts, or blood on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal in a well or open pit of any kind, on private or public land. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner possessor in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-54. - Vaccines used and time of vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats owned, possessed, harbored, or residing within the limits of the city shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies before and no later than four months of age. Any dog or cat found not vaccinated by four months of age must have the consent of a licensed veterinarian stating the reasons. 
(c)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any type of animal in his/her possession, excluding dogs and cats, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies but does so at his own risk and assumes all liabilities for adverse actions of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-55. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Upon administering anti-rabies vaccines, a certificate of vaccination must be issued and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, to provide evidence of vaccination. 
(b)  Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination, provided he furnishes one copy to the animal owner, one copy to the animal control officer upon request by the City of Douglas Animal Control, and one copy is retained by the veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-56. - Animal license. 
The owner, possessor, or harborer of each dog or cat residing in the city must obtain and possess a current rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
Upon vaccination, veterinarians shall be responsible for issuing a metal tag with a vaccination and identification number. Tags must be renewed within 30 days of the expiration date of the vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-57. - Collar and rabies vaccination tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner or possessor to provide a collar and tag for each dog and cat, and the tag and collar shall be on the animal at all times when the animal is not under the immediate control of the owner or possessor of the animal. Animals participating in organized or controlled competitions are exempt from this section only for the duration of the competition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove such tags from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-58. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
No person who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-59. - Citations; summons; subpoenas. 
(a)  The animal control officer, code enforcement officer or city law enforcement officer, at his/her discretion, may choose not to impound the animal or livestock found in violation of any section of this chapter, but may return the animal to its owner or possessor and issue or cause to be issued a summons directing the owner or possessor of the animal or livestock to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction on a certain day to stand trial for the violation(s) of this chapter. 
(b)  If a violation(s) of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by the animal control officer, code enforcement officer or a city law enforcement officer, a subpoena may be issued to any witness or the person(s) complaining to appear on the day and time set for trial to testify on behalf of the Douglas Animal Control. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-60. - Liability of the city, Douglas police, code enforcement officers, animal control officers and employees. 
The city, the city police department, and its officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries, or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at the animal control facility or any facility designated by the city to house such animal. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-61. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the city vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control facility, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-62. - Animal neglect. 
(a)  Any animal or livestock owner or possessor who fails to provide adequate drink, adequate food, adequate space, adequate shelter, sanitary conditions, necessary veterinary care, and/or who causes unnecessary suffering of any animal or livestock shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave animals unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation to prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from heat exhaustion. 
(c)  Any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law may impound any animal found to be neglected, as defined by this section. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-63. - Duty of animal owners to be responsible owners. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-64. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect animals and fail to provide them with humane adequate care, collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this article, or collect, house, or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-65. - Right of entry. 
A law enforcement officer may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the law enforcement officer shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-66. - Animals transported in vehicles. 
No animal shall be transported on a public road in an open vehicle including an open top vehicle or open truck bed, unless the animal is humanely secured so as to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle, getting tangled, or having the ability to extend over the edge of the vehicle that could result in an injury or strangulation of the animal while the vehicle is in motion. No animal shall be transported in the trunk of a vehicle or under a pick up truck's tonneau cover. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-67. - Training guard or protection dogs. 
It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog, unless the trainer holds a state kennel license, a city business license, and maintains at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog or dogs being trained, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog on public property, including but not limited to, public parks. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-68. - Limitation on ownership. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect, abandonment or hoarding of an animal as provided in this chapter or has been required to or voluntarily relinquished ownership of such animal, may not own, possess, or have on his premises in the city any animal for one year from the date of conviction. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time. 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted of failure to keep an animal under restraint while on the owner's property as provided in this chapter and has been required to provide additional confinement requirements and has not complied with the court's order, may not be allowed to own a pet in their city household for one year from the date of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-69. - Backyard breeders. 
It is unlawful for any person who does not hold a license from the state department of agriculture to breed an animal if they are required by the state department of agriculture to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Secs. 10-70—10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOG CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., Vicious Dog Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40. 

Sec. 10-91. - Title and purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to implement the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq. (the "Act"), relating to dangerous dog control, and in some instances, to strengthen the requirements of the Act in furtherance of a community that is safe and secure from the harms of dangerous, potentially dangerous, and vicious dogs. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to amend or supersede any other ordinances relating to animal control. Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-92. - Exceptions. 
No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog, or vicious dog as a result of an injury upon a human being or other animal inflicted at a time when the dog was being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. No dog shall be considered a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog, or vicious dog as a result of an injury inflicted by the dog upon a person who, at the time of injury, was committing a willful trespass or other tort; who was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had done so in the past; or who was attempting to commit a crime. If the person injured is a child of tender years, the age, understanding, and capacity of such child shall be considered to determine whether such child was capable of committing a willful trespass or other tort or a crime. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-93. - Classification as dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog; notice to owner. 
(a)  When the animal control officer classifies any dog as a dangerous dog a potentially dangerous dog, or vicious dog under this article, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. If a dog has more than one owner, notice to one owner shall be sufficient for purposes of this article. If there is a question as to the dog's ownership, notice shall be deemed sufficient if sent to the last person who received a citation for the dog. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officers findings that form the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous, a potentially dangerous or vicious dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing on the classification within 15 days from the date of the notice. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the municipal court judge shall conduct the hearing. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if the owner does not request such a hearing within 15 days from the date of the notice, the classification of the dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be final and conclusive for all purposes. 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the municipal court judge and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such a request. 
(b)  When the municipal court receives a request for a hearing from an owner, it shall schedule such a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the request. The municipal court shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time, and place of the hearing; such notice shall be made to the owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence. 
The municipal court judge shall also receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as it may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify, or overrule the classification of the dog by the animal control officer. Within ten days of the date of the hearing, the municipal court shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of its determination on the matter. If the determination is made that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
Unless the municipal court determines that a later date is appropriate in a particular case, the effective date of the determination shall be the date of the animal control officer's classification. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of a dog which the animal control officer has classified as a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog cannot be determined, the dog shall be immediately confiscated. 
If the dog's owner claims such a dog, the dog shall be released to its owner, together with a copy of the notice specified in subsection (a) of this section, upon proof of strict compliance with all provisions of this chapter. If the dog remains unclaimed for ten days, the dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. Under no circumstances shall such dog be placed for adoption. In addition, all fees as described in this article must be paid before the dog will be released. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-94. - Requirements for possession of dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious dog. 
(a)  Any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of a dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious dog shall be jointly and severally responsible with all other owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of such dog for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody or control of a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog except in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements for a proper enclosure set forth in section 10-41, owners, possessors, guardians or custodians who maintain their dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious dog out-of-doors shall fence a portion of their property with a second perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter or area fence, the dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious dog must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad. The gate to the kennel shall be inward-opening and shall be kept locked, except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious dog to be outside of its proper enclosure as provided for in section 10-41, unless the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dog is attended by the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian, and the dog is restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length and the animal must be kept at least 15 feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced. 
(3)  The premises where a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog is kept shall be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dog on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. Such signs shall include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is a dog on the premises which presents a danger to human beings. The signs shall be conspicuously displayed on each side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two signs, as well as a sign on each ingress and egress point to the enclosure. The signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(4)  The owner of a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog shall maintain at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. 
(5)  The animal control officer, code enforcement officer or his designee shall have the right to inspect randomly and without notice a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog which is required to be confined pursuant to this section. 
(6)  The owner of a dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious dog shall, prior to placing dogs on property, have the dog micro-chip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to City of Douglas Animal Control and code enforcement office. The owner shall keep the registration information updated. 
(7)  Except when being transported to a licensed veterinary facility, dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs shall not be allowed off the property of the owner. 
(8)  Should transport to veterinary care be needed, the animal shall be securely and humanely confined within a vehicle. Movement of the animal from the residence of the owner to and from the transporting vehicle and to and from the veterinary facility shall be conducted with the animal securely leashed by a leash no longer than six feet in length and muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-95. - Registration of dangerous dogs, potentially dangerous dogs and vicious dogs. 
(a)  No dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be permitted to remain within the city, unless it is registered in accordance with this section. In addition to the annual registration fees provided otherwise in this chapter, the owner of a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog shall pay an annual registration fee and shall register such owner's dog as a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog according to the classification and determination previously made under this article. 
No dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be registered unless the owner can provide sufficient evidence that all of the provisions of section 10-64 have been and are being met. 
(b)  The registration provided by this section shall be nontransferable. The registration shall be renewed annually or upon the earlier transfer of ownership or possession of the dog or a change in the location of the dog's primary habitat. 
(c)  The owner of a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register the dog as required in this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
The owner of a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(d)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements of this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-96. - Transfer of ownership or possession. 
Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog, the transferor shall provide the animal control officer and code enforcement officer with the name, address, and telephone numbers of the new owner of the dog and of the effective date of the transfer. 
Any transferee of a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be presumed to have notice of the dog's classification as such. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-97. - Notice to animal control officer and code enforcement officer. 
The owner of a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog shall notify the animal control officer and code enforcement in person or by telephone within 12 hours of the occurrence of any one of the following events excluding weekends and holidays and then the first working day: 
(1)  The dog has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner for any reason, unless the owner knows such dog to be physically secured and restrained or confined in the custody of another competent adult. 
(2)  Such dog has attacked a human being or other animal. 
(3)  Such dog has been sold, given, or otherwise transferred to the ownership or possession of another person. 
(4)  The dog has died. 
(5)  The dog is leaving the city. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-98. - Confiscation and disposition of dogs. 
(a)  If an animal control officer, code enforcement officer or police officer has probable cause to believe that a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog is being harbored in violation of this article, such officer or agent may do one of the following: 
(1)  Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner of the dog to appear in court for the violation; or 
(2)  If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the dog is posing a threat to human beings or other domestic animals, the dog may be seized and impounded, in which case the owner will be cited to appear in court for the violation. Upon approval of the animal control director and at the owner's request and expense, such impoundment may be at a veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing. 
(b)  Absent an order from the court to the contrary, any dog which has been confiscated under this section shall be returned to its owner only following disposition by the court on the citation and only then upon the owner's proof of strict compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of actual boarding expenses, plus reasonable confiscation costs, which shall be $100.00 upon the first confiscation of any dog, $200.00 upon the second, and $400.00 upon the third or subsequent confiscation. 
If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article and paid such confiscation costs within 20 days following disposition by the court, the dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-99. - Report to district attorney and solicitor. 
The animal control officer or code enforcement officer shall report to the district attorney the conduct of any owner which the animal control officer believes may constitute a felony under the Act. 
The animal control officer or code enforcement officer shall report to the municipal court the conduct of any owner that the animal control officer reasonably believes may constitute a misdemeanor under the Act. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 10-100. - Penalties. 
In addition to any other penalty that is available under this chapter, the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who violates this article shall be subject, at a minimum, to the penalties as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28 or § 4-8-40 of the Act, and as such may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-2, 12-20-12) 
Chapter 14 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; traffic, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and maintenance of airports by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authorization to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airport means the Douglas Municipal Airport. 
Airport commission means the appointed representatives of the board of commissioners or its specifically authorized agents or representatives. 
Fixed base operator means any person approved by the airport commission and the board of commissioners to sell aviation petroleum products and other goods and services applicable to aviation at the airport. 
Motor vehicle means any motor vehicle capable of operating only on the ground. 
(Code 1978, § 4-20) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Incorporation of federal rules and regulations. 
The air traffic rules and aircraft operations regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration as in effect and all additions thereto are made a part of the airport rules and regulations in this chapter as fully as if set forth herein. 
(Code 1978, § 4-50) 
Sec. 14-3. - Motorized vehicles on airport property. 
(a)  Prohibited, exceptions. With the exception of aircraft, there shall be no motorized vehicles located on property comprising the airport of the city except in areas designated and marked by the city manager and/or the airport commission. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Anyone convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(c)  Restitution for damages. In addition, in the event of any conviction of any person for violation of this section, the sentencing court shall have the right to require restitution in full to the city for any and all damages to property. 
(Code 1978, § 4-1) 
Sec. 14-4. - Fixed base operations. 
The city manager shall be responsible for developing and maintaining a current contractual agreement with a qualified fixed base operation. Final approval of such fixed base operations contract shall be by the board of commissioners with recommendations through the airport commission. The fixed base operator shall report directly to the city manager. 
Sec. 14-5. - Only authorized activities allowed. 
No commercial aeronautical operation, commercial operation of any kind or any type operation or activity shall be conducted on the airport unless specifically authorized by the airport commission with the advice and consent of the city commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 4-22) 
Sec. 14-6. - Implied agreement to comply with regulations. 
The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user thereof to obey all the regulations herein provided and adopted by the board of commissioners and the airport commission. 
(Code 1978, § 4-23) 
Sec. 14-7. - Assumption of risk; indemnification. 
The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, and the user shall release and hold harmless and indemnify the city and county, their officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use, as well as claims of third persons using the airport. The privilege of using the airport shall be upon the further condition that any person desiring to use such airport shall furnish a policy of indemnity against personal injury and property damage in such sum as the airport commission requires. 
(Code 1978, § 4-24) 
Sec. 14-8. - Denial of use of facilities. 
Any person violating any of the airport rules and regulations may be deprived of the use of the airport facilities for such period of time as determined by the airport commission, the city commissioners or the board of county commissioners in addition to any penalty or punishment imposed by a court. 
(Code 1978, § 4-25) 
Sec. 14-9. - Soliciting, advertising; permission required. 
No person shall solicit funds for any purpose and no signs, advertisements or circulars may be posted or distributed at the airport without permission of the board of commissioners or city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 4-27) 
Sec. 14-10. - Motor vehicles—Use of designated facilities. 
Unless authorized by the airport commission, no highway or automotive vehicle shall be operated on the airport except on roadways, parking areas, etc., that are specifically designated for such vehicles. Such vehicles shall be parked in the manner prescribed by the airport commission while on the airport and as indicated by posted signs. 
(Code 1978, § 4-34) 
Sec. 14-11. - Same—Parking by customers of fixed base operators. 
Fixed base operator customers shall park in areas designated by the airport commission. 
(Code 1978, § 4-35) 
Sec. 14-12. - Same—Driving on ramp. 
When aircraft are parked on the ramp or apron for the purpose of loading or unloading, no vehicle shall be driven on ramp except service trucks and vehicles to pick up passengers and luggage. 
(Code 1978, § 4-36) 
Sec. 14-13. - Same—Reporting of accidents. 
Every motor vehicle accident on airport property involving injury or property damage shall be reported to the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 4-37) 
Sec. 14-14. - Same—Careless or illegal operation. 
No person shall operate any vehicle on airport property in a careless manner or negligent manner or in disregard for the safety of others, or in excess of posted speed traffic signs. 
(Code 1978, § 4-38) 
Secs. 14-15—14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT COMMISSION 

Sec. 14-41. - Membership. 
The city airport commission shall consist of ten members appointed by the mayor of the city and confirmed by a majority of the city commission present and voting upon such confirmation at the first regular meeting in September of each year such appointments are scheduled. The tenth member of the airport commission shall be the elected city commissioner appointed to the airport commission by the mayor of the city and confirmed by the city commission. 
(Code 1978, § 4-89.1) 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-401. 
Sec. 14-42. - Terms of office. 
The terms of office of the membership of the airport commission shall be for a period of three years. The term of office of the elected city commission shall be that term of office for which that commissioner is elected. 
(Code 1978, § 4-89.2) 
Sec. 14-43. - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy in the membership of the airport commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments to the airport commission. 
(Code 1978, § 4-89.3) 
Sec. 14-44. - Removal. 
The mayor of the city shall have the authority, upon confirmation of the majority of the city commission, to remove any member of the airport commission for cause upon written notification to the chairman of the airport commission and to the member so removed. 
(Code 1978, § 4-89.4) 
Sec. 14-45. - Compensation. 
All members of the airport commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1978, § 4-89.5) 
Sec. 14-46. - Organization. 
The membership of the airport commission shall annually elect its chairman from its membership. The chairman shall be eligible for reelection for two successive terms. The airport commission shall, by a majority vote of the members present and voting, elect a vice-chairman who shall act in the absence of the chairman. The airport commission shall appoint a secretary from among its membership or who may be employed by the commission at its discretion. The city manager and finance officer shall serve as ex officio members of the airport commission with no voting power. The mayor shall appoint a city commissioner as liason with the airport commission and such appointee shall have the voting powers of any airport commissioner. 
(Code 1978, § 4-89.6) 
Sec. 14-47. - Meetings; budget; expenditures. 
(a)  Minutes of all regular and special meetings of the airport commission shall be kept in writing and transmitted to the mayor and each member of the city commission annually. 
(b)  The airport commission shall in April of each year submit to the city manager a budget request for funds for the operation of the municipal airport for the next succeeding fiscal year commencing on July 1 of each year. 
(c)  All expenditures of the airport commission shall be in keeping with the approved budget of the airport commission. All expenditures shall follow the purchasing procedures of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 4-89.7) 
Sec. 14-48. - General duties. 
It shall be the duty of the airport commission to administer the operation of the municipal airport in a safe and efficient manner; to direct the fixed base operator in the conduct of his responsibilities; to maintain the airport facilities in good repair; to develop and upkeep of the airport facility; to ensure the safety and welfare of the users of the municipal airport and to promulgate plans and programs for the development of the future use of the municipal airport facility and surrounding area. 
(Code 1978, § 4-89.8) 
Sec. 14-49. - Authority generally. 
The airport commission shall at all times act as an advisory commission to the board of commissioners and shall have authority to take such action as may be necessary in the handling, conduct and management of the public attendance at the airport and enforce this chapter with the advice and consent of the board of commissioners. In any contingencies not specifically covered by this chapter, the airport commission shall be authorized to make such rules and orders and render such decisions as may seem proper. In addition, the airport commission is authorized to receive donations on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 4-21) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 4-22-02, adopted April 22, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as § 39. For purposes of classification, clarity and to preserve the style of this Code, these provisions have been included as art. V, at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; fire protection and prevention, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; private water wells, § 50-26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 94; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Enforcement officers. 
The supervision and enforcement of the building code, electrical code, housing code, gas code and plumbing code shall be within the supervision and control of the city manager, the city building inspector and the code enforcement officer. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Fireproof construction in fire district. 
No person shall build or cause to be built, locate or cause to be located, any other than a brick or stone building, of standard construction, and standard fireproof roof, or such other material or construction as shall be approved by the Insurance Underwriters Association, in the fire district. The provisions of this section shall include all repairs to all buildings and structures now within the fire district. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7) 
Sec. 18-3. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The following provisions of the 1978 Code are saved from repeal and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city: 
(1)  Section 7-7 which describes the geographical boundaries of the city's fire limits (now the fire district). 
(2)  Section 7-8 pertaining to the use of preconstructed structures in designated zones of the city. 
(Code 1978, §§ 7-7, 7-8) 
Secs. 18-4—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 18-31. - Adopted. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City of Douglas to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standards Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
International Building Code 
International Mechanical Code 
International Fuel Gas Code 
International Plumbing Code 
National Electrical Code 
International Fire Code 
International Energy Conservation Code 
International Residential Code 
(b)  The following appendices of said codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
International Building Code: Appendix A through J 
International Plumbing Code: Appendix H through J 
National Electrical Code: Appendix C 
(c)  The 2003 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is adopted by reference as though copied fully herein, with the modifications hereinafter set forth: 
Section 103.1, 103.2 and 103.3 shall be deleted and amended by the addition of Section 103.1 which shall read as follows: 
"The Community Development Director or her duly authorized representative is designated as the building official." 
(d)  The 2003 Edition of the International Existing Building Code is adopted by reference as though coped fully herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-23.1-91, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 12-14.1-92, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 01-27.1-93, 1-27-93; Ord. No. 10-23.1-95, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 04-13.01-98, § 1, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 10-08.01-01, 10-8-01; Ord. No. 041006, 4-10-06) 
Sec. 18-32. - Schedule of permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. No. 07-23.1-91, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 10-23.1-95, § 2, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 07142003, 7-14-03) 
Editor's note— Current listing of fees can be found on file with the city. 
Secs. 18-33—18-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Requirements for toilets, showerheads and faucets, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling unit but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 03-11.1-91, § II, 3-11-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-57. - Construction standards. 
Construction initiated within the city for any residential or commercial building of any type must comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Water closet: Either flush tank or flushometer operated; shall be designed, manufactured and installed to be operated and adequately flushed with no more than 1.6 gallons of water per flushing cycle when tested in accordance with applicable standards. 
(2)  Urinals: Shall be designed, manufactured and installed to be operable and adequately flushed with no more than 1.5 gallons per flush. 
(3)  Lavatory facilities, public: Faucets for public lavatories shall be equipped with outlet devices which limit the flow of water to a minimum of 0.5 gallons per minute or to be equipped with self-closing valves that limit the delivery to a maximum of 0.25 gallons of hot water for recirculating systems and to a maximum of 0.5 gallons for a nonrecirculating system. 
Exception: Separate lavatories for physically handicapped persons shall not be equipped with self-closing valves. 
(4)  Lavatory facilities, private: Faucets for private lavatories shall be designed, manufactured and installed to deliver water at a flow rate not to exceed 3.0 gallons per minute when tested in accordance with applicable standards. 
(5)  Showerheads/sink faucets: Shall be designed, manufactured and installed to deliver water at a rate not to exceed 3.0 gallons per minute when tested in accordance with applicable standards. 
(Ord. No. 03-11.1-91, 3-11-91; Ord. No. 07-23.1-91, 7-23-91) 
Sec. 18-58. - Exemptions. 
New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this article when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings. 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing buildings, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed. 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence. 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(5)  Commercial construction for which the contract was entered into prior to July 1, 1992. 
The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified by this section shall obtain the exemption by applying to the code enforcement officer and/or the building inspector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-11.1-91, § IV, 3-11-91) 
Sec. 18-59. - Enforcement, penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of code enforcement and/or building inspector. 
(b)  Any person violating any provisions of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as described in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 03-11.1-91, § V, 3-11-91) 
Secs. 18-60—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOVEMENT OF HOUSES OR STRUCTURES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-36. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-81. - Responsibility for damages. 
Any damage to any public or private property or persons incurred during the movement of any building, structure or house into, out of or within the city shall be the complete responsibility of the party conducting the movement. 
(Code 1978, § 7-85) 
Sec. 18-82. - Insurance requirements. 
Any person engaged in the profession of moving buildings, structures or houses shall obtain and have in effect at all times during the license year a minimum insurance coverage of $100,000.00/$300,000.00 public liability and $50,000.00 property damage. 
(Code 1978, § 7-86) 
Sec. 18-83. - Violations. 
The party responsible for the movement of any structure, building and/or house, without first having obtained a permit from the city for such movement, shall be declared guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to all penalties therefor. 
(Code 1978, § 7-87) 
Secs. 18-84—18-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-96. - Required. 
A permit from the city shall be required before any building, house or structure shall be moved from one location to another into, out of or within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 7-80) 
Sec. 18-97. - Purpose. 
The permit required by this division shall be for the purpose of the determination of the building inspector of the city of the structural soundness of the building, structure or house to be moved, the route such movement shall take, the necessity of the movement of overhead electric and telephone lines or cables, the requirement of any police, fire or electrical personnel's presence during such movement, zoning requirements and any other requirement deemed necessary by the building inspector of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 7-81) 
Sec. 18-98. - Application. 
A permit application form provided by the city containing thereon any and all information pertaining to the movement of any building, structure or house into, out of or within the city shall be obtained by the owner thereof from the building department of the city prior to the movement of any building, structure or house governed by the terms of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-82) 
Sec. 18-99. - Issuance. 
Upon approval by the building inspection department of the city of the permit application and upon payment by the applicant of the fees herein established, a permit for the movement of the structure, building or house may be issued by the building inspector of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 7-83) 
Sec. 18-100. - Fees. 
Fees to be charged by the city for the movement of any building, structure or house into, out of or within the city are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Base permit fee: All types of movement, an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(2)  Movement into city: To cover all costs incurred by the city, to inspect building(s), structure(s) or house(s) at site locations outside the city prior to movement into the city which shall include, but not be limited to, the following schedule: 
a.  Salary plus overhead of all personnel required to perform inspections outside city limits, portal to portal. 
b.  Cost of vehicle utilized during the inspection based upon a minimum amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per mile traveled. 
c.  Any other related expenses incurred during inspection performed. 
(3)  Movement into, out of or within city: Any movement of a structure, building or house requiring the accompaniment of such by city personnel and/or equipment: 
a.  Salary plus overhead of all city personnel required, plus each equipment unit required at a minimum amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per hour or portion thereof. 
b.  All costs incurred by the movement of any cables, lines, wires, lights, traffic signals, etc., as a result of the movement of a building, structure or house. 
(Code 1978, § 7-84) 
Secs. 18-101—18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 18-121. - Nuisance abatement. 
(a)  The governing authority of the City of Douglas, Georgia, find and declare that within the city limits of the City of Douglas there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in City of Douglas; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the City of Douglas where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwelling, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § 39-1) 
Sec. 18-122. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling Act, charter, ordinance or regulation not to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other lay or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § 39-6(A)) 
Sec. 18-123. - Definitions. 
Applicable codes means: 
(a)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(b)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(c)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the O.C.G.A., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, building, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvement, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The terms "dwelling, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(a)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(b)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel, of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of State Bar of Georgia; 
(c)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(d)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulation or to other activities concerning dwelling, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8, and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § 39-6(B)) 
Sec. 18-124. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The mayor and council of the City of Douglas appoint or designate the community services department, city fire marshall, city fire chief, city police chief, and his/her designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the City of Douglas charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with commission of crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identity the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction, as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the [time] and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and of the repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41, of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received for the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvage materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
(g)  The amount of the of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in subsection (g) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Coffee County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Coffee County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of as valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection real property ad valorem tax, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of City of Douglas. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of Coffee County. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(3)  The [sic] may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with county or municipality agreeing to timetable for rehabilitation of the real property, the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(4)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(5)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(6)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § 39-6(C)) 
Sec. 18-125. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, structures are vacant and sample condition of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crime based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § 39-6(D)) 
Sec. 18-126. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, building, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmation, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § 39-6(E)) 
Sec. 18-127. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer ; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such shall be served and such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (f) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of the [sic] protect the rights of such unknown parties of unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this article, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effects as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § 39-6(F)) 
Secs. 18-128—18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS OF THE HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES 

Sec. 18-151. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as Douglas Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § I, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-152. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Airport. Douglas Municipal Airport. 
Airport elevation. 257 feet above mean sea level. 
Approach surface. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 18-154 of this article. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones. These zones are set forth in section 18-153 of this article. 
Board of appeals. A board consisting of three members appointed by the city council as provided in article XI of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Douglas. For appeals pertaining to this article, the board of appeals shall be supplemented by the appointment of one member of the airport commission to serve as an ex-officio member. 
Community development director. The Director of the Community Development Department of the City of Douglas or his or her designee. 
Conical surface. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
Hazard to air navigation. An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Horizontal surface. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
Nonconforming use. Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article or an amendment thereto. 
Nonprecision instrument runway. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
Obstruction. Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 18-154 of this article. 
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
Precision instrument runway. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout or any other planning document. 
Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in section 18-143 of this article. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
Structure. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
Transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
Tree. Any object of natural growth. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § II, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-153. - Airport zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Douglas Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown on Douglas Municipal Airport Zoning Map, consisting of four sheets, prepared under the direction of the community development department, and dated October, 2007, which is attached to this article and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Nonprecision instrument runway approach zone with a visibility minimum as low as ¾ mile. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Precision instrument runway approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(4)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual and 10,000 feet for all others from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(5)  Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § III, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-154. - Airport zone height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Runway larger than utility nonprecision instrument runway approach zone with a visibility minimum as low as ¾ mile. Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Precision instrument runway approach zone. Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Transitional zones. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 407 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 407 feet above mean sea level. 
(5)  Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 407 feet above the airport elevation. 
(6)  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § IV, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-155. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § V, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-156. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport manager, airport commission, community development director, or the Federal Aviation Administration to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § VI, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-157. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in (1), (2) and (3) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection 18-157(d). 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
(2)  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article except as set forth in subsection 18-154(f). 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this article or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the community development director determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of appeals for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of appeals unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport manager, airport commission, and community development director for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport manager, airport commission, or community development director does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the board of appeals may act on its own to grant or deny said application. 
(e)  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the board of appeals, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the City of Douglas, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § VII, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-158. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the community development director to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the community development director upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the community development director shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the board of appeals shall be forthwith transmitted by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § VIII, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-159. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the community development director made in the administration of this article, may appeal to the board of appeals. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of appeals, by filing with the community development director a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The community development director shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the community development director certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the community development director cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by the order of the board of appeals on notice to the community development director and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § IX, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-160. - Penalties. 
Each violation of this article or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 180 days or both; and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § X, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-161. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. No. 111307, § XI, 11-13-07) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city's business license tax schedule is compiled and published separately by the city as a list of the various trades, occupations, professions, agencies and businesses together with the corresponding amount of the tax due as determined from time to time by the city commission. An official copy is on file in the clerk-treasurer's office. The business license tax schedule was published in the 1978 Code as section 15-9. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; aviation, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; human relations, ch. 54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 90; vehicles for hire, ch. 98; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Authorization of cities to levy and collect taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, adopted Dec. 11, 1995, amended Art. I, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 22-1—22-32. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 22-1. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the City of Douglas, Coffee County. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in Douglas, Coffee County, Georgia, whether with a location in Douglas, Coffee County or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in Douglas, Coffee County, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Douglas, Coffee County, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the revenue collection officer or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of said Douglas, Coffee County, Georgia, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term Douglas, Coffee County is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Douglas, Coffee County, Georgia; wherever the term city or county is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Douglas, Coffee County, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)  Gross receipts: 
a.  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
1.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
2.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
3.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
4.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
5.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
b.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
1.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
2.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
3.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2); 
4.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
5.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
(3)  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer pr project, or a vehicle used for sales by a business or practitioner or profession. 
(4)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(5)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by Douglas, Coffee County. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(6)  Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
(7)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, [Optional: but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes]. 
(8)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(9)  Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, Federal Income Tax, or State Income Tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-3. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is contained on the fee schedule herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-4. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the City of Douglas and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria [Use one of the following methods to determine the amount of occupation tax to levy on a business or practitioner]: 
(1)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner. Number of employees shall mean the average number of employees during a specified period of the calendar year who works 40 hours or more weekly. The hours of part-time employees and those working less than 40 hours/week shall be added together and the sum divided by 40 to produce the full time equivalent. 
a.  Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the City of Douglas: 

 
SEE SCHEDULE OF FEES 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-5. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Douglas, Coffee County and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Douglas, Coffee County for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of Douglas, Coffee County. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-6. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in Douglas, Coffee County. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-7. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A fee of $ 400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-8. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-9. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-10. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in Douglas, Coffee County in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the code enforcement officer and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Douglas, Coffee County, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the Judge of Recorder's Court, Douglas, Coffee County, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, either or both in the discretion of the Judge of Recorder's Court. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-11. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-12. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the Douglas, Coffee County registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-13. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a City of Douglas business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-14. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in Douglas, Coffee County after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in Douglas, Coffee County, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-15. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before March 1 of each year, and on January 1 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in Douglas, Coffee County after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in Douglas, Coffee County any trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 19-53. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. Any business or profession established after July 1 shall be entitled to a 50 percent reduction in annual fees for the remainder of that year. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the code enforcement officer, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Douglas, Coffee County, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-16. - Penalty of ordinance violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the City judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days, either or both, in the discretion of the judge of recorder's court. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-17. - Code enforcement officer; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1995 (this law) and succeeding years. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-18. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-19. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-20. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the code enforcement officer of the City of Douglas, Coffee County through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The code enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in Douglas, Coffee, Georgia, and upon demand of the code enforcement officer such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of Douglas, Coffee County within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in Douglas, Coffee County. Adequate records shall be kept in Douglas, Coffee County, Georgia, for examination by the code enforcement officer at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the under reporting is identified. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-21. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the Douglas, Coffee County under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the Douglas, Coffee County for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the code enforcement officer in accordance with provisions found in section 19-58. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-22. - Effect of failure to comply with ordinance provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in said Douglas, Coffee County after the registration for said business has been revoked as above, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the Douglas, Coffee County request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-23. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the code enforcement officer of Douglas, Coffee County, Georgia, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the Douglas, Coffee County) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the [ordinances and charter of said City of Douglas] and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city marshal of said Douglas, Coffee County upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by [ordinances and charter of said City of Douglas] and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the code enforcement officer against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-24. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the mayor and city commission to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-25. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-26. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the code enforcement officer and police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the code enforcement officer, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the City of Douglas, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-27. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the mayor and city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-28. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the mayor and city commission shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-29. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The mayor and city commission may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in [the minutes of the governing authority or a plan]. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22.29.1. - Produce dealers, farmers curb market. 
In as much as the marketing of produce is seasonal and, in efforts to encourage the use of the facilities provided by the City of Douglas and Coffee County, the regular yearly fee for the sale of produce at the farmers market will be reduced by 50 percent, as shown on schedule of fees. All other provisions for the sale of produce remains in effect. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-30. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-31. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-32. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 12-11.1-95, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 22-33. - Additional requirements for issuance. 
Except as limited by other provisions of this chapter, upon application or renewal for an occupational tax certificate, license or any permit issued by the city, the code enforcement officer shall not issue the same if the applicant or landowner of the property where the business is located has not paid any delinquent occupation tax, property taxes, ad valorem tax or debts owed to the City of Douglas or Coffee County Board of Commission. Taxes are considered delinquent after June 1 st of each of the year taxes are owed. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a license may, upon written appeal filed with the board of commissioners of the city within ten days, have such denial reviewed by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 08232010, § 1, 8-23-10; Ord. No. 03272017(1), 3-27-17 ) 
Sec. 22-34. - Denial, revocation or suspension; appeals. 
(a)  An occupation tax certificate, alcoholic beverage license or another other permit or licensed, issued by the City of Douglas, may be denied, suspended, revoked or not renewed upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraud in the operation of the business or occupation he/she practices or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
(2)  The applicant or certificate holder is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(3)  The applicant or certificate holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent he/she is unable to perform his or her duties under the business or occupation; 
(4)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(5)  The applicant or certificate holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 6, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If after having been granted a certificate, the applicant pleads guilty, is convicted of, or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above offenses, said certificate shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation or ground for the same not to be renewed. Nothing in this section shall supersede the minimum qualifications relating to alcoholic beverage license in section 6-69; 
(6)  The original application or renewal thereof, contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(7)  The business or establishment is not authorized to operate within the City of Douglas, or within the zoning district within which it is located, or is otherwise not in conformity with locational requirements of any of the city's ordinances. 
(8)  The business or establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(9)  The business or establishment has been found by a court of law to have been operating unlawfully; 
(10)  If any holder or any representative of the holder of an city occupational tax certificate is engaged in unlawful activities which violate laws or regulation(s) of the state, any city ordinances, appropriate county ordinances, applicable building codes, property maintenance codes, or zoning regulations; 
(11)  Violation of any state law, statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation that governs the operation of the business in question. 
(12)  Failure to pay any other taxes, fees, or delinquent bills owed to the City of Douglas or Coffee County Georgia. Taxes will be considered delinquent after June 1 st , proceeding the due date of said taxes. 
(13)  Any other violation of this article; or 
(b)  The city manager or his designee may denied, suspend, revoke or deny renewal an occupational tax certificate license or permit for violation of any part of this section. 
(1)  When the occupational tax certificate, license or permit is denied, suspended, revoked or denied renewal the code enforcement officer shall notify the holder of the occupational tax certificate in writing and give official notice of such action. Notice shall be served to the owner or applicant of the occupational tax certificate, licensee, or permit holder. Such notice shall be deemed be served properly if a copy thereof is delivered in person, or sent by certified and first class mail, addressed to the last known mailing address of the applicant, owner or licensee. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(2)  The holder of an occupational tax certificate may, license or permit, may within ten days from receiving notice, file a written request to appeal the decision of the denial, suspension, revocation or denial of renewal of the occupational tax certificate, license, or permit. The city commission shall hold a hearing not less than 15 days or more than 30 days from the date the written request was received, if reasonably possible. 
(3)  The commission shall make the determination on whether or not to uphold the denial, suspension, or revocation of the occupational tax certificate, license or permit. 
(c)  At the time the occupational tax certificate has been suspended or revoked, it shall be unlawful to continue business without a valid occupational tax certificate as required in section 22-1. Violation of section 22-1 shall be punished as set forth in section 22-16. Each day upon which violations of section 22-1 exists, constitutes a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 03272017(1), 3-27-17 ) 
Sec. 22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND GAMING DEVICES 

Sec. 22-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement center means any establishment or location open to the public containing five or more gaming devices. 
Gaming device means any device requiring the depositing into the device of one or more coins or tokens to initiate the operation thereof with the exception of pinball machines as defined in the city's business license tax schedule. 
Operator means the person owning and/or operating an amusement center and/or gaming device. 
Owner means the legal owner of the premises utilized to house an amusement center or gaming device. 
(Code 1978, § 15-58) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-37. - License required for amusement centers. 
The owner and/or operator of an amusement center shall pay to the city a license fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per annum for the operation of the amusement center within the city. All such licenses shall be plainly displayed at all times. 
(Code 1978, § 15-59) 
Sec. 22-38. - Permits required for gaming devices. 
The owners and/or operators of gaming devices located within any business establishment within the city shall annually obtain a permit for operation of such gaming devices by paying to the city an annual permit fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each and every such gaming device so located. 
(Code 1978, § 15-60) 
Sec. 22-39. - License and permit fees; when due. 
(a)  All license and permit fees established in this article shall be due and payable upon application for operation of the amusement center and/or gaming device in the sums set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  All license and permit fees herein established shall be for the period of one year ending December 31 annually and shall be renewable each year on January 1. 
(Code 1978, § 15-61) 
Sec. 22-40. - Operating without required license or permit. 
(a)  The operation of an amusement center and/or gaming device without first obtaining a current license and/or permit issued by the city shall allow an authorized representative of the city to cause the gaming device to be rendered inoperative by blocking and/or discontinuing the flow of electricity to the gaming device. 
(b)  Removal of the electrical blockage and/or continued operation of a gaming device deemed delinquent shall cause the owner/operator to pay to the city a sum not to exceed three times the permit fee on each gaming device found so delinquent. 
(Code 1978, § 15-62) 
Sec. 22-41. - City not responsible for loss of income, damage or destruction. 
The owner/operator of any gaming device by installing and/or operating such gaming device without first obtaining the required license and/or permit does in so doing relieve the city and/or its representatives of any liability for loss of income, damage or destruction of any gaming device rendered inoperative as required in section 22-40. 
(Code 1978, § 15-63) 
Sec. 22-42. - Continued delinquency. 
Repeated and/or continued violation on the part of any owner/operator of any amusement center and/or gaming device regulated by this article shall be subject to revocation of the license and/or permit issued. 
(Code 1978, § 15-64) 
Sec. 22-43. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses and permits required in this article are nontransferable. All gaming devices shall evidence proper permitting by the attachment thereto, in plain view, of a current permit seal issued by the city. 
(b)  The permit seals shall not be transferred to other gaming devices nor shall gaming devices be transferred from one site to another site within the city without the owner/operator having first obtained a new permit therefor. 
(Code 1978, § 15-65) 
Sec. 22-44. - Enforcing officer. 
The chief of police is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 15-66) 
Secs. 22-45—22-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUCTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Auctioneers, O.C.G.A. § 43-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-66. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale, at public auction, or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at auction, any furniture, household furnishings or appliances; linen, laces or cotton materials, sold by the yard or made up in any form; jewelry, watches, both pocket and wrist; silverware or chinaware and other allied products without first obtaining license to carry on such auction and paying the fee therefor, and unless a person employed to auction such goods has likewise obtained a license to obtain a fee therefor, all as may be required by the city. 
(Code 1978, § 15-12) 
Sec. 22-67. - Statement of time, place, etc.; inventory. 
Before commencing such auction sale such person conducting the same shall file with the city clerk-treasurer a statement setting forth when and where and for how long such auction sale shall be conducted, together with a full and true inventory of all the articles to be sold at such auction sales; and shall attach the statement and affidavit made by the person conducting the sale that such statement is true and that the inventory contains a true statement of all of the articles to be sold and that such goods are the property of and owned by the person conducting such sale. Such affidavit shall contain a statement of the name and address of the person employed to act as auctioneer in auctioning off the goods. No auction sale or sales shall be held except as set forth in the statement and affidavit and no other article shall be sold except those included in such sworn inventory unless a new affidavit shall be filed listing the additional goods to be sold nor shall any other person be allowed to conduct such auction except the person named in the affidavit until a new affidavit shall be filed setting forth such other person who may be employed to conduct such auction and cry off the goods. 
(Code 1978, § 15-13) 
Sec. 22-68. - Bond. 
Upon securing the license required by this article and before commencing the auction sale set forth in the required statement and affidavit, the persons holding or conducting such sale of their goods shall annually make and file with the city clerk-treasurer a bond in the sum of $2,500.00 in some good and solvent surety company doing business in this state, or other good and sufficient bond subject to the approval of the clerk-treasurer, payable to the city and conditioned to pay the city, or anyone else suing in its name for their use, for injury or damage received on account of dishonest or fraudulent conduct in the administration of the business so licensed. The bond shall provide that any persons injured by the dishonest, fraudulent or improper conduct of such business may sue on the bond for their own use, and the recovery, if any, shall be payable to such persons. 
(Code 1978, § 15-14) 
Sec. 22-69. - Hours of sale. 
No person shall carry on or conduct an auction for the sale of the character of goods set forth in this article between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1978, § 15-15) 
Sec. 22-70. - False bids. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act or employ another in such auction sale as a by-bidder, or what is known commonly as a chopper or booster; or to make or accept any false or misleading bids; or to pretend to buy or sell any of the aforesaid articles so offered for sale at such auction. 
(Code 1978, § 15-16) 
Sec. 22-71. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not extend to judicial sales or to any sale on the courthouse square or to executors' or administrators' sales, or to the sale by the holder of personal security under a contract allowing public sale in default of payment of the debt. 
(Code 1978, § 15-17) 
Secs. 22-72—22-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BILLIARD ROOMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 

Sec. 22-91. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-11.01-00, adopted Dec. 11, 2000, repealed § 22-91, which pertained to participation by minors. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 22-92. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01282003.01, adopted Jan. 28, 2003, repealed § 22-92, which pertained to hours of operation. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 22-93. - Compliance with law; allowing unlawful conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either by himself or by agents or employees, to own, keep, operate, maintain, supervise or superintend any poolroom, pool table, billiard room, billiard table, or other like device, within the city in violation of any of the state laws, or any of the city laws; or permit any person to drink whiskey, alcoholic or malt liquors or beers therein; or permit any loud talking, boisterous, profane, vulgar or obscene language or disorderly conduct to be carried on or engaged in therein; or permit any fighting, quarreling, loud talking, or other disorder to be engaged in or carried on therein. 
(Code 1978, § 15-26) 
Sec. 22-94. - Interior visibility from sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, proprietor or keeper of a pool or billiard parlor to have a screen, stained glass or obstruction therein, either in or near the door or window of same, that will in anywise obstruct the full view of the interior of the billiard or pool parlor from the sidewalk adjacent to which it is situated. 
(Code 1978, § 15-27) 
Sec. 22-95. - Revocation of license. 
If any person, after having secured a license from the city for carrying on any of the businesses named in section 22-91, shall, either by himself or his agents or employees, violate any of the provisions of sections 22-91 through 22-94, the board of commissioners shall have the right and authority, upon five days' notice in writing being given to the offending parties, to revoke the license thus granted to carry on such business; and shall have authority to order and enforce an immediate discontinuance of such licensed business of such persons, which orders shall be carried out by any police officer of the city, upon order of the city manager. Any person whose license shall have been thus revoked shall be ineligible to again obtain a license, reenter into such business, or operate, maintain, supervise or superintend such business, directly or indirectly, for a period of 12 months after the license has been revoked. Under no conditions shall the offending party be entitled to a rebate of any portion of the license fees paid. 
(Code 1978, § 15-28) 
Sec. 22-96. - Abatement of nuisance. 
If any person, either by himself or his agents or employees, either before or after having secured a license from the city to operate any of the classes of business classified in section 22-9, violates or permits the violation of any of the provisions of sections 22-91 through 22-94, or violates or knowingly permits the violation of any state law with reference to the business, such violation shall be deemed and considered a public nuisance; and upon same being made to appear to the city authorities, its board of commissioners upon giving five days' notice in writing to the offending parties of the time and place of hearing, at which the offending parties may have a full hearing, the board of commissioners may abate such place or places of business, as a public nuisance, and order such place or places of business closed, and enforce the same by order of the city manager, which order shall be enforced by any police officer of the city. When such place of business shall have been thus abated and ordered closed, the offending persons and the owners of such places of business, their agents or employees, shall be ineligible to again engage in, superintend, supervise or operate any such business within the city for the period of 12 months next after such place or places of business shall have been thus abated and closed. 
(Code 1978, § 15-29) 
Sec. 22-97. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 22-91 through 22-94, upon conviction thereof, may be punished as provided in section 1-12. The conviction of any such person before the recorder shall not operate to prevent the board of commissioners in its discretion from proceeding against such defendants or persons to revoke the license, or to abate such places as a nuisance. 
(Code 1978, § 15-30) 
Secs. 22-98—22-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTRIBUTION WAREHOUSES 

Sec. 22-121. - License—Required. 
Any person engaged in the business of the operation of a distribution warehouse within the corporate limits of the city shall annually obtain a license for such operation from the city. 
(Code 1978, § 15-70) 
Sec. 22-122. - Same—Fee. 
The license fee for the operation of a distribution warehouse within the city shall be determined in the following manner: 
(1)  For the first 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(2)  For each additional square foot of gross floor area, the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1978, § 15-71) 
Sec. 22-123. - Calculation of gross floor area. 
For the purposes of this article the gross floor area shall be deemed to include all floor area within the walls of the structure and shall include that area utilized as a loading dock and/or outside storage area connected to the main structure utilized as a distribution warehouse. 
(Code 1978, § 15-72) 
Sec. 22-124. - Auxiliary buildings. 
The square foot area of any auxiliary building located upon the same lot, parcel or tract of land upon which a distribution warehouse is located and utilized in the same or similar manner as the main distribution warehouse shall be included in the computation of the square foot license fee herein established. 
(Code 1978, § 15-73) 
Sec. 22-125. - Each distribution warehouse considered separately. 
For the purpose of determining the license fee for the operation of a distribution warehouse each structure under a separate roof utilized as a distribution warehouse shall be considered a separate warehouse building and the license fee for the operation thereof shall be calculated separately. 
(Code 1978, § 15-74) 
Sec. 22-126. - Connected buildings. 
Buildings connected by areaways, ramps, walkways, tunnels, etc., shall, for the purpose of determining license fees, be deemed to be separate buildings and the license fee shall be computed separately for each structure. 
(Code 1978, § 15-75) 
Secs. 22-127—22-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - JUNK DEALERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Junk or metal dealers records, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-350 et seq.; purchase and resale of used motor vehicles and used parts, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-40 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1; Used Motor Vehicle Dismantlers, Rebuilders and Salvage Dealers Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junk dealer means any person who deals in the purchase and sale of old iron, rags, paper, clothes or other similar things recognized as and coming within commodities commonly known as junk. 
(Code 1978, § 13-20) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-147. - License—Required; bond. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do business of any kind as a junk dealer in the city, until the dealer shall first apply to the city clerk-treasurer and take out a license as such, and pay the license fee fixed by the board of commissioners. Such person shall also, at the same time of taking out the license, give a good and solvent bond, payable to the city, in the sum of $500.00, conditioned to respond to any damages to any person, whose property may have been stolen and sold to such junk dealer. The bond shall be approved by the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 13-21) 
Sec. 22-148. - Same—Revocation. 
If any junk dealer, after having acquired a license and qualified to do business as such, shall violate any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, his license to do business shall be revoked by the board of commissioners and thereafter such person shall be ineligible to obtain a license again, or to again do business in the city as a junk dealer. 
(Code 1978, § 13-22) 
Sec. 22-149. - Business hours; holding period. 
It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer in the city to purchase any of the articles known as, or coming under the definition of junk, before sunrise or after sundown or during any night; and each junk dealer shall acquire a designated public place somewhere in the city, at which point he shall deposit each day's junk purchased, and let it remain there for at least 24 hours, subject to inspection by any person who might be interested in any article which may have been stolen and sold to such junk dealer. 
(Code 1978, § 13-23) 
Sec. 22-150. - Purchase of stolen property. 
It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer to purchase any article which is known by him, or suspected by him, to have been stolen. 
(Code 1978, § 13-24) 
Sec. 22-151. - Purchase from minor. 
No junk dealer shall purchase anything from any person under 18 years of age, except on inspection thereof by the chief of police and after the chief of police has given written permission so to purchase to the junk dealer. 
(Code 1978, § 13-25) 
Sec. 22-152. - Storage in fire district or residential section. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any junk within the fire district or in the residential section of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 13-26) 
Sec. 22-153. - Daily reports. 
Daily reports at the end of each business day shall be filed with the chief of police by each junk dealer, and the daily report shall show the goods purchased by the junk dealer on the day which the report is made, and from whom purchased, and shall be accompanied by a report in writing made by the junk dealer, which report shall set forth the statement made by each person from whom any goods were purchased by the junk dealer during that day, as to the source from which the property purchased was acquired by the one selling to the junk dealer. The giving of misinformation in the daily reports required, or a failure to make the daily reports, shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 13-27) 
Sec. 22-154. - Inspections; prohibited articles. 
All houses or places of business where a junk business is conducted shall at all times be subject to visitation and inspection by the police of the city. If any person who conducts such a business shall at any time refuse to submit to such visitation or inspection, the city manager shall immediately close the place of business of such person so refusing. In case any machinery or any part thereof or any appliance of any railroad shop or gas company, or of the waterworks, or sample waste or loose cotton, grates or any part thereof, gas or waterworks fixtures shall be found in any junk shop, without a sufficient explanation of the same, it shall subject the owner, or person conducting such shop, upon conviction, to punishment prescribed in section 1-12; and conviction of a second offense shall be a just and conclusive cause for the revocation of the license of such business. 
(Code 1978, § 13-28) 
Secs. 22-155—22-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNBROKERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 22-176. - License required; application. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any business in the city as a pawnbroker whereby personal property is delivered or pledged to such person for a loan of money, or other thing of value, without first applying to the city clerk-treasurer and taking out a pawnbroker's license, and paying the license fee fixed by the city ordinances. When such person applies for such license, he shall give his age, name and place of business where he expects to carry on such pawnbroker's business. 
(Code 1978, § 15-18) 
Sec. 22-177. - Dealing with minors, incompetents, drunkards. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or person operating, keeping or maintaining a pawnshop within the city to do business of any kind with, or to accept in pawn any article of personal property or other property of value as a pledge or security for a loan of money or other thing of value from any person under 18 years of age, without the written consent from the parent or guardian of such minor; or from any person not of sound mind, without the written consent of the guardian of such person; or from any person while in a state of intoxication or who is known to be an habitual drunkard. 
(Code 1978, § 15-19) 
Sec. 22-178. - Forfeiture of license. 
Any person engaged in the business of pawnbroker, or who operates a pawnshop within the city, who violates any of the provisions of sections 22-176 through 22-179 shall forfeit his license to do business in the city, and thereafter the city shall not issue a license to such person, or any agent or employee who may have been working for such pawnbroker, who has violated any of the provisions of such sections. 
(Code 1978, § 15-20) 
Sec. 22-179. - Penalty. 
Any pawnbroker, or any of the agents or employees of any pawnbroker, who shall be convicted for the violation of any of the provisions of sections 22-176 through 22-178 shall be punished as provided in section 1-12; and it shall be the duty of the municipal court judge, in imposing sentence, to pass an order revoking the license of such pawnbroker, provided such person shall have obtained a license; or if such person should be an employee of some person who has a license as a pawnbroker, then such last-named person shall be ineligible to take out a license thereafter, or do such business, either under license or as an employee of any person having a license. 
(Code 1978, § 15-21) 
Sec. 22-180. - Daily reports. 
All pawnbrokers doing business within the city limits shall make daily reports to the chief of police at the end of each business day. Reports to be made by pawnbroker shall have an identification of item which is pawned, bought or traded. Report to have the name of person(s) from whom item(s) were obtained, his address, date of birth and the date and time of the transaction. Conviction of violation of section 22-180 shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 03-24.01-97, 3-24-97) 
Secs. 22-181—22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Disabled veterans and blind persons engaging in peddling, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; Transient Merchants Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-201. - Conditions. 
Articles may be sold from vehicles, conveyances, boxes, etc., while located on private premises, but not until and unless the person offering the same for sale has first secured the written consent of the owner of such premises to sell the same thereon, and, secondly, has paid for and secured from the clerk-treasurer the regular license to conduct such business within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 15-22) 
Sec. 22-202. - Sale of fruit, etc., at designated places. 
The sale of fruit and other products licensed hereunder, except at a regular established place of business, shall not be generally upon the streets of the city, but shall be sold only from such points as may from time to time be designated by the police department for such purpose. 
(Code 1978, § 15-23) 
Sec. 22-203. - Soliciting alms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit alms or financial assistance of any kind for the personal use of such solicitor, or to offer for sale any pencils, pens, books or small articles of merchandise upon the streets, sidewalks or other public places of the city, where such articles are not offered for sale in a regular place of business. 
(Code 1978, § 15-24) 
Secs. 22-204—22-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES 

Sec. 22-226. - Garage sales. 
(a)  Garage sales held by individuals for the purpose of disposing of personal items no longer needed or wanted may be held within the corporate limits of the city subject to the further provisions of this section; provided, however, no such sale may be conducted without first receiving a permit from the city. The permit shall be issued by the city marshal for a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The permit shall state the date or dates of the sale, the name of the person conducting the sale, and the location of the sale. It shall be a violation of this section to conduct a garage sale without first obtaining a permit. To receive a permit pursuant to this section, an applicant must be a resident of the county. Only two sales may be held by an individual in any calendar year, and they shall last no more than two consecutive days. A garage sale may be conducted on any property located in the city provided the owner or lessee thereof grants permission for the sale to be so held; provided, however, no garage sale shall be conducted on property owned by and/or leased to any public corporation. Without limiting the generality of the term "public corporation," same shall include Coffee County Hospital Authority, Coffee County Board of Education, Coffee County Industrial Authority, Inc., and/or Douglas-Coffee County Chamber of Commerce, Inc. For the purpose of this section, the term "garage sale" shall be interpreted as yard sale, rummage sale or like term. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violation of the conditions of this section by a court of competent jurisdiction shall pay a fine as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1978, § 15-33) 
ARTICLE X. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 

Sec. 22-227. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interest: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-228. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishments means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically-, electrically- or mechanically-controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go- dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means, for the purposes of this article, a person who has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other facts as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately about the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquierism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-229. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March first of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(c)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas day. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall service, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of any establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(o)  If any portion or subsection of this section of this article or its applications to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-230. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-231. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises with the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-232. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-233. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-234. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-235. - Location. 
No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-236. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to the city commission which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-237. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city administrator or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city commission, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city administrator at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engage in, operation of, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-238. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at lease 18 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and address of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal Code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copy of those documents giving such legal right. 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner. 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative officer. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-239. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city commission, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-240. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and commission may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as a manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder. 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-241. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 U.S. 50,81). 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-242. - Permit—Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and commission. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-243. - Same—Renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-244. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-245. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city commission, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the city Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-246. - Appeal—Procedure. 
The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the commission and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the commission and the name and address of the applicant. 
The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for commission action. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-247. - Same—Commission determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the commission agenda, the commission may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-248. - City commission hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city commission, at the time and date set therefor, the commission shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city commission may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-249. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-250. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city commission and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-251. - Hearing officer—Report. 
The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the commission. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city administrator and chief of police. 
The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-252. - Same—Action by commission. 
The commission may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the commission does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-253. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-254. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief sa will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment, contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-255. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This action shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-256. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-257. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affixed to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Sec. 22-258. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 06-29.1-94, 6-29-94) 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; permit for disturbing burial place in land development, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; preservation and protection of abandoned or unmaintained cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6.1. 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bronze marker means a memorial bronze or other cast metal projecting above ground level no more than one-half inch. 
City cemetery means that tract of land located within the city currently utilized for the burial of the dead and designated as City of Douglas Municipal Cemetery. 
Corner marker means a marker buried flush with the ground at the inside corners of plots or lots, the maximum dimension of which is six inches by six inches. 
Funeral home means an establishment in which the dead are prepared for burial or cremation and in which wakes and funerals may be held. 
Ground cover means the number, in inches, of soil material to be deposited over the burial vault and/or casket at ground level. 
Lot means that tract of land capable of accommodating the burial of two individual outer burial containers. 
Maintenance fee means that fee charged the owners of cemetery plots, lots or mausoleums for maintenance and upkeep of such plots, lots or mausoleums throughout the year. 
Mausoleum means an aboveground structure erected for the purpose of the interment of deceased bodies. 
Monument means a memorial structure consisting of granite, stone, marble or other designated manmade material marking the plot or lot in which a burial has or will take place. 
Notification of burial means that notice requested to be given the city representative by the mortician or other responsible party of date and time of burial. 
Outer burial containers means any container designed for the placement in the grave around the casket, including, but not limited to, such containers commonly known as burial vaults, grave boxes and grave liners. 
Permanent marker means a marker made of a permanent material such as concrete, marble, masonry, iron, steel, or metal and identifying the name of the individual with date buried and the name of the funeral home carved, etched, sandblasted or stamped into the marker. 
Permit means that document allowing burial in the city's cemetery. The permit shall be obtained prior to burial from a designated city department. 
Plantings means any growth of herbaceous, annual and perennial flowers permitted to be planted on a plot or lot within the cemetery as designated by the city's representatives. 
Plot means that tract of land located within the cemetery containing one or more cemetery lots. 
Section means that area of the cemetery containing a number of plots and/or lots. 
(Code 1978, § 8-22; Ord. No. 05122003.01, 5-12-03) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Intent; scope. 
It is hereby the intent of the mayor and board of commissioners, in order to promote the orderly development and maintenance of the municipal cemetery of the city, that the following rules, regulations and requirements shall be adopted and shall govern all interments within the cemetery. 
(Code 1978, § 8-21) 
Sec. 26-3. - Description of cemetery boundaries; dedication of land for cemetery use; markers authorized; city manager's authority. 
(a)  A legal description containing the location, dimensions, courses, distances, metes, bounds and deed references for the city cemetery shall be as shown on a map or plat retained permanently in the official map area at the city hall to be designated as "Official Description and Plat of the City of Douglas Cemetery." 
(b)  Such land is hereby dedicated to cemetery use, and it shall be used for cemetery purposes only. 
(c)  There shall be placed on such cemetery property only graves with bronze grave markers, and such bronze grave markers shall not project or protrude above ground level. 
(d)  The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to do any and all acts and things necessary to manage and control the use of the above-described land for the purposes herein stated. 
(Code 1978, § 8-1) 
Sec. 26-4. - Plots, lots. 
(a)  Purchase of lot. Any person desiring to purchase a plot or lot within the city cemetery may do so by depositing with the city the full cost of the plot or lot selected. At the time of purchase, the purchaser shall be issued a receipt upon which is noted the plot and/or lot number, as well as the cemetery section designation, the purchase price and name and address of purchaser and any other necessary information required by the city. 
(b)  Purchase price. The purchase price of any lot within the city's cemetery shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The purchaser shall waive any or all air rights over the lot purchased. 
(c)  Lot size. All lots sold within the city's cemetery shall measure a minimum of ten feet by ten feet. 
(d)  Plot size. A plot shall consist of any number of lots having a common boundary line on at least one side or end. 
(Code 1978, § 8-23) 
Sec. 26-5. - Grave site openings—Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. There shall be required by any party responsible for opening any grave site located on any lot within the cemetery a permit issued by a representative of the city. The permit shall be obtained a minimum of 24 hours in advance of the site opening. The notice may be waived by the city in extenuating circumstances. 
(b)  Permit fee. The fee charged by the city for the issuance of a permit to open a grave site shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. There shall be no fees in the northeast corner (old section) of the cemetery, for grave openings, markers or monuments, however, nothing contained herein waives any requirement for a person burying someone in the northeast corner (old section) of the cemetery from applying for and receiving a permit for the grave opening and/or marker, however, no fee will be charged for a permit. 
(c)  City responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the city's representative upon receipt of the permit fee to locate the grave site and to mark same in such manner as to be clearly identifiable to the party responsible for opening the grave site. In no event shall any party attempt to open a grave site prior to identification of the site by the city. 
(d)  Opening of grave. The opening of a grave in the city cemetery without a permit shall be an offense punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 8-24; Ord. No. 06-09.01-97, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 26-6. - Same—Specifications. 
(a)  Dimensions. All grave sites shall have an opening sufficient in size to accommodate the casket and outer burial container. 
(b)  Ground cover. All graves shall be dug to a depth sufficient to allow a minimum ground cover of 18 inches. 
(c)  Material disposal. All excess soil removed from a grave site shall be deposited at a site designated by the city representative. 
(d)  Soil removal methods. In no event shall the removal of excess material result in the damage to surrounding plots and/or lots, cause ruts to develop, cause damage to surrounding trees, shrubbery, flowers, monuments, etc. In the event of such damage the person responsible shall pay to the city its cost of repair of such damage. 
(e)  Soil compaction. All grave sites opened shall have the soil returned to the site fully compacted to prevent the settling of such soil after completion of the burial. The costs of any settling at the grave site that takes place within one year of the burial which requires city personnel to correct shall be charged to the party responsible for the original grave site opening. 
(f)  Outer burial container required. For all burials in the city cemetery, the city will require, in addition to a casket, an outer burial container approved by city officials that is made of such material and of such thickness as to render the grave site impervious to eventual cave-ins (materials such as concrete, 1½ inches thick, coated metals of 12 gauge or thicker, or manmade materials impervious to decay). Wooden boxes do not comply with this requirement. 
(g)  Permanent marker. The funeral home shall at the time of burial affix to the ground, displayed in a position as to be read, a permanent marker identifying the name of the individual, the date buried, and the funeral home's name carved, etched, sandblasted or stamped into the marker. The marker must be permanently affixed in such a way that the marker would not hinder maintenance of the plot. 
(Code 1978, § 8-25; Ord. No. 05122003.01, 5-12-03) 
Sec. 26-7. - Plot and/or lot corner markings. 
(a)  Permit required. If the owner and/or heirs wish to designate the location of any plot or lot within the city cemetery with the installation of corner markers, a permit to do so shall be obtained from the designated city department. All corner markers shall be a maximum of six inches by six inches in size and shall be set flush with surrounding ground level on the inside corner of the plot or lot so marked. There shall be no fees in the northeast corner (old section) of the cemetery, for grave openings, markers or monuments, however, nothing contained herein waives any requirement for a person burying someone in the northeast corner (old section) of the cemetery from applying for and receiving a permit for the grave opening and/or marker, however, no fee will be charged for a permit. 
(b)  Permit fee. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged the applicant for a corner marking installation to assist in defraying the cost to the city for location of corner marking sites on behalf of the applicant. 
(c)  Debris removal. It shall be the responsibility of the party installing corner markers to remove from the cemetery all excess soil, etc., resulting from installation of the corner markers. If such debris, soil, etc., is not removed within five working days from the installation of same, the city shall remove such material at the expense of the responsible party. 
(Code 1978, § 8-26; Ord. No. 06-09.01-97, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 26-8. - Monuments. 
(a)  Installation permit required, fee. There is hereby required a permit for the installation of any monument and/or bronze marker within the city cemetery. The party responsible for installation of such monument and/or marker, prior to such installation, shall make application for a permit to install same to the designated city department and pay the designated department a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Such fee is established for the purpose of helping in defraying cost to the city in locating on behalf of the applicant the plot/lot on which such monument/marker shall be installed. 
(b)  Monument base. The base on which all monuments and/or markers are to be located shall consist of poured concrete to a depth and size sufficient to support the monument/marker without cracking. All such bases shall not protrude above surrounding ground level in excess of one inch. 
(c)  Material disposal. The removal of all excess material resulting from the installation of a monument and/or marker base shall be the responsibility of the person making such installation. If all such removal is not completed within five working days from date of installation, the city may remove same and charge all costs therefor to the party obtaining the installation permit. 
(d)  Damage to property. The party responsible for the installation of the monument/marker base or the monument/marker shall be responsible for the cost of report of any damage to property incurred within the cemetery as a result of such installation. 
(e)  Bronze markers. The city may, in its discretion, designate specific locations within the cemetery wherein only bronze plaques or other similar type markers will be permitted. When so done, the owners of plots/lots within the designated area shall not be permitted to erect monuments/markers, etc., other than those so designated. 
(Code 1978, § 8-27) 
Sec. 26-9. - Number of burials per lot. 
There shall be no more than two burials per lot within the city cemetery, except in the case of cremated remains or infant burials wherein four burials per grave site will be permitted. Each such burial shall be considered a separate burial unless accomplished at the same time. 
(Code 1978, § 8-28) 
Sec. 26-10. - Plantings. 
(a)  The owners of plots or lots within the city cemetery shall be restricted to planting only herbaceous, annual and perennial flowers on such plots or lots. 
(b)  No trees or woody plants shall be planted on any lot in the city cemetery. 
(c)  The director of the community services department, with approval by the city manager, shall have the right and power to have removed from any owner's lot any tree, shrub or plant deemed unsafe and likely to injure any of the improvements in the cemetery. 
(Code 1978, § 8-29) 
Sec. 26-11. - Desecration of burial site. 
The destruction, theft or disturbance of any monument, marker or mausoleum, or their defacement in any manner, shall constitute a desecration of the grave site and shall be punishable by applicable law. 
(Code 1978, § 8-30) 
Sec. 26-12. - Hours open. 
The hours during which the city cemetery shall be open to the public are hereby established as 8:00 a.m. to 30 minutes after sunset. Any person apprehended within the confines of the cemetery at any time other than the hours herein designated without approval of the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1978, § 8-31) 
Sec. 26-13. - Burial of animals prohibited. 
The burial of animals of any nature shall not be permitted within the city cemetery. 
(Code 1978, § 8-32) 
Sec. 26-14. - Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 8-33) 
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire protection and prevention, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 70. 

Sec. 30-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1978, § 9-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-27. - Office of emergency management director. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is hereby established the Douglas-Coffee County emergency management agency. The chairman, county commissioners, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment by the governor a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the county and cities therein on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions set forth in section 30-26. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Natural Disaster Operations Plan and Nuclear Emergency Operations Plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Douglas-Coffee County emergency operations center. 
(7)  To coordinate activities of the emergency operations center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of governing officials. 
(Code 1978, § 9-2) 
Sec. 30-28. - Emergency management agency. 
The Douglas-Coffee County emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments and the emergency functions listed in section 30-26 above are assigned as follows: 

 
Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3) 
Sec. 30-29. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman, county commissioners, jointly with the mayors of the affected cities, or in their absences their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4) 
Sec. 30-30. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county and cities therein, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county and city officers and employees. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5) 
Sec. 30-31. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1978, § 9-6) 
Secs. 30-32—30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY NATURAL GAS CURTAILMENT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 30-51. - Intent. 
The city is subject to a limited supply of natural gas utilized for residential, commercial and industrial purposes throughout the city and its service area by its supplier of natural gas. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and those persons utilizing natural gas it becomes necessary in times of cold weather conditions to curtail use of natural gas by various classes of customers of the city natural gas department in order to provide sufficient natural gas for residential heating and cooking purposes. Therefore, the city commission adopts the provisions in this article as an emergency gas curtailment plan. 
(Code 1978, § 23-62) 
Cross reference— Gas department, § 2-282. 
Sec. 30-52. - Curtailment. 
(a)  Authority. The city manager and/or the director of the natural gas department are hereby authorized to institute curtailment and/or discontinuance of natural gas to users of the system when in the judgment of the city manager and/or the director of the natural gas department such curtailment and/or discontinuance of service is required to ensure the delivery of natural gas to residential users of natural gas for home heating and food preparation purposes. 
(b)  Sequence. The sequence of curtailment or discontinuance of users of the natural gas system is hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Interruptible gas contract users. 
(2)  Industrial firm gas contract users. 
(3)  Recreational gas users. 
(4)  Educational institutions. 
(5)  Large commercial gas users. 
(6)  Small commercial gas users. 
(7)  Consumers connected directly to the high-pressure gas transmission system. 
(Code 1978, § 23-63) 
Sec. 30-53. - Discontinuance of natural gas not required for certain users. 
The following class of users of the natural gas system may, under extreme circumstances, be required to curtail the use of natural gas, but shall not be required to discontinue such use for heating and food preparation purposes: 
(1)  Hospitals. 
(2)  Nursing/convalescent homes. 
(3)  Pharmacies. 
(4)  Doctors' offices. 
(5)  Public and private emergency delivery services. 
(6)  Public utility services. 
(7)  Restaurants. 
(Code 1978, § 23-64) 
Sec. 30-54. - Notification. 
(a)  Notification authorization. The city manager and/or the director of the natural gas system and/or their designated representatives are hereby authorized to notify those users of natural gas requiring curtailment and/or their discontinuance of the use of natural gas by telephone, in person or in writing of the requirement for curtailment or discontinuance of such use of natural gas. 
(b)  Required action upon receipt of notification by user. The user of natural gas, upon receipt of notification from the city manager and/or the director of the natural gas department or their authorized representative, shall immediately take appropriate steps to curtail or discontinue the use of natural gas as directed by the notification so given. In no event shall the user delay the completion of the required action by the notification beyond 30 minutes from the time the notification is received by the user. 
(c)  Resumption of service. When in the judgment of the city manager and/or the director of the natural gas department the resumption of gas service to those users of natural gas can be accomplished, those users of the system whose supply of natural gas has been curtailed and/or discontinued shall be notified of such resumption of gas service a minimum of 30 minutes prior to such resumption of service. 
(d)  Responsibility of user upon receipt of resumption notification. It shall be the responsibility of the user of natural gas upon receipt of resumption notification to take any and all steps necessary to ensure the safety and security of all persons and property utilizing and supervised by the user of natural gas within the 30-minute time allotted in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Additional time required after resumption notification. If the user of natural gas service shall require additional time for preparation of resumption of gas service to the installation served, a responsible party shall immediately notify the director of the natural gas department of such condition and request an extension of time for the resumption of service. 
(Code 1978, § 23-65) 
Sec. 30-55. - Enforcement. 
The city manager and/or the director of the natural gas department or their authorized representatives are hereby charged with the enforcement of this article and are hereby authorized to take all steps necessary to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions hereof, including, but not limited to, curtailment or termination of service to the violator and/or issuance of citations for violation hereof. 
(Code 1978, § 23-66) 
Sec. 30-56. - Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 23-67) 
Secs. 30-57—30-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY WATER CURTAILMENT PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Water, wastewater and wastewater treatment department, § 2-376. 

Sec. 30-76. - Intent. 
The city and its service area is subject to a limited supply of water utilized for residential, commercial and industrial purposes; and in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and those persons utilizing the water system, it becomes necessary at times of drought and/or other emergencies to curtail use of water by various classes of customers of the city water department in order to provide sufficient water for residential purposes. Therefore, the commission adopts an emergency water curtailment plan as put forth in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 23-70) 
Sec. 30-77. - Authority. 
The city manager and/or the director of the water department are hereby authorized to institute curtailment and/or discontinuance of service as required to ensure the delivery of water to residential users of water for home usage and food preparation purposes. 
(Code 1978, § 23-71) 
Sec. 30-78. - Sequence. 
The sequence of curtailment or discontinuance of use of the water system is hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Request to users for voluntary curtailment. 
(2)  Discontinuance of use for recreational, yards, gardens and vehicles. 
(3)  Discontinuance of use by large industrial users 100,000 gallons per day and above. 
(4)  Discontinuance of use by small industrial users 99,000 gallons per day and below. 
(5)  Discontinuance of use by large commercial users 50,000 gallons per day and above. 
(6)  Discontinuance of use by small commercial users 49,000 gallons per day and below. 
(Code 1978, § 23-72) 
Sec. 30-79. - Nondiscontinuance of water use for certain users. 
The following class of users of the water system may, under extreme circumstances, be required to curtail the use of water, but shall not be required to discontinue such use for food preparation purposes and emergency use: 
(1)  Hospitals. 
(2)  Nursing/convalescent homes. 
(3)  Pharmacies. 
(4)  Doctors' offices. 
(5)  Public and private emergency delivery services. 
(6)  Public utility services. 
(7)  Restaurants. 
(Code 1978, § 23-73) 
Sec. 30-80. - Notification. 
The city manager and/or the director of the water system and/or their designated representatives are hereby authorized to notify those users of water requiring curtailment and/or their discontinuance of the use of water by telephone, in person or in writing of the requirement for curtailment or discontinuance of such use of water. 
(Code 1978, § 23-74) 
Sec. 30-81. - Timely compliance required. 
The user of water, upon receipt of notification from the city manager and/or the director of the water department or their authorized representative shall immediately take appropriate steps to curtail or discontinue the use of water as directed by the notification so given. In no event shall the user delay completion of the required action by the notification beyond 30 minutes from the time the notification is received by the user. 
(Code 1978, § 23-75) 
Sec. 30-82. - Resumption of service. 
When in the judgment of the city manager and/or the director of the water department the resumption of water service to those users of water can be accomplished, those users of the system whose supply of water has been curtailed and/or discontinued shall be notified of such resumption of service. 
(Code 1978, § 23-76) 
Sec. 30-83. - Responsibility of water user upon receipt of resumption notification. 
It shall be the responsibility of the user of water upon receipt of resumption notification to take any and all steps necessary to ensure the safety and security of all persons and property and equipment utilizing and supervised by the user of water, within the 30-minute time allotted in section 30-81. 
(Code 1978, § 23-77) 
Sec. 30-84. - When additional time required after resumption notification. 
If the user of water service shall require additional preparation time for resumption of water service to the installation served, a responsible party shall immediately notify the director of the water department of such condition and request an extension of time for the resumption of service. 
(Code 1978, § 23-78) 
Sec. 30-85. - Enforcement. 
The city manager and/or the director of the water department or their authorized representatives are hereby charged with the enforcement of this article and are hereby authorized to take all steps necessary to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions hereof, including but not limited to curtailment, or termination of service to the violator and/or issuance of citations for violation hereof. 
(Code 1978, § 23-79) 
Sec. 30-86. - Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 23-80) 
Chapter 34 - COURTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; traffic, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Acceptance of cash bonds for violations of ordinances or other offenses against municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10; establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. 6, sec. 1, par. 1; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 10-1 through 10-10 of the 1978 Code relating to the establishment and operation of the city's recorder's court are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; floods, ch. 46; private water wells, § 50-26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05082017(1), adopted May 8, 2017 , repealed the former article II, §§ 38-26—38-34, and enacted a new article II as set out herein. The former article II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 2-12-07. 

Sec. 38-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; and 
(3)  Any minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq., provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(4)  The 2012 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code and its amendments, a set forth by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(5)  The 2012 Edition of the International Existing Building Code is adopted by reference as though coped fully herein. 
Building means any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy. 
Debris, for the purpose of this article, shall include residue from the burning of wood, coal, or other combustible material, as well as paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, fallen, broken or destroyed trees or tree limbs or other material or objects not a part of the land and constituting a health or safety hazard. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle as defined herein which is incapable of being moved under its own power without additional work or repairs being completed to the motor vehicle, or without any additional components being added to or placed upon said motor vehicle. 
Junked motor vehicle is any motor vehicle, as defined in this article, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a current license decal, or the condition of such motor vehicle is in a state of disrepair, wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. The absence of a current car tag or decal from any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that such vehicle is a junked motor vehicle. 
Lot, for the purposes of this article, shall mean one or any one or more of several contiguous parcels of land making up a block, measured and set apart for use or occupancy. 
Motor vehicle is any vehicle which is or is intended to be self-propelled and designed to travel on the ground and shall include, but shall not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, four-wheelers, campers and trailers, as well as any part or parts thereof. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Private property shall mean any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property shall mean any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly-maintained way and dedicated to the purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall also mean any other publicly-owned property or facility. 
Unlicensed vehicle shall mean any car, truck van, motor home, camper, trailer, motorcycle or other vehicle not displaying a proper, valid/current proof of licensing from the state of license plate issuance or any car, truck, van, motor home, camper, trailer motorcycle or other vehicle that is not bearing a valid/current license plate. 
Weeds shall be defined as all objectionable growth, including weeds and grasses which serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes and other unhealthy or undesirable insects, or as a refuge for snakes, rats or other rodents, or that create a fire or traffic hazard or provide a hiding place for persons. Provided, however, that flowers, shrubbery, trees and other growth used as a part of landscaping shall not be included in this definition. 
Wooded areas shall be defined as those portions of lots consisting of a dense growth of trees, which exceed three inches in diameter. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(1), 5-8-17 ) 
Sec. 38-27. - Specific nuisances. 
The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
Nuisance means anything within the city or its police jurisdiction that works hurt, inconvenience or damage to others or is manifestly injurious to the public health or safety or tends to corrupt the manners or morals of the people. 
(a)  The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort: Sounds, animals or things which interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. 
(2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors: The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter: The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution: The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Stagnant water: Any stagnant pool of water (excluding city-owned holding ponds) in the city. 
(6)  Vacant lots: Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc.: Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used within this city contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(8)  Animal enclosures: Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)  Privies: The construction or maintenance of any surface closet, privy or privy vault on any premises within the city. 
(10)  Dead animals: The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(11)  Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, furniture, or other household goods, etc., on private or public property: The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, furniture, household goods, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish and trash which is a menace to public health and safety in the city. 
(12)  Accumulation of junk: The retention, storage or accumulation of any automobile, motor vehicle, mechanized equipment, machinery, appliance, scrap metal, or other scrap material on property for a period of ten days or longer in a condition that prevents its use for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured so as to affect the public health, safety and welfare of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(1), 5-8-17 ) 
Sec. 38-28. - Weeds, debris, parking or storage of unlicensed, inoperable vehicles, trailers or equipment, junked motor vehicles; prohibition exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot of land or premises in the city, or the owner of any lot of land or premises in the city, or any agent or representative of such owner or occupant, to permit or maintain on such lot any nuisance as enumerated herein, the growth thereon of objectionable weeds, the accumulation of debris or the harborage of inoperable motor vehicles, as defined in this article, which distracts from the community aesthetics, and endangers the public health, safety or welfare. The following conditions shall constitute a nuisance as it relates to the growth of objectionable weeds: 
(1)  Any lot on which a residential structure is built shall be deemed a nuisance if the growth of weeds as defined herein is 12 inches or more in height. 
(2)  Any vacant lot located within a residential district or area shall be deemed a nuisance if the growth of weeds as defined herein exceeds 18 inches or more in height. 
(3)  Any lot or property other than those described above shall be deemed a nuisance if the growth of weeds as defined herein exceeds 18 inches in height. 
Exception: For the purpose of this article, wooded areas as defined herein shall be exempt from the above requirements. 
(b)  This article defines and establishes procedures for abating inoperable or junked motor vehicles. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or partnership to allow any unlicensed vehicles of any kind without valid/current license plate and decals, or any vehicles, trailers or equipment to remain in an inoperable condition for more than 30 days within any residential district, gateway district, town center district, commercial district, or planned development district. 
a.  Those vehicles which are exempted from the provisions of this article are as follows: 
1.  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of licensed automobile dealers; 
2.  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of such junkyards; 
3.  Any motor vehicle, enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health; 
4.  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways; and 
5.  Any motor vehicles in the process of being restored to an operable condition provided they are: 
i.  Limited to no more than two in number; 
ii.  Located in the rear yard and behind the house of the owner of such vehicles; and 
iii.  Not visible from any road. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(1), 5-8-17 ) 
Sec. 38-29. - Penalty of violations. 
(a)  When any objectionable condition as defined in section 38-26, section 38-27 or violations of any applicable codes, is being permitted or maintained on any lot of land or premises in the city, it shall be punished as a misdemeanor in accordance to section 1-12. 
(1)  If the court determines that the conditions do in fact constitute a nuisance, the court shall issue an order specifying the time within which such nuisance must be abated. Failure to abate the nuisance within ordered the time period may also be punished as listed in subsection 38-31(b). 
(b)  In any proceedings brought under this chapter, each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense unless the applicable ordinance explicitly states otherwise. 
(c)  This chapter shall be enforced by the chief of police or his designee, certified peace officer employed with the City of Douglas Police Department, code enforcement officer or building inspector, where applicable. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(1), 5-8-17 ) 
Sec. 38-30. - Responsibility for removal. 
Upon giving written notice, citation or summons, the owner of the unlicensed or inoperable vehicles, trailers, equipment or junked motor vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property upon which the same is located, either, or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event that such owners fail to remove such vehicle and thereby abate such nuisance within the 15-day time period provided in the notice, the official officer shall be authorized to institute proceedings against such owner or owners in the municipal court of the city. Such service shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. 41-2-12. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(1), 5-8-17 ) 
Sec. 38-31. - Complaint, trial, order, failure to comply, assessment, collection. 
(a)  When it becomes necessary to summons an owner or occupant of lands subject to the provisions of this article, said summons shall be in the form of a written complaint setting forth, particularly, the nature and location of the nuisance and the identity of the person complained against. If the court determines that the conditions do in fact constitute a nuisance, the court shall issue an order specifying the time within which such nuisance must be abated. In addition, the court may impose a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for the offense of failure to abate the nuisance within the period provided for in section 38-28, if the court determines that the owner or occupant unreasonably failed to abate the nuisance during that time period or prior to the court hearing. 
(b)  The failure of the owner or occupant to comply with the court's order to abate the nuisance shall constitute an offense and shall subject the person to prosecution and penalties as provided in section 1-12 of this Code, including: 
(1)  Fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
(2)  Imprisonment, not to exceed six months. 
(3)  Community service to be performed with any private, nonprofit community service organization or any public agency willing to participate and approved by municipal court. Violators shall not be used for any purpose resulting in private gain to any person, except in accordance with state law. The role of the city in the supervision of violators performing community service shall be a governmental function. 
(4)  Any or all of these penalties in the discretion of the judge. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(1), 5-8-17 ) 
Sec. 38-32. - Summary abatement. 
(1)  Enforcement; notice to abate. In the event that the nuisance is abated by the city pursuant to the authority of the order of the court authorized by this article, it shall be lawful for the city to abate the same and remove the objectionable conditions from the property. In such cases, the official shall notify the public works director who shall cause the nuisance to be abated and the objectionable conditions to be removed from the property and shall assess the costs associated with said removal and charge all costs thereof to the owner or representative. Said costs shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for county taxes. Provided, however, that this shall not preclude other remedies available to the official for abating said nuisance or the city's use of other legal means of collecting the cost therefore. 
(2)  Unlicensed inoperable or junked motor vehicle. In the event that the nuisance is abated by the city pursuant to the authority of the order of the court authorized by this article, the city shall abate the nuisance in the following manner: 
(a)  The city shall hire a wrecker service, or such other service as may be required, to remove the nuisance, and direct that the nuisance be removed to a local licensed junkyard or other similar facility. 
(b)  The wrecker service hired to remove the nuisance shall notify the owner of the property and the owner of the motor vehicle within ten days of removal of the property of the location of the junked motor vehicle and of the cost incurred by the owner in connection with the abatement service. Such cost may include the actual cost of removal of the motor vehicle and storage charges, if applicable, up to and including the date of payment by the owner. 
(c)  In the event that the owner does not pay the charges or otherwise recover the motor vehicle within such time as may be established by the wrecker service or by state law, the wrecker service may be authorized to recover its costs and expenses and dispose of the property in accord with general provisions of state law. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(1), 5-8-17 ) 
Sec. 38-33. - [Debris or trash on sidewalk or public way.] 
No person shall sweep, rake, blow or deposit any trash, garbage, debris, leaves, grass, clippings, brush, soil or other foreign matter onto any sidewalk or public way. 
( Ord. No. 09142017(1), 9-14-17 ) 
Sec. 38-34. - [Violations of section 38-33.] 
Any person violating section 38-33 shall be issued an accusation to appear in municipal court and shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 09142017(1), 9-14-17 ) 
Secs. 38-35—38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04262010, §§ I—X, adopted April 26, 2010, repealed former Art. III, §§ 38-61—38-70, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. Former Art. III pertained to erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. No. 02092004.01, §§ I—X, adopted Feb. 9, 2004. 
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 94; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-61. - Title. 
This article will be known as "City of Douglas Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § I, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-62. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Altamaha Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 38-64(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geo-textiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 38-63(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Altamaha Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § II, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-63. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 38-64(c)(15) and (c)(16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and toll way authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and toll way authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and toll way authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § III, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-64. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (c)(16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
b.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § IV, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-65. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of City of Douglas without first obtaining a permit from the inspections and permits division to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the inspections and permits division and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 38-64(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections (c)(15) and (c)(16), has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 38-64(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 38-64(c)(15) and (c)(16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(2)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(4)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § V, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-66. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The inspections and permits division will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The inspections and permits division shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § VI, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-67. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 38-65(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § VII, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-68. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § VIII, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-69. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and board of commissioners within 15 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Coffee County. 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § IX, 4-26-10) 
Sec. 38-70. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 26th day of April, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(d)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 04262010, § X, 4-26-10) 
Secs. 38-71—38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 38-101. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Douglas Wetlands Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 11082004.02, § 1, 11-8-2004) 
Sec. 38-102. - Intent and purpose. 
The wetlands of the city are important to the environment and shall be protected. The purpose of this article is to recognize and require adherence to federal regulations and procedures that govern the development of land that contain wetlands within the city. The regulations contained in this article are created under the requirement of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1344), ("CWA"). Any city government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. In the event of a conflict between or among any provisions of this article, the Clean Water Act or any other ordinance, resolution or regulation of the city, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. It is not the intent of this article to regulate individual properties where activities will not impact wetlands and do not require a land-disturbing permit. 
(Ord. No. 11082004.02, § 2, 11-8-2004) 
Sec. 38-103. - Definitions. 
All words in this article have their customary dictionary definitions except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. 
Anaerobic means not having molecular oxygen (O 2 ) present. 
Applicant means any person who seeks permission to engage in any regulated activity on any land that contains wetland areas, as those terms are defined herein. 
COE means United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
Director means the director or his/her designee of the city community development department. 
Generalized wetlands map, means the latest edition of the city maps generated from National Wetlands Inventory mapping. 
Hydrophytic vegetation means any plant growing in water or in soil that is at least periodically anaerobic as a result of saturation; plants typically found in wet habitats. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetlands boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended). 
Jurisdictional wetlands means a wetlands area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) maps means a series of maps produced by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service showing the location and classification of wetlands in standard topographical areas. A wetlands inventory area does not necessarily represent jurisdictional wetlands and shall not serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or wetland delineation. 
Regulated activity means any activity that will, or which may reasonably be expected to result in the discharge of dredged or fills material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands as defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve temporary or permanent sources of water to cause soil saturation. 
Wetlands delineation means the establishment of wetlands boundaries by a representative of the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and authority designated by the COE, or the Director, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1344), as amended. Wetlands shall be delineated on the basis of hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soils, and wetlands hydrology, in accordance with the techniques outlined in the COE, Wetlands Delineation Manual (Technical Report Y-87-1, January 1987). 
(Ord. No. 11082004.02, § 3, 11-8-2004) 
Sec. 38-104. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are identified, designated and mapped as wetland areas by the city mayor and board of commissioners. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
The generalized wetlands map and the established wetlands protection district do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and shall not serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries approved by the COE, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article shall not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
The generalized wetlands map is available in the community development department and incorporated by reference. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein. 
a.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that an individual 404 permit is required. 
b.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
c.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
d.  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
e.  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
f.  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: 
a.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
b.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 11082004.02, § 4, 11-8-2004) 
Sec. 38-105. - Benefits. 
Important benefits to the City of Douglas citizens that are derived from wetlands protection include: 
(1)  Flood control. 
(2)  Erosion control. 
(3)  Improved water quality due to the retention of sediment, nutrients, and toxic materials. 
(4)  Aesthetics. 
(5)  Recreational and natural resource education opportunities. 
(6)  Open space. 
(Ord. No. 11082004.02, § 5, 11-8-2004) 
Sec. 38-106. - Authority and applicability. 
Terms and provision of the Wetlands Protections Ordinance, established herein, shall apply to all activities which require the issuance of a land disturbance permit on any real property within the City of Douglas. No land-disturbing permit shall be issued by the building inspector without it being determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(1)  Site plans. Application for a land disturbing permit within the wetlands protection division shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1"=50', with the following information: 
a.  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
b.  A map of any wetlands boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
c.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
d.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
e.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
f.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection system designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
g.  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(2)  Activities to comply with site plan. All activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal or change the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official/inspector. Minor changes such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(3)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. 
a.  Single-family detached and duplex dwellings constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
b.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
c.  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(Ord. No. 11082004.02, § 6, 11-8-2004) 
Sec. 38-107. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
Jurisdictional wetlands shall be protected according to the regulation of the State of Georgia, COE, Environmental Protection Agency and all other applicable state and federal regulations. Under current federal law and state policy, alterations or degradation of wetlands should be avoided unless it can be demonstrated that there will be no long term impacts or net loss of wetlands. Any unavoidable degradation or loss must be mitigated through the restoration, creation, enhancement or preservation of other waters of the United States. 
If the applicant can provide to the building inspector a valid COE wetlands delineation that verifies that the proposed activity is not located within jurisdictional wetlands, or if the applicant can provide a valid COE permit or letter that authorized the proposed activity within jurisdictional wetlands, then the building inspector shall follow current procedures for issuing a land disturbance permit. If such evidence of compliance with COE permitting requirements is not provided, then the procedures are as follows: 
(1)  The building inspector shall consult the generalized wetlands map to assess whether the proposed activity is located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district. 
a.  If the building inspector determines that the proposed activity is of a type that could not result in a disturbance of wetlands or if the proposed activity is not located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district, the building inspector shall follow current procedures for issuing a land-disturbing permit. 
b.  If the building inspector determines that the proposed activity is located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district and that the proposed activity is of a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands and jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a land-disturbing permit. 
c.  If the COE determines that a permit or letter of permission is required, a land-disturbing permit shall be issued only following issuance of a COE permit or letter of permission. If the COE determines that the proposed activity would not require a COE permit or letter of permission, the building inspector shall proceed with current procedures for issuing a land disturbance permit based on documentation of the COE determination. If the COE determines that wetlands mitigation is required, the applicant shall perform mitigation in the city, unless such action conflicts with the direction of COE. 
d.  If under any of the provision of this section a conflict occurs between the building inspector and the applicant with regards to the proposed activity being a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands, the applicant shall provide the building inspector with the appropriate COE documentation to resolve the conflict. 
(2)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the city inspections and permits division and will be reviewed within 15 days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, disapproval) by the building inspector/official. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is deemed to be approved. Decisions of the building official/inspector may be appealed to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 11082004.02, § 7, 11-8-2004) 
Sec. 38-108. - Penalties. 
When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure. 
When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation as far as practicable. 
If the building official/inspector determines that a violation of this article also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the building inspector/official shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the applicant and/or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 11082004.02, § 1, 11-8-2004) 
Secs. 38-109—38-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-120. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited and referenced to as the City of Douglas Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 1, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-121. - Findings of fact. 
It is hereby determined that land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; this stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, and; stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. 
Therefore, the City of Douglas establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 2, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-122. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels; 
(2)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(3)  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime; 
(4)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety; 
(5)  To provide a guideline of minimum stormwater requirements for developers and property owners; 
(6)  To assist in maintaining eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 2, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-123. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all projects causing an increase in stormwater runoff quantity by the addition of impervious surfaces, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a variance by the City of Douglas under the specifications of division 3 of this article. This article also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the City of Douglas has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing 1.0 acres or more and to construction activity disturbing less than 1.0 acres that increases the amount of stormwater runoff by more than 1.0 cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm event. The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria: 
(1)  Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the State of Georgia or other applicable regulatory authority, as applicable; 
(2)  Single-family structures if the lot is not part of a common development; additions or modifications to existing single family structures; 
(3)  Developments that do not disturb more than 1.0 acres of land and do not increase the amount of impervious surface area by at least ten percent, provided the developments are not part of a larger common development plan. Documentation must be provided by the developer or his qualified representative as determined by the City of Douglas; 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by and/or approved by the City of Douglas. 
When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in section 38-126 of this division, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by this article. These stormwater requirements are dependent on the amount of increase in stormwater runoff created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the code enforcement-planning and zoning department, in no case shall the stormwater runoff be increased by more than 1.0 cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm event, without providing adequate stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 2, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-124. - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 2, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-125. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 2, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-126. - Definitions. 
Accelerated erosion means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit. 
As-built plans means amended plans specifying the location, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of storm drainage facilities and structures as they have been constructed. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
City means the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who acts in the person's own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and undertakes land disturbance activities. 
Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
Engineer means a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Georgia and who has extensive education or experience relating to the design. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc). 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
Infiltration facility means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land disturbance activity means any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse. 
Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
Maintenance agreement means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Operator means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities. 
Recharge means the replenishment of underground water reserves. 
Redevelopment means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding square feet in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential. 
Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
Stormwater management means the use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation, which reaches a drainage system. 
Stormwater treatment practices (STPs) means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
Surveyor means a professional surveyor who is registered in the State of Georgia. 
Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 3, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 38-127—38-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 38-141. - Permit required. 
No landowner or operator shall receive any of the permits required without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 4, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-142. - Application requirements. 
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator desiring a stormwater management permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the City of Douglas a permit application on the form provided for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise accepted by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application be considered: 
(1)  A stormwater management concept plan; 
(2)  A maintenance agreement; and 
(3)  A nonrefundable permit review fee. 
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 38-162, and divisions 4 and 5 of this article, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of division 7 of this article, and fees shall be those established by the City of Douglas in section 38-144. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 4, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-143. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land contained within the entire tract of land on which the new development or redevelopment is to be constructed. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 4, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-144. - Application procedure. 
The code enforcement-planning and zoning department is designated as the official responsible for the administration of this article for the City of Douglas. The code enforcement-planning and zoning department or its authorized representative shall be responsible for reviewing and approving/denying the development plans, on-site inspections of construction and maintenance, and initiation of enforcement actions when violations occur. The following procedures and/or requirements shall be followed: 
(1)  Application. 
a.  Submittal: The owner-developer or design engineer shall submit three copies of plans and two sets of computations to the code enforcement-planning and zoning department. 
b.  Application fees: A fee shall be charged for review of each application, according to the following schedule: 

 
c.  Review: The code enforcement-planning and zoning department will review plans and computations for compliance with this article. A decision will be made within 45 days from time of submittal. 
d.  Disapproval: Plans not meeting all requirements will be disapproved. Disapproved plans will be returned along with a statement as to reasons for disapproval. After plans are revised they shall be resubmitted to the code enforcement-planning and zoning department for review. There is no fee for review of resubmitted plans if resubmittal is within 30 calendar days of initial submittal. 
d.  Approval: After approval, two approved copies of the plans and one copy of the computations will be returned to the design engineer or owner/developer. One copy of the approved plan and computations shall remain on file in the office of the code enforcement-planning and zoning department. 
(2)  Inspection. The code enforcement-planning and zoning department or their authorized representative or any other authorized City of Douglas representative shall make inspections as necessary to determine if construction and maintenance conforms to the plans, studies and other related ordinances. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized City of Douglas representative who requests entry for purposes of making inspections, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out their official duties. 
(3)  Violation. If, through inspection, it is determined that construction or maintenance does not comply with the plans or the owner-developer has not complied with other requirements of this article a written notice to comply shall be served upon the owner-developer. The notice shall set forth the deficiencies and actions necessary to comply with the plans or other requirements of this article, and shall state the time, not to exceed 30 days, within which such actions must be completed. 
If the owner-developer fails to comply within the stated time, he will be deemed in violation of this article. 
(4)  Enforcement. The code enforcement-planning and zoning department, or its designee, may upon any owner/developer being deemed in violation, cause enforcement and penalty provisions to be enacted as described in division 8 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 4, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-145. - Appeal procedure. 
In the event the owner/developer and the code enforcement-planning and zoning department cannot reach a satisfactory resolution to disputed points within the drainage plans, the plans shall be deemed disapproved by the code enforcement-planning and zoning department. The code enforcement-planning and zoning department shall immediately notify the owner/developer in writing of such disapproval. The owner/developer shall have ten days from the code enforcement-planning and zoning departments notice of disapproval to file an appeal to be submitted to the city manager. If such action is not taken within a ten-day period, the owner/developer shall forfeit the right to appeal as provided in the ordinance and the plans will be deemed disapproved until plans have been revised and resubmitted to the city code enforcement-planning and zoning department for a review. 
Step 1: Appeals submitted to the city manager shall be written for presentation which supports the owner/developers position as to why certain regulations should be waived or modified, or other reason why the owner/developer disagrees with the decision of the code enforcement-planning and zoning department disapproving said plans and/or computations. 
Upon receipt of the appeal, the city manager will review and meet with both the code enforcement-planning and zoning department and the owner/developer and hear both sides. Following the presentation, the city manager will render a decision within 15 days. 
Step 2: Following receipt of the city manager's opinion, the owner/developer has 15 days to appeal the city managers decision to the Douglas City Commission. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. 
The appeal to the Douglas City Commission shall be on the evidentiary record as developed before the appeal to the city commission. The city commission shall not hear or allow additional evidence. The owner/developer and the city manager may submit a written argument or brief and may request oral argument. The decision to grant or deny oral argument shall be at the discretion of the city commission. 
The city commission shall review the record and evidence at either a special called meeting or a regularly scheduled meeting within 30 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The city commission shall render a decision within a reasonable period of time thereafter. The decision of the city commission shall be the final decision of the City of Douglas. 
Judicial review: Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the City of Douglas, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Coffee County. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 4, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 38-146—38-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WAIVERS TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 38-161. - Waivers for providing stormwater management. 
The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria: 
(1)  Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the State of Georgia or other applicable regulatory authority, as applicable; 
(2)  Single-family structures if the lot is not part of a common development. Additions or modifications to existing single family structures; 
(3)  Developments that do not disturb more than 1.0 acres of land and do not increase the amount of impervious surface area by at least ten percent, provided the developments are not part of a larger common development plan. Documentation must be provided by the developer or his qualified representative as determined by the City of Douglas; 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by and/or approved by the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 5, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-162. - General performance criteria for stormwater management. 
Unless judged by the City of Douglas to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)  All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)  All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not impact a jurisdictional wetland or local water body. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers (ACE). 
(3)  The proposed improvements shall, if possible, promote infiltration through the use of structural and nonstructural methods. The proposed improvements shall, if possible, mimic the post development site annual groundwater recharge rates to the pre-development site annual groundwater recharge rate. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 6, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 38-163—38-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BASIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA 

Sec. 38-171. - Minimum control requirements. 
Unless the City of Douglas grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from the requirements, this article shall control the release of stormwater runoff. All new developments or redevelopments shall provide controlled release of stormwater runoff generated by the two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year, 50-year and 100-year 24-hour frequency storm events. The peak release rate of stormwater runoff from a new development or redevelopment shall not exceed the peak stormwater runoff rate of the site in its natural undeveloped state for all storm intensities listed above. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Douglas reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, time and rate of runoff. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 7, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-172. - Site design feasibility. 
Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered: 
(1)  Topography. 
(2)  Maximum drainage area. 
(3)  Depth to water table. 
(4)  Soils. 
(5)  Slopes. 
(6)  Terrain. 
(7)  Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 7, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-173. - Conveyance issues. 
All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Maximizing flowpaths from inflow points to outflow points; 
(2)  Protection of inlet and outfall structures; 
(3)  Elimination of erosive flow velocities; 
(4)  Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 7, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-174. - Maintenance agreements. 
All stormwater treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any stormwater management permits. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 7, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-175. - Nonstructural stormwater practices. 
The use of nonstructural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 7, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-176. - Engineering requirements—Design standards. 
Two hydrological methods for computing surface runoff are hereby adopted: 
(1)  The rational method (Shall be used on sites less than 50 acres). 
(2)  U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55) (Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds. 
Alternative computer models may be utilized if such models are approved in advance of application submittal to the City of Douglas. 
The runoff coefficient for a development site in its natural undeveloped state (having no impervious areas) shall be assigned a runoff coefficient for woodlands land use for the natural slope and soil present on the property, but in no case shall the coefficient exceed 0.30. 
The rainfall intensity for the various storm frequencies is defined by the rainfall intensity duration curves for the City of Thomasville as published in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, latest edition, or other locally developed, approved and accepted intensity curves. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 7, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-177. - Requirements of engineering drawings. 
(a)  Scale: The site plan shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals 50 feet (max). Other scales may be acceptable if pre-approved by the code enforcement-planning and zoning department. North arrow shall be provided. 
(b)  Contours: The site plan shall illustrate both existing and proposed contours on a one-foot increment. 
(c)  Elevation datum: Mean sea level. 
(d)  Spot elevations: Grate, throat and invert elevations shall be provided for all storm drainage structures. 
(e)  Drainage basins: 
(1)  Earthen slopes shall not exceed 3:1. 
(2)  Wet detention basins shall have a permanent pool depth of not less than four feet to reduce bottom vegetation growth. 
(3)  Dry basins must be designed with access to allow for efficient maintenance of the basin bottom and side slopes. 
(4)  An overall map of the drainage area of study with total acreage. 
(5)  The calculations shall clearly show how the times of concentrations were determined. 
(6)  V-notched weir, rectangular weir or orifice outlets are recommended to achieve detention storage. 
(7)  Design data for storage volume and detention outlet requirements shall be submitted and approved. 
(8)  The principal outlet must convey the 100-year storm flow without emergency overflow. However, design peak flow can be exceeded and because outlet structures can become partially blocked, an emergency overflow must be provided. The emergency overflow should direct flows to minimize property damage and avoid risk to people. 
(9)  Where discharge velocities exceed five feet per second, riprap shall be provided. Where rip rap is not desirable, energy dissipation devices of concrete may be utilized. 
(f)  Details: The engineering drawings shall contain construction details of the drop inlets, catch basins, junction boxes, headwalls, spillways, outlet control structures, basin dam, etc. 
(g)  Fencing: Permanent chain link fencing of at least six feet in height shall be installed around all detention facilities having a maximum water depth greater than 4.0 feet in depth. Fencing shall include a lockable gate of adequate width to allow access for maintenance equipment and labor. 
(h)  Flood plain: The site plan shall exhibit the limits and flood elevation (if published by FEMA) of the 100-year flood plain. 
(i)  Engineers seal: All required plans, computations, studies, etc. shall have the seal and signature of the design engineer, who shall be a professional engineer registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 7, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 38-178—38-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL 

Sec. 38-191. - Stormwater management plan required for all developments. 
No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be prepared by an individual approved by the City of Douglas and must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the general location and type of practices. The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements. No other permits shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, has undergone a review and been approved by the City of Douglas after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 8, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-192. - Stormwater management concept plan requirements. 
A stormwater management concept plan shall be required with the permit application and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan: 
(1)  A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; a written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
(2)  Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this article and other applicable regulations. 
(3)  A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(4)  A written description of the required maintenance burden for any proposed stormwater management facility. 
(5)  The City of Douglas may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential. 
For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this article to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 8, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-193. - Final stormwater management plan requirements. 
After review of the stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to the plan as deemed necessary by the code enforcement-planning and zoning department, a final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information required in the final stormwater management plan. This includes: 
(1)  Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected. 
(2)  Topographic base map. A one inch equals 200 feet topographic base map of the site which extends a distance as determined by the design engineer beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all existing structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown which may have an impact or be impacted by the proposed project. 
(3)  Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this article. Such calculations shall include: 
a.  Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration, 
b.  Time of concentration; 
c.  Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients; 
d.  Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; 
e.  Infiltration rates, where applicable; 
f.  Culvert capacities; 
g.  Flow velocities; 
h.  Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms; and 
i.  Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(4)  Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil boring or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(5)  Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(6)  Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(7)  Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. 
(8)  Maintenance agreement. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management measure in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
(9)  Erosion and sediment control plans for construction of stormwater management measures. The applicant must prepare an erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with the City of Douglas Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
(10)  Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 8, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-194. - Performance bond/security. 
The City of Douglas may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The City of Douglas will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development states can be done at the discretion of the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 8, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 38-195—38-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION 

Sec. 38-211. - Notice of construction commencement. 
The applicant must notify the code enforcement-planning and zoning department in advance before the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the City of Douglas or their designee who has been approved by the City of Douglas. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; 
(4)  Any violations that exist. 
If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No additional work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 9, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-212. - As-built plans. 
All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City of Douglas is required before the release of any performance securities can occur and before a certificate of occupancy is issued by the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 9, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 38-213—38-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORMWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 38-221. - Maintenance easement. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit that has an stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City of Douglas, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the developer at no expense to the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 10, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-222. - Maintenance covenants. 
Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the City of Douglas and recorded prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 10, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-223. - Requirements of maintenance covenants. 
All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner at the expense of the owner, as determined by the City of Douglas, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 10, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-224. - Inspection of stormwater facilities. 
Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 10, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-225. - Right of entry for inspection. 
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, the property owner shall grant to the City of Douglas the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 10, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-226. - Records of installation and maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least three years. These records shall be made available to the City of Douglas during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 10, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-227. - Failure to maintain practices. 
If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the City of Douglas, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Douglas shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have ten days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the City of Douglas may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 10, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 38-228—38-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 38-241. - Violations. 
Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 11, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-242. - Notice of violation. 
When the City of Douglas determines than an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 11, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-243. - Stop work orders. 
Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This stop work order will be in effect until the City of Douglas confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 11, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-244. - Civil penalties. 
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed five days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 11, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-245. - Restoration of lands. 
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the City of Douglas may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 11, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-246. - Holds on occupation certificates. 
Occupation certificates will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 11, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 38-247. - Criminal penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalties not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 061206, § 11, 6-12-06) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Fire code adopted. 
The fire code of the city shall be the same as the 1991 Standard Fire Prevention Code, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., with the following amendments: 
(1)  Appendix A, Recommended Supplemental Administrative Provisions. 
(2)  Appendix B, Upholstered Furniture. 
(Ord. No. 07-23.1-91, 7-23-91) 
Sec. 42-2. - Adoption of state safety fire code. 
The rules and regulations now and hereafter promulgated for the prevention of destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in this state by the state safety fire commissioner, under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon the state safety fire commissioner by O.C.G.A. ch. 92A-7, are hereby adopted as the rules and regulations of this city. Reference is hereby made to the Georgia Safety Fire Code, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer and is hereby made a part of this Code by reference and the copy on file in the clerk-treasurer's office is referred to for more particularity as to the contents of the fire code. 
(Code 1978, § 11-2) 
State Law reference— Adoption of state fire safety standards, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12. 
Sec. 42-3. - Fireworks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display, shoot or explode any fireworks in the city; provided, however, public fireworks exhibitions by a professional company may be allowed upon approval by the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 11-3) 
State Law reference— Regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 42-4. - Illegal use of water from fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any fire hydrant, whether public or private, for any purpose other than for the extinguishment of fires, or for lawful city purposes. 
(Code 1978, § 11-4) 
Sec. 42-5. - Tampering with fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper or interfere with any fire hydrant of the city, except in case of fire and under instructions from the chief of the fire department, without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of the water department or the fire chief, and without notifying the chief of the nature of such interference. 
(Code 1978, § 11-5) 
Sec. 42-6. - Obstructing fire station entrance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, in any manner, the entrance to any fire station in the city. 
(Code 1978, § 11-6) 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1. 
Sec. 42-7. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give or cause to be given, or to aid in the giving of, any false alarm of fire with intent to deceive the department, or to pull the hook of any station or signal box with such intent. 
(Code 1978, § 11-8) 
State Law reference— Transmitting false report of a fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 
Sec. 42-8. - Driving over fire hose. 
It shall be unlawful for any person driving any conveyance, including a bicycle, to pass over or across or otherwise interfere with any of the hose owned or used by the city when the same is laid on the streets for the purpose of fire control or for other purposes. 
(Code 1978, § 11-10) 
State Law reference— Crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248. 
Sec. 42-9. - Riding fire vehicle without permission. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except members and officers of the fire department of the city, to mount or ride any vehicle used in connection with the fire department when such vehicle is responding to a fire call, or while the same is in attendance upon a fire, or at any other time without approval of the fire chief. 
(Code 1978, § 11-11) 
Sec. 42-10. - Periodic inspections by fire chief. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect or cause to be inspected as often as may be necessary, but not less than twice a year in outlying districts and four times a year in closely built portions of the city, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any violation of the provisions or intent of any ordinance of the city affecting fire hazards. 
(Code 1978, § 11-12) 
Sec. 42-11. - Abatement of hazardous conditions—Enumeration; issuing orders; appeals. 
Whenever any officer or member of the fire department shall find, in any building or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation or rubbish or oily waste in combustible receptacles; unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any other highly inflammable materials especially liable to cause fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property; or shall find obstruction to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operation of the fire department, or egress of occupants, in case of fire; or fire doors or shutters obstructed or in poor repair; or interior firefighting equipment not in serviceable condition; or any unsafe chimneys, stoves, furnaces, boilers, flues, stacks, or heating appliances; he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or building, subject to appeal within 24 hours to the city manager, who shall within ten days review such order and file his decision thereon; and unless the order is revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by such owner or occupant. 
(Code 1978, § 11-13) 
Sec. 42-12. - Same—Service of orders. 
The service of any order as provided in section 42-11 shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy of same to such occupant personally, or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises; or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner or premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with such person a true copy of the order; or if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such copy to the owner's last known post office address. 
(Code 1978, § 11-14) 
Sec. 42-13. - Same—Failure to comply with order. 
Any owner or occupant failing to comply with an order issued pursuant to section 42-11 within ten days after the appeal was determined, or, if no appeal is taken, then within ten days after the service of the order, shall be liable to punishment as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 11-15) 
Sec. 42-14. - Conditions for lighting fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or set fire to trash, rubbish, weeds, grass, or any other combustible material, on any premises within the city without first having confined the area so to be burned so as not to endanger any wood, fences, houses or any property of any description whatsoever; and before any fire shall be so set it shall be the duty of the person setting the fire or having it set, burning weeds, rubbish, etc., or having them burned, to obtain permission for so doing from the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1978, § 11-21) 
Secs. 42-15—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS 

Sec. 42-31. - Authority. 
The following ordinance is promulgated in order to regulate the inspection, testing, maintenance, correction, and repair of fire hydrants located on private property in the City of Douglas. 
( Ord. No. 03142016, § 1.A, 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 42-32. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide standards and requirements for the inspection, testing, maintenance, correction, and repair of fire hydrants located on private property of the City of Douglas. 
a.  Ensure that every private fire hydrant to which the Fire Department of the City of Douglas connects in the event of a fire or other emergency will function as designed to produce the water necessary to respond appropriately to the fire or other emergency. Protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the City of Douglas. 
( Ord. No. 03142016, § 1.B, 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 42-33. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Emergency impairment. A condition where a private fire hydrant is out of service due to an unexpected occurrence, such as frozen or ruptured hydrant components or an interruption of the water supply to the system. 
Fire department. The fire department of the City of Douglas. 
Hydrant. A private fire hydrant as defined below. 
Impairment. A shutdown of a private fire hydrant which renders the hydrant non-operational and therefore out of service. 
Impairment tag. A tag affixed to a private fire hydrant to indicate that the hydrant is out of service. The fire department may determine the requirements of an impairment tag and the means and location of its attachment to a hydrant. 
Inspection. An examination of a private fire hydrant to verify that it appears to be in operating condition and is free from physical damage. 
Maintenance. Work performed to keep a private fire hydrant operable or to make repairs. 
NFPA Standard. Publication 25 of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) titled Standard for the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems 2002, and any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto. 
Owner. The person that holds record title to the property upon which a private fire hydrant is located. 
Owner's designee. Where the owner is not the occupant of the premises upon which a private fire hydrant is located, the occupant, management firm, or managing individual designated by the owner through specific provisions in the lease, written use agreement, or management contract owner to assume the responsibility to inspect, test, and maintain, correct and repair a private fire hydrant located on the owner's property. 
Person. Any institution, public or private corporation, individual, partnership, or other entity. 
Pre-planned impairment. A condition where a private fire hydrant is out of service due to work that has been planned in advance. Private fire hydrant. A valved connection to a water main for the purpose of supplying water to a fire hose or other fire protection apparatus and that is not located within the right-of-way of the City of Douglas. 
Qualified. Having knowledge of the installation, construction, operation, maintenance, correction or repair of a fire hydrant and the hazards involved. 
Record. Written documentation of the inspection, testing, maintenance, correction, or repair of a private fire hydrant. 
Shall. Indicates a mandatory requirement 
Testing. A procedure of periodic physical and operational checks used to determine whether a private fire hydrant is capable of being operated as intended and will perform as intended, e.g. water-flow tests. These tests follow up on the original tests at intervals specified in this article. 
( Ord. No. 03142016, § 1.C, 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 42-34. - General requirements. 
(1)  Responsibility for properly maintaining a private fire hydrant shall be that of the owner of the property or the owner's designee. 
(a)  Where the owner of a private fire hydrant has designated an occupant, management firm, or managing individual, through specific provisions in the lease, written use agreement, or management contract, to be responsible for the inspection, testing and maintenance of a private fire hydrant in accordance with this ordinance, the owner's designee shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance and shall be subject to enforcement of this ordinance in the event of a failure to so comply. 
(2)  By means of periodic inspections, tests, maintenance, correction, and repair, every private fire hydrant shall be maintained in proper working condition, consistent with this ordinance, the NFPA Standard, and the manufacturer's specifications or recommendations. 
(3)  Inspection, testing, maintenance, correction and repair shall be implemented with the procedures meeting or exceeding those established in this ordinance and the NFPA Standard, and shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications or recommendations. This article shall control in the event of a conflict among any of the aforementioned applicable standards. Inspection, testing, maintenance, correction, and repair shall be performed by qualified maintenance personnel or a qualified contractor. 
(4)  The owner or owner's designee shall notify the fire department of the City of Douglas before testing or shutting down a private fire hydrant or its water supply. 
(a)  This notification shall include the purpose for the shutdown, the private fire hydrant involved, and the estimated time that the hydrant will be impaired. 
(5)  The owner or owner's designee shall notify the fire department when the private fire hydrant is returned to service. 
(6)  The owner or owner's designee shall, within 30 days, correct or repair any deficiencies, damaged parts, or impairments found while performing the inspection, testing, and maintenance requirements of this article. 
(7)  The owner or owner's designee shall promptly correct or repair any deficiencies, damaged parts, or impairments of any private fire hydrant of which the owner or owner's designee has knowledge or, in the exercise of reasonable care, ought to have knowledge. 
( Ord. No. 03142016, § 2.A, 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 42-35. - Inspection, testing, maintenance, correction and repair. 
This section provides the minimum requirements for the routine inspection, testing, maintenance, correction, and repair of private fire hydrants. These functions shall be permitted to be carried out simultaneously. 
(1)  On or before November 1 of each year, the owner or the owner's designee shall inspect, test, maintain, and if necessary, correct, and repair each private fire hydrant to ensure proper functioning, with the necessary repair or corrective action taken as shown in Table 1. Records of these actions will be recorded pursuant to section 42-37 of this article. 
a.  The owner or owner's designee shall also conduct an inspection of a private fire hydrant after each operation of the hydrant. 
(2)  Opening and closing hydrants too fast can have the potential of causing some major problems as well as stir up discolored water. Designees acting or testing a hydrant on behalf of the hydrant owner shall register with the fire department of the City of Douglas. Testing of any private fire hydrant as outlined in this ordinance requires 24-hour notification to the fire department. 
(3)  When conducting a test of a private fire hydrant, the hydrant shall be opened fully and water flowed until all foreign material has cleared. 
a.  Flow shall be maintained for not less than one minute. 
(4)  Private fire hydrants shall be lubricated annually to ensure that all stems, caps, plugs, and threads are in proper operating condition. 
(5)  Private fire hydrants shall be kept free of snow, ice, or other materials and protected against mechanical damage so that free access is ensured. 
(6)  The owner or the owner's designee shall repair as soon as possible a private fire hydrant which is impaired or otherwise does not function as required by this ordinance, the NFPA Standard, or the manufacturer's specifications. 
a.  After completing all necessary repairs to a private fire hydrant, the owner or the owner's designee shall inspect and test the hydrant as necessary consistent with the standards of this ordinance, including without limitation Table 1, to ensure that the hydrant is operational. 

 
( Ord. No. 03142016, § 3.A, 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 42-36. - Identification and notification of impaired hydrant. 
(1)  The owner or owner's designee shall notify the Douglas Fire Department in advance of a preplanned impairment of a private fire hydrant. 
(2)  The owner or the owner's designee shall notify the fire department immediately of an emergency impairment of a private fire hydrant. 
(3)  The owner or owner's designee shall affix an impairment tag approved by the Douglas Fire Department to an impaired hydrant at the commencement of a preplanned impairment and at the time of discovery of an emergency impairment. 
(4)  Once the necessary inspection and testing confirm that repairs have restored a private fire hydrant to operational status, the owner or the owner's designee shall remove the impairment tag and shall notify the Douglas Fire Department that the hydrant is operational. 
( Ord. No. 03142016, § 4.A, 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 42-37. - Records. 
(1)  Records shall indicate the procedure performed to inspect, test, maintain, correct, and repair a private hydrant. Such records shall include the organization that performed the work, the results, the date work was performed, and other pertinent information as the fire department shall require. 
(2)  Records shall be maintained by the owner or the owner's designee. 
(3)  By December 31st of each calendar year, the owner or owner's designee shall submit to the fire chief of the City of Douglas a record documenting the annual inspection, test, maintenance, correction and repair of each private fire hydrant and its components. 
(4)  The owner shall retain the original purchase, installation and maintenance records of a private fire hydrant for the life of the private fire hydrant. 
(5)  Inspection records shall be retained for a period of one year after the subsequent annual inspection required by this article. 
( Ord. No. 03142016, § 5.A, 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 42-38. - Enforcement violations and penalties. 
(1)  A civil penalty of not more than $100.00 may be imposed for a violation of this ordinance. Each week that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(2)  Corporation counsel may file a complaint to recover civil penalties for violations of this article. 
(3)  Other relief. In addition to the enforcement procedures available, the City of Douglas may pursue any remedy authorized by law, including without limitation, the maintenance of a civil action in superior court to obtain injunctive and other appropriate relief. 
( Ord. No. 03142016, § 6.A, 3-14-16 ) 
Chapter 46 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08102009, Arts. 1—6, adopted Aug. 10, 2009, amended Ch. 46 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 46, §§ 46-1—46-65, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 30; environment, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 46-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and Board of Commissioners of Douglas, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 1, § A, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Douglas, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 1, § B, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 1, § C, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 1, § D, 8-10-09) 
Secs. 46-5—46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 46-26. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Douglas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 2, § A, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-27. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 11, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 11, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for unincorporated Coffee County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: City Hall, Community Development Department, 224 E. Bryan St., Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 2, § B, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-28. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 2, § C, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-29. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 2, § D, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-30. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 2, § E, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-31. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 2, § F, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-32. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of The City of Douglas or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 2, § G, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-33. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Douglas from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 2, § H, 8-10-09) 
Secs. 46-34—46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 46-61. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The community development department designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 3, § A, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-62. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the community development department designee on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 46-82(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage: 
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The community development department designee shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 3, § B, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-63. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the community development department designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 46-27, then the community development department designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 46-62(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 46-62(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building inspector shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 46-62(1)c. and subsection 46-82(2) or 46-84(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(10)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the community development department designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(11)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the community development department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 3, § C, 8-10-09) 
Secs. 46-64—46-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 46-81. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one-square-inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 4, § A, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-82. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 46-81(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 46-63(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels, 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Reference: Subsection 46-81(6), above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 46-82(3)a., c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-27, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 46-82(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article 4. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 4, § B, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-83. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-27, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 46-27, then the community development department designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the streambank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 46-81(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The community development department designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 4, § C, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-84. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-27, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 46-82. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 4, § D, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-85. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-27, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 46-81(4), "elevated buildings". 
The community development department designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified firm flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 46-62(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 4, § E, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-86. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 4, § F, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 46-87. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 4, § G, 8-10-09) 
Secs. 46-88—46-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 46-111. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of appeals as established by the City of Douglas shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the community development department designee in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Coffee County, as provided in O.C.G. A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The community development department designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 5, 8-10-09) 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered a "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the community development directors design interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 46-27. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 16, 1979. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 16, 1979. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 16, 1979 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 16, 1979 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after July 16, 1979. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.) (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 08102009, Art. 6, 8-10-09) 
Chapter 49 - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL COST RECOVERY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09082003.01, §§ 43.1—43.7, adopted Sept. 8, 2003, added new provisions to the Code as ch. 43. In order to maintain the alphabetical sequencing of chapters within the Code, the provisions of Ord. No. 09082003.01, §§ 43.1—43.7, have been redesignated as ch. 49, §§ 49-1—49-7, at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 30; environment, ch. 38; fire protection and prevention, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 90. 

Sec. 49-1. - Recovery of costs associated with the mitigation, cleanup or disposal of a hazardous material incident. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or organization possessing, keeping, transporting or having control of a hazardous materials defined under section 49-2 is liable for those costs associated with the investigation, mitigation, cleanup or disposal of a hazardous material or incident due to carelessness, negligence, accident or violation of any local, state or federal law. 
(b)  Costs shall include all necessary and reasonable costs and shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed and expended specifically for the purpose of the cleanup or remedial action. 
(2)  Compensation of employees for the time and efforts devoted specifically to cleanup or remedial action. 
(3)  Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the cleanup or remedial action (such as personal protective equipment, clothing, scientific or technical equipment). 
(4)  Replacement costs for equipment owned by the city that is contaminated beyond reuse to [or] repair, if the equipment was a substantial loss occurred during a cleanup or remedial action (such as a self-contained breathing apparatus irretrievably contaminated during the response.) The city will determine at what point the equipment is contaminated beyond reuse or repair. 
(5)  Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the response. 
(6)  Special technical services specifically required for the cleanup or remedial action. 
(7)  Other special services specifically required for the cleanup or remedial action. 
(8)  Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the cleanup or remedial action. 
(9)  Costs of cleanup, storage, or disposal of released hazardous material. 
(10)  Costs associated with the services, supplies, and equipment procured for a specific cleanup or remedial action. 
(11)  Costs associated with the services, supplies, and equipment procured for a specific evaluation. 
(12)  Medical expenses incurred as a result of the response, cleanup or remedial action. 
(13)  Legal expenses that may be incurred by the city as a result to the cleanup or remedial action including efforts to recover costs pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Costs shall determined by the fire chief or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 09082003.01, § 43.1, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 49-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of section 49-1 "hazardous material" means: 
(1)  Any substance or mixture of substances which is toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or which generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means, if such substance or mixture of substances may cause substantial personal injury or substantial illness during, or as a proximate result of, any customary or reasonably foreseeable handling or use, including reasonably foreseeable ingestion by children. 
(2)  Any substances, elements, or compounds which arc contained in the list of hazardous substances adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the list of toxic pollutants defined by the United States Congress. 
(Ord. No. 09082003.01, § 43.2, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 49-3. - Prohibitions. 
No persons or entity shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a hazardous material into the soils, air, ground water or surface water in the City of Douglas unless such discharge is in compliance with federal, state and local law. No person or entity shall cause or permit the unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material to a septic or other type of on-site sewage disposal system or centralized water, sewer or storm drainage system in the City of Douglas except in compliance with federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 09082003.01, § 43.3, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 49-4. - Cleanup abatement. 
The City of Douglas is authorized to cleanup or abate the effects of any hazardous material unlawfully released, discharged or deposited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 09082003.01, § 43.4, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 49-5. - Nonexclusive remedy. 
The remedies provided by this article shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 09082003.01, § 43.5, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 49-6. - Submission of claim. 
(a)  The City of Douglas Fire Department or other city official shall submit by certified mail, hand delivery or by personal service a written itemized claim for the total costs incurred by the city to the responsible person(s) or entity and a written notice that unless amounts are paid in full within 60 days from the date of receipt of the claim and notice, the city may file a civil action seeking recovery for the stated amount. 
(b)  Costs assessed pursuant to this article, including reasonable attorney fees, court costs and administrative costs shall be payable by the person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization responsible for the hazardous material incident. These costs shall be paid within 60 days of receipt of the claim and notice and shall bear interest at ten percent per annum from the date when same becomes due and payable. 
(c)  The person, firm, corporation, partnership or organization assessed with the costs set forth in this section shall have the right of appeal from the assessment and to appear before the city council within 60 days of the receipt of the claim and notice. City council may suspend, modify, amend or revoke the assessment or condition same on the promise of future remedial action for good cause shown. If an appeal is not taken as provided herein, the assessment shall become final and effective upon lapse of period provided herein for making an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 09082003.01, § 43.6, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 49-7. - Lien. 
In addition to any civil remedy allowed by law, the assessment shall constitute a lien on any property, real or personal, owned by the person, firm, corporation, partnership or organization responsible for the hazardous material incident. The city attorney shall have the responsibility of perfecting such liens and with city council approval taking legal action to foreclose any lien. 
(Ord. No. 09082003.01, § 43.7, 9-8-03) 
Chapter 50 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
Article II. - Water 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 50-26. - City water line. 
Any residential, commercial or industrial facility within the city limits will be required to connect to publicly owned water system provided the publicly owned water system is within 100 feet of the property line of the facility. No private wells will be installed within the city limits of Douglas for any purpose if the City of Douglas has a water line within 100 feet of the property line of the person attempting to install the private well. 
( Ord. No. 09222014-2, 9-22-14 ) 
Secs. 50-27—50-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 

Sec. 50-51. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited and referenced to as the City of Douglas Clean Indoor Air Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 1, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-52. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The mayor and council do hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the mayor and council find and declare that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and public and private places of employment; and 
(2)  To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 2, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-53. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Adult entertainment establishments means any nightclub, cabaret, or other establishment that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. This includes dancing by topless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers. 
Attached bar means the bar area of a restaurant or anywhere in a restaurant where alcoholic beverages are served. 
Child day care facility shall be defined as a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school", "early learning center", "pre-kindergarten", "private kindergarten", "play school", or "pre-school". 
Dining area means an interior or exterior (such as porch, patio or courtyard) area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means any person who employs the services of an individual person. 
Enclosed means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. It includes areas commonly described as public lobbies or lobbies when they are in an area that is enclosed as defined herein. 
Establishment means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term "establishment" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; 
(2)  Grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods of merchandise; 
(3)  Service stations, store or shops for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items or products; 
(4)  Barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; 
(5)  Video arcade, pool hall, and other amusement centers; 
(6)  Offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, and architectural services; 
(7)  Banks, savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; 
(8)  Hotels and motels and other places that provide accommodations to the public; and 
(9)  Restaurants and cafeterias. 
Health care facility means any licensed general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center, or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1(2), as amended. 
Intermediate care (nursing) home means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged. 
Personal care home means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, non-related persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. Personal care homes include those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication, and provision of transient medical care. Such term does not include old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. Personal care homes shall also mean residential care facilities for the elderly. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work area, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult day care facility, or a health care facility. The dining area of a restaurant shall be treated as a place of employment under this article. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, waiting rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, public transit, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, elevators, service lines, service stations, offices providing professional services, banks and other financial institutions, educational, recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, theaters, arenas, meeting rooms, repair shops, automobile dealerships, convention halls, bowling facilities, polling places, and bingo games. Porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall be considered a public place. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult daycare facility or a healthcare facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, dining areas, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" includes an attached bar as defined in this section. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 3, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-54. - Prohibited smoking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places, and places of employment within the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 4, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-55. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to city property. 
This article shall apply to all enclosed facilities including buildings and vehicles owned or operated by the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 5, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-56. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking may occur outdoors but no less than ten feet from any entrance to any public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 6, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-57. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(2)  Private residences, including private residences which may serve as an office workplace, except if used as a childcare, an adult day care of a health care facility; 
(3)  Designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels rented by guests provided that such designated smoking rooms shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the total number of rooms available for rent; and 
(4)  Outdoor areas of places of employment, except where an owner or employer declares that the outdoor area is a smoke-free environment, as provided in this article. 
(5)  Class III establishments that do not serve food. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this article may declare that the entire establishment is a non-smoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 7, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-58. - Employers' responsibility. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees of public places, and places of employment but employers are not required to make expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke-free work area. 
(b)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(c)  All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(d)  Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the City of Douglas is encouraged to adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy that incorporates the smoking prohibitions of this article. 
(e)  The written smoking policy should be provided to all employees. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 8, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-59. - Posting of signs and notification. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posed in every building where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or area. 
(b)  Every public place where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance into a public place and place of employment a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 9, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-60. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the police department. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the police department. 
(c)  The health department, fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article and forward along any notice of violation to the chief of police or his designee. 
(d)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. 
(f)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the chief of police, the city manager, or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 10, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-61. - Non retaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment as afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 11, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-62. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A warning for the first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $250.00 for a second violation; 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a third violation of this article within one year; and 
(4)  A fine to be determined in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(b)  Any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $250.00 for first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation within one year. 
(3)  A fine to be determined in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 12, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-63. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the city, its officers nor its employees are liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this article caused injury. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 13, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 50-64. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective 60 days after final approval of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 04262004.01, § 14, 4-26-04) 
Chapter 52 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the City of Douglas, Georgia, is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the Citizens of Douglas, Georgia; and 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; and 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
Now, therefore, the mayor and board of commissioners of the City of Douglas, Georgia hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § I, 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-2. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
Building means a building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to an historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means an architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure, or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing, as more fully described in the Design Guidelines for the City of Douglas, a copy of which is identified as Appendix "A" (reserved). 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character or the property. 
Historical district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects, united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. An historical district shall further mean an area designated by the Douglas City Commission (hereinafter "city commission") as an historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 52-42 of this chapter. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof, designated by the city commission as an historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 52-43 of this chapter. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of an historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within an historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of an historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of an historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within an historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a structure is a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § II, 2-25-97; Ord. No. 08-11.01-97, 8-11-97) 
Sec. 52-3. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for in the punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § VII, 2-25-97) 
Secs. 52-4—52-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CREATION OF AN HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 52-21. - Creation of the commission. 
There is hereby created a council whose title shall be "Douglas Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § III(A), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-22. - Commission position within the City of Douglas. 
The preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § III(B), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-23. - Commission members; number, appointment, terms and compensation. 
The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the commission. All members shall be residents of the City of Douglas and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
To the extent available, members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions; building construction or real property appraisal; members shall be appointed from among residents of or business owners in an historic district or shall reside in a structure listed on the register of historic places, etc. 
Members shall serve three-year terms. 
Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § III(C), 2-25-97; Ord. No. 03-27.01-00, 3-27-00; Ord. No. 04262004.02, § 1, 4-26-04; Ord. No. 09222014-1, 9-22-14 ) 
Sec. 52-24. - Statement of the commission's powers. 
The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Douglas having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city commission specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny the same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Recommend to the city commission that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Douglas; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the City of Douglas of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976" (O.C.G.A., Section 44-10.1 through 5); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the City of Douglas and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, that the city commission or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal, or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city commission concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Douglas Historic Preservation Program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the City of Douglas without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city commission enter into agreements to do the same. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § III(D), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-25. - Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. 
The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, land design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § III(E), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-26. - Conflict of interest. 
The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City of Douglas Code of Ordinance and Code of Ethics, the provisions of which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § III(F), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-27. - Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. 
The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall insure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § III(G), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-28. - Records of commission meetings. 
A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings, and land actions. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § III(H), 2-25-97) 
Secs. 52-29—52-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECOMMENDATION AND DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 

Sec. 52-41. - Preliminary research by commission. 
(a)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City of Douglas. 
(b)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city commission for designation. The commission shall present to the city commission recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(c)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of an historic district or historic property to the city commission for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
(1)  A physical description; 
(2)  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
(3)  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. historic, non-historic, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties 
(4)  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
(5)  Representative photographs. 
A copy of the Report for Nomination is identified for purposes of this document as Appendix "B," a copy of which attached hereto and hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § IV(A), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-42. - Designation of an historic district. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. An historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sties, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
(1)  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
(2)  Represent one or more periods, styles or types or architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
(3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(b)  Boundaries of an historic district. Boundaries of an historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
(c)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
(1)  Historic (contribute to the district); 
(2)  Non-historic (does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in paragraph (a)); and 
(3)  Intrusive (detracts from the district as provided for paragraph (a)). 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § IV(B), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-43. - Designation of an historic property. 
Criteria for selection of historic properties. An historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, City of Douglas, or the State of Georgia, for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Douglas, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § IV(C), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-44. - Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(a)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city commission, the commission, or: 
(1)  For historic districts - an historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  For historic properties - an historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(b)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
(1)  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
(2)  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
(3)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(4)  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Douglas, Georgia and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(c)  Require public hearings. The commission and the city commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the City of Douglas tax roll and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this ordinance. 
(d)  Notification of historical preservation section. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report required in section 52-41(c), to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources. 
(e)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city commission. 
(f)  City commission action on the commissions recommendation. Following the receipt of the commission recommendation, the city commission may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(g)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the commission, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the commission, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the City of Douglas tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(h)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Douglas of the ordinance for designation. 
(i)  Moratorium on applications for alternation or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § IV(D), 2-25-97) 
Secs. 52-45—52-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATION TO PRESERVATION COMMISSION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 52-61. - Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. 
After the designation by ordinance of an historic property or of an historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of an historic or non-historic building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(A), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-62. - Submission of plans to commission. 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans, and documentation required by the commission, as further set forth on the application for certificate of appropriateness, attached thereto as Appendix "C" (reserved). 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(B), 2-25-97; Ord. No. 08-11.01-97, 8-11-97) 
Sec. 52-63. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effort on exterior architectural features. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(C), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-64. - Technical advice. 
The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(D), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-65. - Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness notices, and right to be heard. 
The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the proposed property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(E), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-66. - Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
Commission action: The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic, property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction, or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and landscaping as further specified in the Design Guidelines for the City of Douglas, a copy of which is attached hereto as Appendix "A," [reserved] and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, a copy of which is attached hereto as Appendix "D" and hereby incorporated by reference. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure, or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structure, sites, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site or object from collapse 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(F), 2-25-97; Ord. No. 08-11.01-97, 8-11-97) 
Sec. 52-67. - Undue hardship. 
When by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this ordinance would result in the exceptional, practical difficulty, or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(G), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-68. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certification of appropriateness. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within an historic distinct. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by united states mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(b)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(H), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-69. - Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may take modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(b)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(I), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-70. - Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(b)  The commission or the city commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(J), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-71. - Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(K), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-72. - Recording applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates or appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(L), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-73. - Acquisition of property. 
The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city commission and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(M), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-74. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Douglas City Commission. Any such appeal must be filed with the Douglas Historic Preservation Commission within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to section 52-68(a) of this chapter or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45 day period allowed from the commission action, section 52-68(b) of this chapter. The Douglas City Commission may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals of the decision of the Douglas City Commission may be taken to the Superior Court of the City of Douglas in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Douglas ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(N), 2-25-97) 
Secs. 52-75—52-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES; BUILDING AND ZONING CODE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 52-81. - Ordinary maintenance or repair. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on an historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § VI(A), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-82. - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Conditions which allow the elements and vermin to enter (such as broken windows, doors, and openings) and the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 52-3 of this chapter and, at the direction of the city commission, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § VI(B), 2-25-97) 
Sec. 52-83. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 02-25.1-97, § V(C), 2-25-97) 
Chapter 54 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Fair housing, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-200 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION 

Sec. 54-26. - Prohibited acts. 
Except as exempted hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(3)  Make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, religion or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental, when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representation regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion or national origin. 
(6)  Deny to anyone the use of or participation in any real estate services, such as brokers' organizations, multiple listing services or other facilities related to the selling or renting of housing. 
(7)  Deny or make different terms or conditions for home loans by commercial lenders, such as banks, savings and loan associations and insurance companies. 
(Code 1978, § 10½-1) 
Sec. 54-27. - Exemption. 
Nothing in section 54-26, other than subsection (3), shall apply to any single-family house sold or rented by a private individual owner, without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, or salesman. 
(Code 1978, § 10½-2) 
Sec. 54-28. - Application to finance businesses. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, firm or enterprise, whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or discriminate against him in the fixing amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the building or dwelling in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 54-27. 
(Code 1978, § 10½-3) 
Sec. 54-29. - Application to real estate businesses. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(Code 1978, § 10½-4) 
Sec. 54-30. - Complaint procedure. 
Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice, or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur, may file a complaint with the director of the department of community development. The complaint shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the director requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the director shall furnish a copy of the same to the person who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, the director shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person claiming to have been injured whether he intends to resolve it. If the director decides to resolve the complaint, he shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion. If the director has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this article, he shall then refer such complaints to a board of housing appeals. 
(Code 1978, § 10½-5) 
Sec. 54-31. - Creation of board of housing appeals; duties, additional appeal. 
The board of housing appeals will be created by the city and will consist of no more than seven or less than five members. The board will have 30 days to review complaints, mediate or negotiate differences remaining unresolved by the director of community development. After a 30-day period, the housing appeals board will make a recommendation to the city for future action. If the board of housing appeals has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this chapter after acting with reasonable promptness, it shall so notify the person claiming to have been injured. The person claiming to have been injured may then commence a civil action in any appropriate court against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights granted or protected by this article, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. 
(Code 1978, § 10½-6) 
Chapter 56 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 56-1. - Authority, purpose and title. 
(a)  Authority. This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and laws enacted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Development Regulations of the City of Douglas, Georgia." 
(c)  Purpose. These regulations are intended to serve the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the comprehensive plan and other policies and objectives of the city. 
(3)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new developments and to redevelopments in conformance with public improvement policies of the city. 
(4)  To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments and in redevelopments. 
(d)  Intent and application. It is the intent of this chapter that it will apply to and provide guidance for the development of lands within the incorporated limits of the City of Douglas, Georgia, whether the developments involve the subdivision of land or the construction of buildings and/or other improvements on a single parcel. Any land development activity must first comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § I, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Use of words and interpretation. Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in these regulations have their customary dictionary definitions. 
(1)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall apply to the use of all words: 
a.  Words used in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular; 
b.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; 
c.  The word "building" includes the word "structure"; 
d.  The word "erected" includes the words "constructed," "moved," "located" or "relocated,"; 
e.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel"; 
f.  Words in masculine gender shall include the feminine and words in feminine gender shall include the masculine; 
g.  The word "person" includes the words "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies," and all other legal entities; 
h.  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied"; 
i.  The term "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary; 
j.  The word "may" is permissive; 
k.  Use of the word "and" is inclusive and requires that all of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency; 
l.  Use of the word "or" is not exclusive and requires that at least one of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. The word "or" may allow more than one component phrase to be present or fulfilled, as in the term, "and/or". 
(2)  In this chapter the following shall control the interpretation of words and phrases: 
a.  Words and phrases defined in this article shall be interpreted as defined herein without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word indicates otherwise. 
b.  Words or phrases not defined herein shall be interpreted as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of Douglas, Georgia, as defined in the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Douglas, Georgia, as defined in the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of Douglas, Georgia, as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance of the City of Douglas, Georgia, the Stormwater Management Ordinance of the City of Douglas, Georgia, or the Flood Prevention Ordinance of Douglas, Georgia, as applicable to the use of the word or phrase within the context of this chapter. 
c.  Words or phrases not defined herein or in any other applicable code, regulations or ordinance of the City of Douglas, Georgia, shall be construed to have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(b)  Definitions of words and phrases. 
Abutting: Touching at one point or along a common side, boundary or property line. Two pieces of property that are separated by a street or right-of-way are adjacent, but not abutting. 
Alley: A private or publicly maintained way of narrow width use for secondary vehicular access. 
Appeal: A request for a review to hear and decide where it was alleged there was an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination or refusal made by any officer of the City of Douglas in the enforcement of these development regulations. 
Board of appeals: The City of Douglas Zoning Board of Appeals. 
City: The City of Douglas, Georgia, a municipal corporation. 
City commission: The legally constituted and elected governing body of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
City engineer: The engineer for the City of Douglas, Georgia, or their designee. 
City manager: The city manager of the City of Douglas, Georgia, or their designee. 
Clearing: The removal of trees, other vegetation and/or above ground improvements including, but not limited to, buildings and structures, walls, fences, steps, walks, curbs, gutters, concrete slabs, pavements (including bases for pavements) and surfacing. 
Cul-de-sac: A local street or road with one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
Curb cut: The opening along the curb line or edge of pavement of a public street as which point a driveway begins for vehicular ingress and egress from the parcel. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavations; the depth below the original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Developer: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit who directs the undertaking or proposes to undertake development activities as herein defined, whether the development involves the subdivision of the land for sale to individual users, the construction of buildings or other improvements on a single land ownership or both. 
Development: 
(1)  (Noun). A specific subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as an interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases. 
(2)  (Verb). All activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy or habitation other than for agricultural purposes. Such activities include land disturbance and the construction of improvements such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, buildings, structures, utilities, or storm drainage facilities. 
Development plans: The detailed and professional plans showing the layout and design, site work and construction activities proposed for a project (other than architectural/engineering buildings plans); including, but not limited to, site plans, grading plans, erosion and sediment control plans, tree protection plans, landscape plans, street plans and profiles, water supply plans, sanitary and storm sewer plans and profiles, other site improvement plans and other appropriate sections, details, notes, schedules, legends and diagrams. 
Drainage improvements: Those facilities and structures intended to control and direct the passage of stormwaters and other surface water flows from and across property; including but not limited to, modified natural drainage ways, modified creeks, modified streams, channels, swales, ditches, flumes, culverts, cross drains and other piping, catch basins, area drains, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, flared end sections, detention ponds and basins, rip rap, drainage way lining systems, and energy dissipation devices. 
Driveway: A vehicular access, or curb cut that is in private ownership and provides access primarily to one property. 
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Easement, access: An easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian access across or to a property. 
Easement, utility: A grant by a property owner for the use of real property for the specified purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities; including by not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, cable lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines. 
Engineer: A register[ed], professional engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Erosion control regulations: The City of Douglas, Georgia Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Georgia DOT: The Department of Transportation of the State of Georgia. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land I its cut and filled condition. 
Grubbing: The removal of stumps, roots, and abandoned underground facilities including, but not limited to: utilities, structures, walls, footings, foundations, wells, septic tanks, storage tanks, and pipe, but not grading. 
Health department: The Health Department of Coffee County, Georgia. 
Joint access driveway: A driveway that provides direct vehicular access to two or more abutting properties from a public street. 
Mean seal level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For purposes of these regulations, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
Parcel: Any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Paved: An area covered by asphalt, concrete, brick or pavers meeting the specifications of the city, pervious paving materials are subject to the approval of the city manager. 
Planning commission: The Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission. 
Private drive: A nonpublic, privately owned and maintained access way. 
Project: The entire proposed development, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Public hearing: An official session of any elected or appointed board advertised according to law and called for purpose specified in the public notice. 
Public improvements: Any improvement, facility, or service together with its associated public site or right-of-way. Public improvements differ from lot improvements because public improvements are constructed either on public property, or on the portion of a site undergoing development that is to be dedicated for public ownership and maintenance. Common examples of public improvements include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices, street lights, and utilities. 
Public sewer: A common sewer controlled by a government agency or public utility. 
Public street: Right-of-way dedicated to or owned by a public government agency for the purpose of providing principal access to abutting property. 
Public works department: The Department of Public Works of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Reserve strip: A strip or parcel of land along, around, or between properties; the sole purpose of which is to restrict access. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land dedicated to, designated, reserved, or purchased by the city for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
Right-of-way line: The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Right-of-way width: The distance between property lines measured at right angles to the centerline of the street. 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or stormwater. 
Shoulder: That portion of the street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface or back of curb to the inside edge of the ditch or gutter or original ground surface. 
Sidewalk: The portion of the right-of-way which is parallel to the street or road which is intended for pedestrian traffic. 
Site: Any plot, parcel or area of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land. 
Street: A way for vehicular traffic, including all street classifications. 
Street classifications: Streets are classified according to the function that they are to serve, the type, speed and volume of traffic they will carry and the required standards of design. Classifications include: 
(1)  Principal arterial: A principal arterial is used to transport large volumes of traffic at moderate speeds and is typically multi-lane. A principal arterial is usually a median divided highway with some controlled access. These roads provide immediate access to adjacent land uses through driveways and two-way turn lanes in the center of the multilane arterial. A principal arterial is designed for typical capacity of 45,000 to 75,000 vehicles per day. 
(2)  Minor arterial: A minor arterial is designed to provide cross-town and cross-county street access. These roadways are usually multi-lane, although in some less developed areas they may be two lane roads. With access to development, there are often driveways that run directly into thoroughfares and, occasionally, on-street parking. A minor arterial is designed for typical capacity of between 20,000 and 50,000 vehicles per day. 
(3)  Major collectors: A major collector is designed to move traffic from large residential areas and other local traffic generators such as schools, parks, office and retail areas to principal and minor arterials. Generally these are two to four lane roads with frequent intersections. Traffic volumes are between 15,000 and 30,000 vehicles per day. 
(4)  Minor collectors: Minor collectors are roads designated to collect traffic from local networks of city streets and roads and transport this traffic to the arterial system. Collectors are typically two to four lane facilities with an average daily traffic volume between 7,500 and 15,000 vehicles. 
(5)  Local roads and streets: These roads exist primarily to provide access to adjacent land; and serve low-mileage trips compared to collectors or other higher systems. Use of these roads and streets for through traffic is usually discouraged. Local roads and streets constitute the mileage not classified as part of the principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector system. 
Street, dead end: A street that must be exited at the same point as is entered but not a cul-de-sac. 
Street grade: The percent change in vertical elevation of the street centerline measured along the finished surface of the street. 
Street, half: A street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
Street jog: The incidence where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. 
Street or road, private: Any privately owned and maintained right-of-way set aside to provide vehicular access, including safety and emergency equipment, which is not dedicated to the city or maintained by the city. 
Sewer use regulations: The City of Douglas, Georgia, Sewer Use Ordinance. 
Street, substandard: A street which does not comply with at least the standards for the designated street classifications as contained in these regulations and the land subdivision regulations. 
Subdivision regulations: The City of Douglas, Georgia, Land Subdivision Regulations. 
Surveyor: A registered, practicing surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Utlity: Public or private water, stormwater, or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, railroads, similar services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services for utilities licensed or authorized to serve the city. 
Zoning regulations: The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § II, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-3. - General provisions. 
(a)  Zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other regulations. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required under this chapter and those contained in zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, building codes or other ordinances or regulations of the City of Douglas, Georgia, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(b)  Required public improvements. Every developer of lands within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall provide the public improvements included in this chapter, in accordance with these development regulations and other pertinent ordinances, codes, and regulations of the City of Douglas, Georgia. These public improvements together with associated rights-of-way, easements, and other lands shall be provided at no cost to the city and shall be dedicated or otherwise transferred, as required, to the public in perpetuity and without covenant or reservation. 
(c)  Plan review and approval. Any developer of land within incorporated Douglas, Georgia, shall first submit to the city such plans, plats, or construction drawings as may be required by these regulations and receive approval of those documents by the city prior to the initiation of development activities. Approval of plans, plats, or construction drawings by the city shall not imply nor transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, surveying, architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans, plats, or construction drawings were prepared and sealed. 
(d)  Other permits. Nothing in these regulations shall impose any obligation on the city to obtain or assist in obtaining permits, approvals, and/or clearances from other local, state or federal agencies having jurisdiction over elements of a project. It is solely the developer's responsibility to obtain all such required permits, approvals, and/or clearances. The developer shall furnish the city with copies of all such permits, approvals and/or clearances before authorization to proceed with development is requested. 
(e)  Standard specifications. In addition to the construction standards found in the text of this chapter, the city will maintain on file for consultation and distribution a series of standard specifications for construction of improvements required for the development of land in accordance with these development regulations. 
In conjunction with these development regulations, the standard specifications describe minimum acceptable standards for the construction of required improvements, but shall not supersede more restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practice as applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. 
The standard specifications are subject to the modifications and appeal provisions of section 56-124 and article VI. 
(f)  Standard drawings. The city will maintain on file for consultation and distribution a series of standard drawings illustrating details of construction of public improvements, and other elements related to the development of land in accordance with these development regulations. 
The standard drawings illustrate minimum acceptable construction standards for public improvements required under this chapter, but shall not supersede more restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practice as applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. 
The standard drawings are subject to the modification and appeal provisions of section 56-124 and article VI. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § III, 2-25-08) 
Secs. 56-4—56-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 56-30. - Street improvement standards. 
Streets, whether abutting or internal, existing or new, public or private, shall be constructed or improved under those circumstances and to the standards as established in these regulations. Roadway improvements shall be in accordance with the street classification system defined in the land subdivision regulations. Specific street classification designations shall be as shown in adopted transportation plans of the city or as established by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-31. - Right-of-way requirements. 
(a)  Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths: 
(1)  The minimum widths for public rights-of-way or private street ingress/egress easements and pavements shall be as shown in "Table of Minimum Right-of-Way and Lane Widths." See Appendix B, Standard Drawings for detailed dimensions. Total width of streets includes land width plus curb and gutter (back of curb to back of curb) or from edge of pavement if no curbs exist. Local streets will use a 24-inch curb and gutter. Other road/street classifications will use a 30-inch curb and gutter. If an existing street is used for access, the developer shall conform to the existing street width. 
(2)  Minimum widths of right-of-way and lanes shall be as shown in the "Table of Right-of-Way and Lane Widths." 
Table of Minimum Right-of-Way and Land Widths 

 
(b)  Right-of-way dedication: 
(1)  The minimum width of right-of-way shall be dedicated based upon the street classification, as provided in this section and approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  On any existing street abutting a proposed development, one-half of the required width of right-of-way shall be dedicated, at no cost to the City of Douglas, as measured from the centerline of the roadway along the entire property frontage. Right-of-way widths for existing streets shall be based on the current classification as determined by the city engineer. 
(3)  Additional right-of-way may be required at intersections or other locations fronting the property where turning lanes, storage lanes, medians, re-alignments or other traffic safety improvements are required. 
(4)  If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by the City of Douglas or the State of Georgia to adjoin or traverse the property, the proposed road shall be accommodated into the development plans of the property in accordance with these regulations. These right-of-way requirements shall govern except where there exist clearly defined plans of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) or the City of Douglas that require additional right-of-way. In that case, the greater right-of-way requirements shall govern. 
(c)  Clear zone requirements: All new roads/streets should utilize the concepts, designs, and philosophies in the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Roadside Design Guide, where practical and feasible to use the latest state-of-the-practice in roadside safety. New roads/streets should also use context-sensitive design concepts in the applications of clear zone. Context-sensitive design concepts are also on the GDOT web site (www.dot.state.ga.us). The application of clear zone concepts on existing roads/streets needs to be used where the greatest safety benefit can be realized. Crash reports, site investigations, and maintenance records offer starting points for identifying these locations. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-32. - Access management. 
(a)  Applicability: Except for development projects consisting of single-family dwelling units or industrial development, land development that takes its primary access from a state or federal highway or a thoroughfare classified as a collector, principal arterial or minor arterial shall comply with these standards. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the GDOT. 
(b)  Joint and cross access: 
(1)  Adjacent commercial or office properties on collector, principal arterial or minor arterials shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. 
(2)  Joint driveways and cross access easements shall be established for multi-parcel commercial, office or industrial development, wherever feasible, along collector, principal arterial or minor arterial corridors. The building site shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous service drives or cross access corridor connecting adjacent parcels along the thoroughfare. 
b.  A design speed of 15 mph and a two-way travel aisle width of 24 feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles and loading vehicles. 
c.  Driveway aprons, stub-outs and other design features to allow abutting properties to be connected and provide cross access via a service drive. 
(c)  Minimum driveway setbacks from street intersections: 
(1)  Driveway connections shall not be permitted within the functional area of the intersection, of two public streets. The functional area includes the longitudinal limits of auxiliary or turning lanes. 
(2)  Minimum standards. No driveway access shall be allowed within 150 feet of the centerline of an intersecting major collector or arterial street, or within 100 feet of any minor collector street. The city engineer may reduce these required distances where they prove impractical due to lot frontages of less than 100 feet. 
(d)  Minimum access requirements: 
(1)  All developments shall have one or more driveways or entrances to a public right-of-way. 
(2)  The number of such access points shall be as shown in "Table of Minimum Number of Access Points." 
Table of Minimum Number of Access Points 

 
(e)  Separation of access points: 
(1)  Subdivisions located along existing city roads shall be required to provide reverse frontage lots or parallel frontage roads where feasible. All other lots must comply with the following: 
a.  Along state or federal highways, no more than one point of vehicular access from a property shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof, although requirements of the GDOT shall apply whenever more restrictive. 
b.  Along arterial or collector roads other than state or federal highways, no more than two points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided, however, that lots with less than 200 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. The city engineer shall determine whether the points of access may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. To make this determination the city engineer may require a traffic study to be performed by the owner. 
(2)  No point of access shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersections for single-family and two-family residential lots and within 50 feet for multifamily and nonresidential properties. 
(3)  Corner lot access shall be located as far from the intersection as reasonably possible to reduce turning movement conflicts and to promote proper traffic circulation. 
(4)  The separation of access points on any street or road shall be determined by the established speed limit of the street or road, with the following minimum spacing requirements as provided in "Table of Minimum Driveway Spacing." 
Table of Minimum Driveway Spacing 

 
(5)  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent driveway or roadway. 
(6)  Driveways shall be located so that the radius return is a minimum of four feet from a property line that intersects the right-of-way line. 
(7)  The city engineer may reduce the required separation distance of access points where the minimum required distance proves impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Joint-access driveways and/or cross-access easements are provided in accordance with this section. 
b.  The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system for vehicles and pedestrians. 
(8)  The requirements of this section are not intended to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
(f)  Emergency access: All public streets, private and residential drives shall be designed and maintained so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles, as required by the City of Douglas Fire Chief. New developments with restricted access, such as gated subdivisions, must receive a variance from this requirement based on review and approval of the City of Douglas Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-33. - Driveway design standards. 
(a)  Permits required: No driveway shall be constructed abutting a city-maintained road or street until all applicable driveway permits have been approved and issued by the city. For driveways that abut a state or federal highway, all applicable permits shall be obtained from the GDOT prior to construction. 
(b)  General requirements. (See also section 56-32): 
(1)  Joint access driveways are permitted in order to achieve minimum driveway spacing requirements. 
(2)  No property may have a curb cut in excess of 50 feet in width without approval of the city engineer. 
(3)  If a nonresidential driveway design is one-way in or one-way out, then the driveway shall be a minimum width of 16 feet and shall have appropriate signage designating the driveway as a one-way connection. 
(4)  For two-way, nonresidential access, each travel lane shall have a minimum width of 11 feet. When more than two lanes are proposed, a specific driveway design must be approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  Driveways that enter an arterial or collector street at traffic signals must have at least two outbound lanes of at least 11 feet in width and one inbound lane with a maximum width of 12 feet. 
(6)  Except for single-family and two-family residences, driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Design Standards. 
(7)  Driveways shall intersect roads or streets with no more than a ten degree skew from a 90 degree angle. 
(8)  Driveway aprons shall slope from the right-of-way to the edge of pavement or gutter flow line. For all nonsingle-family driveways and entrances, a storm sewer inlet or grade break shall be provided at the right-of-way line to prevent discharge of stormwater onto the public right-of-way. 
(9)  Driveways shall comply with the minimum requirements of the City of Douglas Standard Drawings Appendix B, based on projected use and classification. 
(10)  Driveways serving single-family detached or duplex residences may be no less than ten feet wide at the right-of-way line and shall provide a radius to the back of the curb or edge of the pavement of the roadway of no less than five feet. All other driveway curb cuts on public streets shall conform to the standards shown on the driveway details contained in the standard drawings, Appendix B. 
(11)  All driveways and driveway curb cuts on state highways shall conform to GDOT standards. 
(c)  Driveway construction standards: 
(1)  Sidewalks and curbs adjacent to driveways shall meet requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(2)  Portions of driveways within the public rights-of-way shall be six inches thick, 4,000 psi fiber-reinforced concrete. 
(3)  Driveways shall be no closer than three feet, at the closest point, to an at-grade utility structure, including, but not limited to, curb inlets, drainage structures, streetlights, telephone and electrical poles, boxes and transformers, manholes, handholes and fire hydrants. 
(4)  Driveways shall be no closer than ten feet from a street tree or fire hydrant. 
(5)  Water and sewer lines shall be located outside of driveways, except for generally perpendicular crossings. 
(6)  Commercial driveways shall provide a 35-foot minimum radius at intersection with a public street. If designed for tractor-trailer trucks, the minimum radius shall be 75 feet 
(d)  Auxiliary lanes: 
(1)  Along any arterial or major collector street, a deceleration lane, acceleration lane, left turn lane, larger turning radius, traffic islands or other devices or designs may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards that, otherwise, would be created by the proposed driveway location, except in instances where the driveway is for a one-family or two-family residence. 
(2)  Deceleration lanes shall be required by the City of Douglas at each access point on roads classified as arterials or collectors when the posted speed limit is 30 mph or higher and otherwise where considered necessary by the city engineer based on traffic volumes. Deceleration lanes are required on city roads classified as arterial and major collector streets when the posted speed limit is 30 mph or higher. Minimum deceleration lengths are specified in the "Table of Deceleration Lane Requirements." The city engineer may vary length requirements based upon a consideration of available sight distance and traffic volumes. 
Table of Deceleration Lane Requirements 

 
(3)  When a new deceleration lane required by this section is proposed to begin or end within 50 feet of an existing deceleration lane, driveway or street intersection, then the new deceleration lane shall be extended as needed to provide a safe, continuous connection with adjacent or nearby deceleration lanes, driveways and intersections. 
(e)  Sight distance: All roads, streets, and driveways shall provide adequate sight distance as shown in the Table of Intersection Sight Distance Requirements. 
Table of Intersection Sight Distance Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-34. - Requirements for new streets and roadways. 
(a)  [New streets:] All new streets proposed to be constructed in a subdivision or other development shall be designed and constructed to the minimum standards contained in these Regulations, in accordance with the classification of streets. 
(b)  [Construction regulations for new streets or thoroughfares:] If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by the City of Douglas or the State of Georgia to traverse the property, the proposed road shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the street classification as shown these regulations or as shown on plans proposed by the City or State of Georgia. The specific vertical and horizontal alignment of the proposed roadway shall be as established or approved by the City of Douglas and/or the State of Georgia, as applicable. 
(c)  Street widening: When property fronting on an existing city street is to be developed and when the property is to be accessed from the existing city street, roadway improvements (pavement, curb and gutter and drainage) are required along the existing road across the entire property frontage. Required improvements shall not be less than provided in these regulations for the designated street classification. 
(1)  Widening, curb and gutter and drainage shall be provided from the centerline of the existing roadway along the side of the road upon which the property abuts. In lieu of installation of curbs and gutters and/or related improvements, the developer must have presented to and received approval by the city for a street improvements and stormwater drainage plan for the development and its affected environs. Said plan must provide for adequate stormwater drainage, and will further address as a minimum, street grading, paving, and curbs and gutters, and or other innovative provisions for said drainage. This plan must conform to the applicable standards and specification established by the city and be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Georgia Registered Professional Engineer. 
(2)  The developer shall be responsible for the relocation and/or modifications of public and/or private utilities as necessitated by the required street improvements. 
(d)  Substandard streets: 
(1)  If a substandard street (dirt or gravel road or inadequate width of pavement or right-of-way) provides a means of access to a development, the street shall be upgraded to the street classification standard required by this article. These improvements shall extend from the entrance of the development to the nearest standard paved road of an equivalent or higher classification, along the route of primary access. 
(2)  In the event that a development has access to a substandard street and if that substandard street is other than the primary means of access to the development, the substandard street, except as indicated below, shall be fully upgraded only along the entire property frontage and shall be paved on the opposite side of the road from the development, 12 feet from the street centerline. 
(3)  The upgrading of substandard streets used for access will not be required if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The development consists of a single one- or two-family residence on an existing recorded lot within the city; 
b.  Total traffic on the substandard street is less than 2,000 vehicles per day including projected traffic volume from the development. 
(e)  Improvements along state highways: For any development which abuts a state or federal highway, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation and these regulations. A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved by the GDOT and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the city. 
(f)  Permanent dead-end streets: New streets shall connect at both ends to existing streets unless the city engineer determines that unique parcel configuration or terrain make a fully connected street pattern infeasible or unsafe. 
(1)  When necessary, streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround and may be no more than 600 feet in length, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center of the cul-de-sac to the center of the intersection with another street. 
(3)  Cul-de-sacs shall conform to the standard drawings found in Appendix B. 
(g)  Temporary dead-end streets: 
(1)  A temporary dead-end street shall be provided to the boundary of a subdivision to provide access to abutting property for planned continuity of future circulation, improved access for public safety vehicles or for the extension of public water or other utilities to neighboring properties. Such dead-end streets shall be designed to meet the requirements of these regulations and to allow their reasonable extension and shall be located so as to be reasonably incorporated into a street design for the neighboring property. A temporary vehicular turnaround shall be provided as as required by the Subdivision Regulations Section IV B 17 [of Appendix B]. 
(2)  Existing dead-end streets on abutting property shall be extended into a proposed subdivision and incorporated into the street design of the development. 
(3)  Paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection may be modified by the city engineer in cases of serious topographical hardship or unacceptable land use conflicts between the two developments. This modification may be conditioned on the provision of easements necessary for the extension of public utilities, the provision of a cul-de-sac or other permanent turnaround on the dead-end street or the removal of the dead-end street back to its nearest intersection. 
(4)  Where a dead-end street (other than a cul-de-sac) serves four or more lots in a multiphase subdivision and such street is to be extended later, the developer shall be required to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround complying with paragraph (1) above. This requirement may be waived if extension of the dead-end street is approved and under construction prior to its inclusion in a final plat. 
(h)  Access roads: Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, major utility easement, limited access highway right-of-way or a major thoroughfare; a public street may be required to be constructed and dedicated within the development approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way. Locations of such service roads shall be aligned with similar service roads on adjacent properties. 
(i)  Construction access drives: Construction access drives are required for vehicles with gross weight of 10,000 pounds or more. 
(1)  On multiphase developments, the developer shall be required to dedicate, install, maintain and remove temporary construction access drives for the ingress and egress of construction vehicles, personnel and equipment. 
(2)  Temporary construction access drives shall be shown on the concept plan and preliminary plat and shall access an existing city road where possible. Construction access drives shall be permitted through the city, and shall comply with sight distance requirements in subsection 56-33(e) sight distance. 
(3)  Temporary construction access drives shall be utilized as the sole means of ingress and egress during the construction of subsequent phases of the development, to prevent the flow of construction and heavy vehicular traffic on newly constructed streets completed under earlier phases. 
(4)  If the city engineer determines that a temporary construction access drive cannot be provided, due to site-specific restrictions, then the developer shall provide a maintenance bond for those portions of the newly constructed roadway utilized for construction access. 
(j)  Half streets: Both the construction of new half streets and the extension of access to existing half streets shall be prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed development tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed development. 
(k)  Reserve strips: Land in private ownership adjacent to public rights-of-way, which could control or is intended to control access to streets, alleys or public lands, shall not be permitted unless control is given to the city under ownership, dedication or easement conditions approved by the city attorney or acceptable to the city engineer. No development shall be designed so as to deny access to abutting properties. 
(l)  Alleys: Alleys are to be constructed to the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum width of right-of-way or easement: 20 feet. 
(2)  Minimum 14-foot-wide paved travel lane. 
(3)  24-inch rolled curb and gutter. 
(4)  Minimum four-foot building setback from the edge of the pavement. No obstructions are permitted in this clear zone. 
(5)  Utility easements as required by the city engineer. 
(6)  Maximum length, 1,200 feet with a minimum of two points of access/egress to a local street or higher classification. No dead-end alleys may be longer than 200 feet. 
(7)  Maximum grade of eight percent. 
(8)  Paving and base must be constructed to standards of public streets. 
(9)  Alleys shall be signed, "Fire Lanes—No Parking." 
(m)  Street jogs: 
(1)  Local streets shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet for residential subdivision streets and a minimum of 200 feet for nonresidential subdivision streets, as measured between the centerlines. 
(2)  Where it is not feasible to align new streets or entrances with an existing street intersecting nearby on the opposite side of a collector or arterial street, then the new street intersection shall be no less than 600 feet from the intersection of the existing street, as measured between centerlines of the two opposing streets. 
(n)  Traffic-calming measures: Street layout and configuration should include a series of relatively short interconnected roadways in lieu of longer straight roads, to discourage excessive speeds. Additional traffic-calming measures may be required by the city engineer. Any specific measures employed shall be approved by the city engineer. See section 56-41 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-35. - Street intersection. 
(a)  Angle of intersections: Intersections of two public streets shall form an angle that is between 85 and 95 degrees, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. If the intersection is signalized, the angle of the intersection may be reduced subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. 
(b)  Intersection approaches: 
(1)  The approaching street at any intersection shall be designed and constructed to provide both the minimum horizontal and vertical approach distances, as defined in this section and indicated in the "Table of Intersection Approach Distances" contained in this section. 
(2)  Minimum horizontal approach distance is defined as the minimum distance required along the centerline of an approaching street, perpendicular or no less than 85 degrees to the intersected street, as measured from the edge of pavement of the intersected street to the point of horizontal curvature on the approaching street. 
(3)  Minimum vertical approach distance is defined as the minimum distance required along the centerline of the approaching street, at a grade less than or equal to the recommended grade indicated in the "Table of Intersection Approach Distances," as measured from the edge of pavement of the intersected street to a point on the profile of the approaching street where grades exceed recommended values. 
Table of Intersection Approach Distances 

 
(c)  Crown taper: The typical crowned street cross section shall be tapered over a distance of not less than 50 feet on the approaching street at all intersections, in order to connect flush with the line and grade of the edge of pavement on the intersected street. The cross section taper shall be designed and constructed so as to provide for the adequate drainage of surface water from all portions of the travel surface and gutter. 
(d)  Intersection radii: Intersection radii for roadways measured at back of curb and for the right-of-way lines shall be as shown in the "Table of Intersection Radii." For intersecting streets of different classification, the larger radii shall be provided. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at angles less than 90 degrees. In all cases, adequate right-of-way shall be provided to maintain a minimum of 12 feet from back of curb to right-of-way line. Miters are acceptable. 
Table of Intersection Radii 

 
(e)  Islands: In no case shall anything in an island extend more than three feet above the street grade within the right-of-way; except traffic regulatory devices, street trees and other infrastructure erected or approved by the City of Douglas. No island shall be approved that contains less than 100 square feet. Irrigation or other private systems shall not be installed within public right-of-way. 
(f)  Intersection corner sight distance: 
(1)  Intersections shall be designed with adequate corner sight distance for each approaching street. Where necessary, back slopes shall be flattened and horizontal or vertical curves lengthened to provide the minimum required sight distance. 
(2)  The minimum corner sight distance from the approaching street shall be calculated using latest edition of AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets." 
(g)  Obstructing visibility at intersections: On all corner lots located at a street intersection, a clear sight zone shall be maintained at all times. The design and location of new intersections shall meet the standards of subsection 56-33(e). 
(h)  Turning lanes at intersections: Both center left-turn and right-turn lanes shall be provided on all new internal project streets, and on all existing city roads, where traffic volumes and turning movements warrant the installation. At the request of the city engineer, the developer or applicant shall prepare and submit a detailed traffic study (as defined herein), outlining projected traffic volumes, turning movements and auxiliary lanes required. The methodology and conclusions presented in the traffic study are subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. 
(1)  Center turn lane storage. A minimum storage length of 150 feet shall be provided for center left turn lanes on any arterial streets. A minimum storage length of 100 feet shall be provided on all collector streets. Additional storage capacity shall be provided as required, based on projected peak traffic volumes and turning movements. 
(2)  Taper length. The taper length shall be in accordance with AASHTO design standards, based on the lane widths and design speed of the subject street. 
(3)  The design, right-of-way acquisition, drainage system improvements, roadway widening, asphalt construction, traffic control, traffic striping, signage and all other improvements required or incidental to the installation of auxiliary turn lanes required to support any proposed development shall be completed by the developer or applicant, at no cost to the City of Douglas. 
(4)  Under the following conditions, left storage lanes shall be added to two-lane collectors or arterials with speed limits of 30 mph or more, at unsignalized locations where left turning vehicles will leave the arterial or collector street and enter major driveways or development entrances. See the "Table of Left Storage Lane Requirements." 
Table of Left Storage Lane Requirements 

 
(5)  The length of left turn storage lanes and tapers shall be as prescribed in the Table 4-9, "Minimum Design Elements of Left Turn Lanes", GDOT "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control", and the latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-36. - Geometric design standards. 
(a)  [Design standards:] All streets and roadways shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO Standards, as provided in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," latest edition and any amendments thereto. All applicable signage, markings or other traffic control measures shall be designed in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices (MUTCD), latest edition and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  Horizontal curvature and super-elevation: All new streets shall adhere to the standards governing horizontal curvature and super-elevation in "Table of Horizontal Curvature and Super-elevations," unless otherwise specified by AASHTO Standards: 
Table of Horizontal Curvature and Super-Elevations 

 
(c)  Tangents: Between reverse horizontal curves there shall not be less than the minimum centerline radii and tangents shown in the "Table of Horizontal Alignment and Reverse Curves," unless otherwise specified by AASHTO Standards. Compound radii are prohibited. 
Table of Horizontal Alignment and Reverse Curves 

 
(d)  Vertical alignment. 
(1)  All changes in street profile grades having an algebraic difference greater than that shown the latest edition of the GDOT Design Manual shall be connected to a parabolic curve having a minimum length in feet (L), which is equal to the algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) multiplied by the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its classification and design speed (i.e. L = KA). 
(2)  (K) values shown in the Table of Constant (K) Values for Vertical Alignments shall be utilized in all cases, and in no case shall the constant (K) value be less than the minimum permitted. 
Table of Constant (K) Values for Vertical Alignments 

 
(e)  Street centerline grades: 
(1)  Street or road grades exceeding ten percent for a minor collector and 12 percent for local streets are prohibited, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may grant limited exceptions on maximum grades, based on conclusive evidence that shows a lesser grade is impractical due to topographic or site-specific limitations. 
(2)  The minimum centerline grade for any street or roadway shall not be less than one and one-half percent, without exception, due to drainage concerns. A desirable minimum centerline grade of two percent shall be provided where possible. 
(3)  The maximum centerline grade across any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be 5 percent. 
(f)  Crown slope: Unless super-elevated, all streets and roadways, except alleys, shall be designed and constructed with a crown slope of one-quarter inch per foot, to provide for the adequate drainage of surface water from the street centerline to the gutter or edge of pavement. 
(g)  Super-elevation: The design of arterial and major collector roadways may require the super-elevation of the travel surface on horizontal curves in accordance with AASHTO Standards. The design and horizontal alignment of minor collectors and local streets serving residential areas should avoid the use of super-elevation where possible. In all instances, the maximum super-elevation rates shall be in accordance with paragraph (b) above. Under no circumstance is a curved street of any classification to be reverse super-elevated. 
(h)  Pavement design; 
(1)  Pavement sections shall be constructed in accordance with the standards in the "Table of Standard Pavement Sections." 
Table of Standard Pavement Sections 

 
(2)  The developer may submit for review and approval an alternative pavement design, prepared at the developer's cost. This submittal shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Design prepared by a professional engineer licensed in Georgia. 
b.  Soils testing results prepared by a professional engineer licensed in Georgia. 
c.  Design shall be completed using the GDOT's "Asphalt Pavement Design Procedures," latest edition. 
d.  Design shall be based on 15-year pavement life. 
e.  Traffic shall be calculated using the Trip Generation Manual, by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, latest edition. 
f.  Traffic projections shall be made for any streets that serve areas outside of the proposed development. 
g.  Traffic counts, including truck traffic, shall be made as required on existing roads. 
h.  The City of Douglas will require written certification that material used in subbase conforms to the soils test results used in the design. 
i.  Cores of pavement and base will be made as necessary to verify actual thickness of each pavement layer (surface, base, and subbase). Test results shall be certified by a 3 rd party contractor at the expense of the developer. Copies of the test reports will be made available to the city engineer. The minimum number of cores of surface, binder, base, and subbase is one core per 100 feet of each street (or one core with streets less than 100 feet in length). 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-37. - Street construction standards and specifications. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for street construction shall conform to the latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications—Construction of Transportation Systems including all amendments. 
(1)  Clearing and grubbing: Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared and grubbed of all trees, stumps, roots, brush, debris and other objectionable materials (See Appendix A—[on file in the clerk-treasurer's office]). All erosion control measures shall be installed as required by the approved plans and in accordance with Chapter 38, Article III, Erosion and Sedimentation Control of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglas. For specific technical requirements reference is made to Georgia DOT Specifications, section 201, clearing and grubbing right-of-way. Combustible material generated from clearing and grubbing operations may be burned only when authorized and permitted by the City of Douglas Fire Chief. 
(2)  Rough grading: Conduct street earthwork construction in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification section 205, roadway excavation and embankments. 
a.  For purposes of these regulations, the maximum density of soil material shall be determined by ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) test procedures. 
b.  Complete rough street subgrade construction before starting utility and drainage installation. 
(3)  Final grading and subgrade preparation: 
a.  Perform subgrade construction in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification section 209, subgrade construction. 
b.  The developer shall provide quality control testing during earthwork and subgrade construction as necessary to assure the entire earthwork, including all fill layers and subgrades, meet the minimum requirements of these regulations. The minimum quality control testing to be provided consists of the following: 
1.  Moisture - density relationship curve for each type soil encountered. 
2.  One in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other recognized method) per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of subgrade or base to be paved. 
3.  One in-place density test (ASTM D1556 or other recognized method) per 1000 cubic yards or fraction thereof of fill placed. 
c.  Earthwork which falls below specified minimum quality control limits shall be removed, reconstructed and retested until compliance with specified requirements is achieved. 
d.  After completing street earthwork operations and before beginning street base construction, the developer shall file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these requirements with the city. At any time during the construction process, representatives of the city may request to review and the developer shall provide quality control test results. 
(4)  Street and alley base construction: 
a.  Street and alley bases shall be constructed in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification section 300, specifications applying to all base and subbase courses. 
b.  The following Georgia DOT Specification sections shall apply to base materials indicated on the standard detail typical street sections: graded aggregate base - section 310 - graded aggregate construction. 
(5)  Surface and binder asphaltic paving course construction: Surface and binder asphaltic paving courses, including prime, shall be constructed in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Section 400 - Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Construction. 
(6)  Post-construction stabilization of disturbed areas: When earthwork and paving are complete, the developer shall grass and stabilize all disturbed areas including roadway shoulders which are not covered by paving or other improvements (see Appendix A - specifications for grassing). It shall be the developer's responsibility to maintain grassed areas by watering, fertilizing, weeding, mowing, trimming, regrading and replanting as required to establish a smooth, acceptable stand of grass free of eroded or bare areas. Grassed areas will be considered acceptable when a viable stand of grass covers at least 90 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. Grassing operations shall meet the technical requirements of Georgia DOT Specification section 700 - grassing for planting zone 4. 
(7)  Quality control testing required: 
a.  The developer shall provide quality control testing during base and pavement construction as necessary to assure the entire pavement structure meets the minimum requirements of these regulations. The minimum quality control testing to be provided consists of the following: 
1.  Moisture-density relationship curve for each base material used on project. 
2.  For soil cement base, conduct mix design to determine Portland cement content (percent of dry weight of the soil) to achieve a minimum compressive strength of 300 psi at seven days when testing in accordance with ASTM D 1632 and D 1633. 
3.  One in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other method acceptable to the City) per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
4.  One thickness measurement normal to base surface per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
5.  One surface tolerance measurement using a 15-foot straight edge per 250 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
6.  One asphalt extraction (ASTM D 2172) and aggregate gradation analysis (ASTM C 136) per 2400 square yards or fraction thereof of surface course and per 2,400 square yards or fraction thereof of binder course (if any). Obtain samples for extraction and gradation tests in accordance with ASTM D 979. 7) One density and compacted thickness measurement per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of each course placed. Density determined to be made in accordance with ASTM D 1188. Remove not less than three-inch diameter nor larger than 12-inch square test specimens. Repair test specimen holes with full depth application of fresh hot asphaltic plant mix. 
7.  One surface tolerance measurement using 15-foot straight edge per 250 square yards or fraction thereof of surface course. 
b.  Base and/or paving construction which falls below specified minimum quality control limits shall be removed, reconstructed and retested until compliance with specified requirements is achieved. 
c.  After completing base and paving construction, the developer shall file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these regulations with the city. At any time during the construction process, representatives of the city may request to review and the developer shall provide quality control test results. 
(8)  Use of nonspecified base or paving materials or systems: In the event the developer desires to utilize base or paving materials or systems not included in these regulations, the developer shall provide an engineering study prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer comparing the proposed material or system to the appropriate system which is included in these regulations. The engineering study will include a pavement structural design based on the AASHTO "Guide for Design of Pavement Structures" and suggested specifications for the materials and construction of the proposed system. The city will treat the developer's request through the appeals process described elsewhere in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-38. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  All new streets or street widening sections shall be provided with curb and gutter, except as provided herein under. All gutters shall drain smoothly with no areas of ponding. 
(b)  In lieu of installation of curbs and gutters and/or related improvements, the developer must have presented to and received approval by the city for a street improvements and stormwater drainage plan for the development and its affected environs. Said plan must provide for adequate stormwater drainage, and will further address as a minimum, street grading, paving, and curbs and gutters, and or other innovative provisions for said drainage This plan must conform to the applicable standards and specification established by the city and be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Georgia registered professional engineer. 
(c)  All concrete curb and gutter shall be GDOT Standard 9032B, Type 2 (except in subdivisions, where the curb and gutter shall be 24 inches wide, while all other dimensions remain). 
(d)  Curbing shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Concrete shall be Class "A" as defined by the GDOT, and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days, a two-inch to four-inch slump (ASTM C 143) and, three to six percent air content (ASTM C 231 or C 173) and shall comply with ASTM C 94. 
(2)  One-half inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be provided at all structures and radius points and at an interval not to exceed 250 ft. in the remainder of the curb and gutter. Contraction joints also shall be provided at ten-foot intervals along the curb line. 
(3)  When the development ties into existing curbing, the curb and gutter shall transition to match the existing width and profile at the connection point. 
(4)  Termination or curb tapers shall be provided at the end of any gutter. The curb height shall be tapered from six inches to zero inches over a distance of six feet. 
(e)  The developer shall use a standard curb and gutter section. The section is shown in Appendix B, design standards. 
(f)  Curb and gutter shall be set true to the line and grade of the street on a properly prepared subgrade with application of Georgia DOT Type 2 membrane curing compound, horizontally and vertically field staked and finished to the section shown on the plans. Line and grade shall be established by the developer's engineer or surveyor. Offset staking shall be provided at 50-foot intervals. 
(g)  Curbing not installed in accordance with the requirements of this section or Appendix B, design standards shall be removed and replaced at the developer's expenses. The city may require and the developer shall provide core samples to verify concrete thickness. 
(h)  Disturbed areas along curbing shall be back-filled, compacted, stabilized and grassed. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-39. - Street lighting. 
The developer shall provide a street lighting standard at each street intersection and at an interval not exceeding 400 feet. The developer shall provide lighting standards at no cost to the city. 
(1)  The developer or other person developing a residential subdivision shall be required to provide street lights that conform to all of the standards provided for in this section and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain approval of the street light layout from the city engineer prior to the construction of any street light facilities. Approval or final acceptance of the subdivision requires compliance with this section. 
(2)  The developer or other person developing a shopping center, industrial park, office park, apartment complex or like development within a designated street light district shall provide street lights along public rights-of-way adjoining that property that conform to all standards provided for in this section; and the developer shall obtain approval of the street light layout from the city engineer prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
(3)  The city engineer shall not recommend the acceptance of any public streets or roads proposed to be dedicated to the city for perpetual ownership and maintenance until such time as the street lights conform to the approved street light layout. 
(4)  Street lights: Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions or other developments utilizing new streets or roads to be dedicated to the city or existing city streets or roads or any combination, unless waived by city commission. Unless so waived, the developer, at the time of submitting the final plat to the city shall: 
a.  Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company, which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the development or subdivision. For residential and nonresidential subdivisions, this drawing must be approved by the city engineer prior to obtaining any building permit within the subdivision. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company, which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities, and by the city engineer. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 25 feet above the ground, and each fixture shall have appropriate arm length to illuminate the street. Lights must be located at any or all street intersections within the subdivision or other development and 400 feet apart along any streets with the subdivision or other development. 
b.  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
c.  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the city. 
d.  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(5)  Standards of installation and operation. In order to ensure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1983), as from time to time amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the City of Douglas, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Except for principal arterials, lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be as shown in "Table of Minimum Average Street Illumination Levels". 
Table of Minimum Average Street Illumination Levels (footcandles) 

 
b.  The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be no less than one-sixth of this average. 
c.  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the city engineer for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. 
d.  Should the city engineer disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. 
e.  Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the city engineer may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the city engineer, a notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval. It shall be the responsibility of the city engineer to transmit forthwith to the board of zoning appeals all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The board of zoning appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed. 
f.  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street, and shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the city engineer shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
g.  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way, for whatever purpose, shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-40. - Sidewalks and bikeways. 
Sidewalks shall be provided along public streets for all developments and in such other locations as deemed necessary by the city for safe pedestrian movement. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be located on both sides of the street or road and on existing street frontage of any new development. 
(2)  Sidewalks in subdivisions shall be continued to the nearest arterial street. 
(3)  All new sidewalks shall match and provide a smooth transition to any existing sidewalk. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be installed on an individual lot basis at the time of building construction. The city shall inspect the location and construction of the sidewalk and shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the required sidewalk is properly installed. 
(5)  A strip of grass or other approved landscape material at least four feet in width shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs on public streets. Sidewalks shall be concrete and a minimum of five feet wide and four inches thick. Concrete shall be Class "A," as defined by the GDOT, and have strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. Disturbed areas along sidewalks shall be backfilled, compacted, stabilized and grassed. The city may require and the developer shall provide core samples to verify core thickness. 
(6)  Additional sidewalks and/or pedestrian easements may be required in subdivisions or developments where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(7)  Bicycle lanes, where provided, shall be a minimum of four feet in width and placed between the outside lane of a roadway and the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with appropriate markings, as required by MUTCD Standards. Bikeways and bicycle lanes must be pre-approved by the City Engineer and meet the requirements of AASHTO "Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities," latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-41. - Traffic calming devices. 
(a)  Traffic calming devices and associated signage may be required by the city engineer. 
(b)  The city engineer may establish specific standards for the design, construction, placement, and if applicable, planting plan for traffic calming devices. These standards shall be known as "Traffic-Calming Device Design and Placement Standards for the City of Douglas," further referred to and known as the design and placement standards and are hereby made a part of this section by reference. The city will maintain a on file for consultation and distribution a series of design and placement standards for traffic calming devices. The city engineer may, from time to time, modify these technical standards. 
(c)  Traffic-calming devices for all local streets shall be placed, designed and installed in accordance with the design and placement standards. 
(d)  Other designs or types of traffic-calming devices not included in the design and placement standards may be approved at the discretion of the city engineer, provided that such devices meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  The proposed traffic-calming device must be recognized as such by the transportation industry, i.e., it must be recognized by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, American Association State Highway Transportation Officials, the Federal Highway Administration, the American Traffic Safety Services Association or other nationally recognized transportation industry organization or guiding authority. 
(2)  The proposed traffic-calming device must be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the minimum standards of the approving organization or guiding authority. The city engineer may impose additional design, location or construction criteria prior to approving such a device. 
(3)  The proposed traffic-calming device must include plantings, water quality or other environmental enhancements or beautification elements. 
(4)  Traffic calming may be accomplished via proper geometric design of the streets. Such designs may be accepted by the city engineer in lieu of other structural traffic calming devices. 
(5)  The city engineer may disallow the use of devices that meet the criteria set forth in subsections (a) through (d) of this section if, in his judgment, the installation of such a device would create unusual or costly maintenance, create a safety hazard, restrict movement of emergency vehicles, or would otherwise not be in the best interest of the city. 
(e)  Islands that are not specifically for traffic calming, such as entrance islands, cul-de-sac islands, tree save islands or other decorative islands may be approved for construction by the city engineer, if they conform to the design principles contained in the design and placement standards. 
(f)  All plant materials included in islands shall be installed at the expense of the developer and shall be maintained by the subdivision's homeowner's association. A notification to this effect shall be included on the final plat recorded for the subdivision. 
(g)  The city engineer may, at his or her discretion, approve unusually shaped islands or innovative designs. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-42. - Traffic control devices. 
Traffic control devices consisting of street name signs, traffic control signs, traffic markings and traffic signals shall be provided by the developer as appropriate to serve each development. All traffic control devices and installation thereof shall conform to the Federal Highway Administration "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices". 
(1)  For residential developments, minimum traffic control devices shall consist of street name signs at each street intersection, stop or yield signs at each intersection, one speed limit sign per block, school or pedestrian crossing signs where appropriate, and limited pavement marking such as crosswalk lines for school or pedestrian crossings. 
(2)  Minimum traffic control devices for nonresidential developments shall include those devices for residential developments and lane and centerline markings, stop lines, and parking space markings. Additionally, appropriate other signs and signals shall be provided by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-43. - Street improvement plans. 
(a)  Plans required: Street improvement plans for all new streets, street widening and existing street upgrades shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer. At least three copies of the plans shall be submitted to the city for review and comment. An electronic copy (in PDF format) may be submitted in addition to other plans. Within 30 days of submittal of the plans, the city will either approve the plans or make comment on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans can be approved by the city. 
(b)  Required information: All plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
(1)  Profiles of existing ground levels along street centerlines and each right-of-way. Field determined elevations shall be indicated at intervals not exceeding 25 feet. Where cross sections are provided at least every 25 feet, only centerline elevations need be shown on the profile. 
(2)  Existing facilities and features within and adjacent to rights-of-way which affect or could be affected by street improvement construction. Items include, but are not limited to, streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, buildings, parking lots, driveways, fences, tree lines, and railroads. 
(3)  All drainageways, lakes, streams, creeks, channels, wetlands, and drainage facilities. 
(4)  All existing utilities and appurtenances within and adjacent to rights-of-way which affect or could be affected by street improvement construction. Items include, but are not limited to, sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street lights. The utility type, size, depth, material and location in relation to street improvements should be indicated. 
(5)  Existing and proposed property and easement lines and land lot and land district lines intersecting street rights-of-way. 
(6)  Limits of new construction. 
(7)  New road improvements, including but not limited to, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, pavements, driveways, wheel chair ramps, traffic control devices, and street lights (if any). 
(8)  Profiles of each pavement edge or line of curb and gutter with new finished grade elevations at intervals not exceeding 50 feet. 
(9)  Horizontal and vertical street geometry including street centerline angles of deflection, radii, degree of curvature, design speed, tangent lengths, arc lengths, bearings street grades, and lengths of vertical curves. Stations for all points of curve, points of tangency, points of intersection, both horizontal and vertical, should be shown. 
(10)  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
(11)  Name of the development, names, addresses and telephone numbers of developer and developer's engineer, engineer's seal, north arrow, scale, and date. 
(c)  Plans shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Where specific design guidance is not given in these regulations or other City of Douglas regulations, rules, or ordinances the AASHTO publication "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets", latest edition shall be followed. 
(2)  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
(3)  Plan drawings shall be at a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet. In developed or congested areas, the city may require a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or less to be utilized. 
(4)  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least one inch equals ten feet. A one inch equals five feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict grade changes in flat areas. 
(5)  The desired drawing size is 18 inches by 24 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
(6)  One set of Mylar drawings are to be provided. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IV, 2-25-08) 
Secs. 56-44—56-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 56-60. - Utilities. 
All authorized public utilities must be installed by a Georgia Licensed Underground Utility Contractor who must meet minimum bonding and insurance requirements as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-61. - Placement of utilities. 
All authorized public and private underground or overhead utilities shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street or within an easement designated for such use. Within public street rights-of-way, placement of the various authorized utilities (water, sanitary sewer, natural gas, power, telephone, and cable TV) shall conform to the specific locations for such use designated by the city. Private underground utilities such as lawn sprinkler systems, septic tanks and drain fields, exterior lighting systems, and heating and cooling piping are not permitted within public street rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-62. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements required: Permanent easements for public water, drainage and sanitary sewer facilities shall be dedicated to the city. 
(b)  Easement widths: The minimum width permanent easements for a single utility shall be 15 feet. Where more than one utility has a common easement, the minimum easement width shall be increased by five feet for each additional utility. However, additional easement widths may be required by the city where the depth of the utility is excessive or other conditions will cause difficulty in accessing the utility. 
(c)  Dedication requirements: Before dedication, the developer shall grass and stabilize all disturbed areas within and adjacent to easements which are not covered by paving or other improvements. An acceptable stand of grass free of eroded or bare areas must be achieved before the city will consider dedication. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-63. - Utility line extension requirements. 
If existing water mains and or sanitary sewers must be extended to serve a development, the developer shall install or have installed the necessary extensions at no cost to the city under the existing city policy and procedures at plan approval time. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-64. - Water distribution system design criteria. 
(a)  Pressure: All water mains, including those not designed to provide fire protection, shall be sized after hydraulic analysis to maintain a minimum pressure of 40 psi at ground level under all conditions of design flow. 
(b)  Design flow: The design flow is to consist of projected peak demand plus fire flow (where applicable). To determine projected peak flow for residential developments, utilize values in "Table of Peak Water Demands for Residential Developments." For developments other than residential, utilize AWWA "Manual of Water Supply Practices M22, Sizing Water Service Lines and Meters" to estimate peak demand. For fire flow, select proper value from the "Table of Minimum Design Fire Flows". 
(c)  Sprinkler connections: For each fire protection sprinkler connection to the city's water system, the developer must provide a double detector check valve installation consisting of not less than two detector check valves with bypass meter on the second unit and two gate valves all enclosed in an accessible, nonfloodable concrete pit. The pit is to have a double leaf aluminum access hatch. 
(d)  State approval: It is the developer's responsibility to obtain the approval of the environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources of all water distribution system additions and extensions. In addition to the other requirements, the city must receive a copy of the approval before the developer will be allowed to proceed with construction. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-65. - Location of water mains, fire hydrants and other fixtures. 
(a)  Water mains: Water mains shall be located along city streets on the south and west side of the street, five feet from the back of the curb. The minimum cover is to be 42 inches. Locate water service laterals with a minimum cover of 24 inches within street rights-of-way. Within five feet of the water meter, service lateral cover may be reduced to not less than 18 inches. 
Table of Peak Water Demands for Residential Developments 

 
Table of Minimum Design Fireflows (1) 

 
(b)  Fire hydrant spacing: Provide fire hydrant spacing as requested by the fire chief and as follows: 
(1)  One-family and two-family residential: Space fire hydrants not more than 500 feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary so that the maximum hose lay from a hydrant to the furthermost part of any building does not exceed 500 feet. 
(2)  Multiple-unit residential: Space fire hydrant not more than 500 feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary so that the maximum hose lay from a hydrant to the farthermost part of any building does not exceed 400 feet. 
(3)  Office-institutional, commercial and industrial: Space fire hydrants not more than 400 feet apart so all portions of buildings can be reached by hose lays of not more than 400 feet. 
(4)  [Exception:] Except when waived by the fire chief, a fire hydrant shall be located at all street intersections in all zoning districts. 
(5)  [Additional provision:] Locate fire hydrants between the water mains and right- of-way and within five feet of the right-of-way. 
(c)  Valves: Locate valves at not more than 1,000-foot intervals in residential areas and 500 foot intervals in nonresidential areas. At water main junctions, the minimum number of valves to be provided shall equal the number of pipes extending from the junction minus one. 
(d)  Meters: Locate water meters in public rights-of-way within six inches of the right-of-way except where alternate location is approved by the water department. Water meters will be furnished and installed by the city upon payment of appropriate fees. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-66. - Sanitary sewer design criteria. 
(a)  Design capacity: Design sewer systems for the estimated ultimate development tributary population and/or area. In establishing design capacity, the following factors must be considered. 
(1)  Maximum hourly residential sewage flow. 
(2)  Maximum hourly commercial/institutional sewage flow. 
(3)  Maximum hourly industrial sewage flow. 
(4)  Ground water infiltration. 
(5)  Topography of the area. 
(6)  Pumping requirements. 
(7)  Design new sewers in residential areas on the basis of an average daily flow of sewage of not less than 400 gallons per household per day. A peaking factor of not less than 2.5 must be applied to the average daily flow to establish peak design flow. Sewers shall be designed to carry peak design flow when flowing one-half full. 
(8)  In nonresidential developments, base sewer design on the estimated peak flow from the development but in no case less than 0.4 gallon per square foot of gross building areas. Sewers shall be designed to carry peak flow when flowing one-half full. 
(b)  Size and shape: The minimum size sanitary sewer shall be eight inches. Design sewers to give mean velocities, when flowing half full, of not less than 2.0 feet per second based on the Manning formula using an "n" value of 0.013. The "Table of Minimum Sewer Slopes" contained in this section gives the minimum as built slopes which must be provided to allow dedication of sewers to the city, however, where possible greater slopes are desirable. Sewers shall be placed with a uniform slope between manholes. 
(c)  Manholes: 
(1)  Install manholes at the following locations: 
a.  End of each sewer. 
b.  At all changes in grade, size, or alignment. 
c.  At all sewer intersections. 
d.  At distances not greater than 400 feet for sewer 15 inches and smaller. 
(2)  When pipe sized change at a manhole, the 0.8 depth point of both sewers shall be aligned at the same elevation. 
(3)  When the same size pipe enters and leaves a manhole, at least a 0.1-foot drop in elevation shall be provided between the entering and the exiting inverts. 
(4)  U-shaped flow channels shall be constructed through manholes. 
(d)  Relation to water mains: 
(1)  Whenever possible, lay sewers at least ten feet horizontally from any existing or proposed water main. Should conditions prevent a separation of ten feet, lay the lines in separate trenches. In either case, construct the elevation of the crown of the sewer at least 18 inches below the bottom of the water main. 
(2)  When sewers cross under water mains, lay the sewer so that the top of the sewer is at least 18 inches below the bottom of the water main. Install the two pipes such that a full length of pipe will be centered over the crossing so that all joints will be separated as much as possible. Install ductile iron pipe for both lines when the crossing is less than two feet of separation. 
Minimum Sewer Slopes 

 
(e)  Sewer locations: When sewers are laid in public streets, construct the sewer along the approved right-of-way or easement at a depth of not less than five feet from the road surface to the top of the pipe. In curved streets, install the sewer between gutter lines to avoid conflicts with other utilities. 
(f)  State approval: It is the developer's responsibility to obtain the approval of the environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for sanitary sewer collection system additions and extensions. In addition to other requirements, the city must receive a copy of the approval before the developer will be allowed to proceed with construction. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-67. - Natural gas system. 
All gas mains and services will be installed in accordance with the City of Douglas Natural Gas Department Operations and Maintenance Manual. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-68. - Electrical system. 
All electrical systems will be installed according to the latest edition of the National Electrical Code and the City of Douglas Electric Service Manual. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-69. - Preparation of utility plans. 
(a)  Plans required: Utility plans for all extensions, additions, improvements and/or modifications for the water distribution and sanitary sewer collection systems shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer. At least three copies of the plans shall be submitted to the city for review and comment. Within 30 days of submittal of the plans, the city will either approve the plans or make comment on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans can be approved by the city. 
(b)  [Plan information:] Information to be shown on the plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
(1)  Existing facilities and features in the vicinity of utility construction which affects or could be affected by such construction. Items include but are not limited to streets, rights-of-way, buildings, driveways, parking lots, fences, tree lines and railroads. 
(2)  All drainageways, lakes, streams, creeks, channels, wetlands, and drainage facilities. 
(3)  All existing utilities and appurtenances in the vicinity of utilities construction which affect or could be affected by such construction. The utility type, size, depth, material and location in relation to utilities improvements should be indicated. 
(4)  Existing and proposed property and easement lines and land lot and land district lines intersecting utility line construction. 
(5)  New utilities construction including as applicable, but not limited to, pipelines, manholes, lift stations, force mains, valves, fittings, fire hydrants, meters, casings, services facilities, special construction and details for connections to existing utilities. Pipe sizes and materials shall be indicated on the plans. Include horizontal geometry as necessary to define location of new utilities. 
(6)  Profiles of sanitary sewers showing existing ground surface, sewers, manholes with top and invert elevations, line lengths and grades, crossing utilities, and limits for special construction. 
(7)  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
(8)  Name of the development, names, addresses and telephone numbers of developer and developer's engineer, engineer's seal, north arrow, scale and date. 
(c)  [Preparation:] Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the following: 
(1)  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
(2)  Plan drawing shall be at a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet. In developed or congested areas, a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or less shall be utilized. 
(3)  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least one inch equals ten feet. A one inch equals five feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict pipeline conditions. 
(4)  The desired drawing size is 22 inches by 34 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
(5)  Utilities construction may be shown on street improvement plans provided the resulting drawings are clear, legible and plainly show all necessary information. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-70. - Construction record drawings. 
At the completion of utilities construction and before dedication to the city, the developer shall furnish two copies of construction record drawings for the development to the city. The record drawings shall be made from the original drawings of the approved development drawings revised to reflect actual construction. Drawings shall be signed/sealed by Georgia licensed surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § V, 2-25-08) 
Secs. 56-71—56-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRADING AND DRAINAGE 

Sec. 56-91. - Site grading. 
(a)  Site grading shall be done in accordance with the finished grades shown on the approved development plans. Site grades shall direct surface drainage away from buildings without causing adverse impact on adjacent properties. 
(b)  The maximum slopes for soil cut or fill shall be two feet of horizontal run for each foot of vertical rise or fall except for stable rock slopes. If actual soils encountered require a flatter slope for stability, the lesser slope shall be used. 
(c)  Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be provided as required in chapter 38, article III - erosion and sedimentation control of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglas. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § VI, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-92. - Drainage. 
Provisions for stormwater drainage and detention designs are to be in accordance with the City of Douglas Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § VI, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-93. - Specifications for drainage construction. 
Refer to Georgia Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest Edition for specifications for drainage construction. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § VI, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-94. - Preparation of grading and drainage plans. 
(a)  Plans required: Grading and drainage plans for all developments except individual one and/or two family dwelling units, shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer or landscape architect. 
(b)  Plan submittal requirements: At least three copies of the plans and detention study shall be submitted to the city for review and comment. 
(c)  Plan review process: Within 30 days of submittal of the plans, the city will either approve the plans or make comment on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans can be approved by the city. 
(d)  Required plan information: Information to be shown on the plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
(1)  Topographic map of the existing conditions for the development showing existing facilities and features which affect or could be affected by grading and drainage improvements. Utilize a contour interval of not greater than two feet with spot elevations as necessary to define existing ground surfaces. 
(2)  All drainageways, lakes, streams, creeks, swales, ditches, channels, wetlands, and drainage facilities. 
(3)  All existing utilities and appurtenances which affect or could be affected by grading and drainage improvements. The utility type, size and location in relation to grading and drainage improvements should be indicated. 
(4)  Existing and proposed property and easement lines and land lot and land district lines intersecting or bounding grading and drainage improvements. 
(5)  Finished grades depicted by finished contours and/or spot elevations as necessary to define finished grade surfaces. 
(6)  New drainage improvements including, but not limited to, pipes, culverts, catch basins, area drains, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, berms, dikes and detention basins with outlet works. The drainage areas tributary to each drainage structure, design flow, and time of concentration shall be indicated. 
(7)  Profiles of storm drains showing existing and finished ground surfaces, pipes, drainage structures with top and flow line elevations, distances from centerline to centerline of drainage structures, pipe and ditch grades, crossing utilities, and limits of special construction. 
(8)  Pipe design chart including: 
a.  Drainage area. 
b.  Runoff coefficient. 
c.  Rainfall intensity. 
d.  Design flow. 
e.  Pipe size. 
f.  Pipe material. 
g.  Pipe slope. 
h.  Full flow capacity. 
i.  Flow velocity. 
(9)  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
(10)  Name of the development, names, addresses and telephone numbers of developer and developer's design professional, design professional's seal, north arrow, scale and date. 
(e)  Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the following: 
(1)  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
(2)  Plan drawings shall be at a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet. In developed or congested areas, a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or less shall be utilized. 
(3)  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for the associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least one inch equals ten feet. A one inch equals five feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict drainage conditions. 
(4)  The desired drawing size is 22 inches by 34 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
(5)  Drainage construction may be shown on street or utilities improvements plans provided the resulting drawings are clear, legible and plainly show all necessary information. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § VI, 2-25-08) 
Secs. 56-95—56-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; APPEALS; PENALTIES 

Sec. 56-121. - Schedule of fees. 
If applicable, the schedule of fees for development plan review, appeals, waivers, reinspections, and other items is on file with the city clerk and may be altered or amended from time-to-time by the city commission to help defray the costs of the administration of these regulations. 
Development plan review fees, if any, shall be paid at the time development plans are submitted for review. A development plan review fee shall be paid each and every time development plans or parts thereof are submitted or resubmitted. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § VII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-122. - Administration and enforcement. 
These development regulations shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the city manager. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to maintain an accurate and up-to-date compilation of these development regulations, including appendices, and all amendments, and to publish said compilation and make it available to the public for a fee set by the city commission. 
In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of these regulations, not in compliance with the provisions of a permit issued by the city, or without authorization of a permit which would otherwise be required, the city manager is hereby authorized to order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public health, safety and welfare. The stop work order shall be posted on the property and delivered or mailed to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § VIII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-123. - Variances. 
Requests of for variances to requirements of these regulations shall be submitted in a form as prescribed by the city manager along with such fee as shall be established by the city commission. 
The city manager shall coordinate the review of each variance request by all other affected city departments and shall summarize such comments and/or recommendations as may be received in a report to the board of zoning appeals for final action in their normal course of business. 
In granting variances and modifications, the board of zoning appeals may require such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § IX, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-124. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals, hearings, and notice: It is the intention of this chapter that all questions arising in connection with the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations shall first be presented to the city manager, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of zoning appeals only on appeal from the decision of the city manager, and that from the decision of the board of zoning appeals, recourse shall be to the courts as provided by the law. 
Appeals to these regulations may be taken to the board of zoning appeals by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of zoning appeals' notice of said appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city manager shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
An appeal stays all legal proceeding in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the officer, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notices to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(b)  Powers and duties: The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city manager in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases a variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, vowing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of zoning appeals that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
b.  The application of the ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this chapter, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  To decide on other matters where a decision of the board of zoning appeals may be specifically required by the provisions of this chapter. In exercising these powers, the board of zoning appeals may be reversed or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The board, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt may certify such fact to the superior court. 
(c)  Certiorari from decisions: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning of appeals shall have the right of certiorari to the superior court within 30 days after the decision of the board is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § X, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-125. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be upon conviction and shall be punished for each offence according to section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Each day such violations continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XI, 2-25-08) 
Secs. 56-126—56-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 56-140. - Authority. 
These development regulations, may be amended from time to time by the city commission as herein specified, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-141. - Initiation of amendments. 
(a)  Initiation of amendments: A proposed amendment to the development regulations may be initiated by the city commission, board of zoning appeals, the planning commission, the city manager or by application filed with the city manager by a developer or citizen. 
(b)  Application procedure: Each request for amendment of the development regulations shall be submitted in a form as prescribed by the city manager along with such fee as shall be established by the city commission. Applications for amendments must be submitted in proper form at least 25 days prior to a planning commission hearing in order to be heard at that meeting. 
(c)  Notice of public hearing for amendments: For each amendment to this chapter, notice of the nature of the proposed change and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the city commission shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city in which are carried the legal advertisements of the city at least 15 days prior to the meeting with the planning commission and not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing before the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-142. - Planning commission meeting. 
(a)  Upon the receipt of an application as noted above, the city manager shall submit, at the next following meeting of the planning commission, provided such application shall precede said meeting by a minimum of 25 days, any and all information submitted by the applicant. In addition, the city representative may submit any additional information deemed appropriate to the amendment. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the required information, the planning commission shall consider the proposed amendment at a regular or special called meeting and shall determine at that time if the applicants request merits further consideration. 
(c)  All applicants seeking amendments to this chapter shall have an opportunity to present facts, reports and/or evidence to the planning commission at the time of either their regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting. The planning commission shall hold and conduct, as appropriate to the requirements of this resolution, public meetings in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act of 1988 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1). 
(d)  If the planning commission determines, by majority vote, the application does not warrant further consideration, the fees shall be returned to the applicant with a written notice enumerating the reasons for denial of the applicant's request. A copy of this denial shall be submitted to the city commission. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the request, the planning commission shall determine, by a majority vote, their recommendation to the Douglas City Commission and shall transmit that recommendation to the city commission forthwith. Said recommendation shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Identification of the subject. 
(2)  A record of the vote taken. 
(3)  Recommendation and any specific comments the planning commission may wish to make concerning the rezoning request. 
(4)  Any individual commission member's comments on the subject application wishing to be recorded. 
(f)  The planning commission may determine that additional specific technical information is needed regarding any potential environmental, fiscal or public service impacts. If such determination is made, the planning commission shall have the discretion to defer its recommendations upon preparation of a special study intended to analyze the potential impacts or the specific areas of concern. Where preparation of a special study has been required, no recommendation will be forwarded to the city commission until such study has been received and reviewed by the planning commission. The cost of any special study shall be borne by the applicant, unless the city commission approves the participation of public funds, as necessary or as being in the public interest. 
(g)  Where no special studies are required, the planning commission shall then have 60 days from the date of the scheduled regular or special meeting at which the review of an application for zoning/rezoning request, zoning ordinance text changes and conditional use permits were conducted to submit final recommendations on the technical merit of the application to the city commission for consideration. If the planning commission fails to render a final recommendation within the 60-day period, the application shall be forwarded to the city commission for a public hearing and subsequent final action as appropriate to the requirements of this resolution. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-143. - Public hearings. 
The governing, calling, and conducting of the public hearings held by the planning commission and city commission for consideration of proposed amendments shall be accomplished with the policies and procedures listed below: 
(1)  The chairman shall indicate that a public hearing has been called for the consideration of zoning decisions. Thereupon each application shall be considered on an individual basis. 
(2)  When an application comes up for review, the chairman may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen so that the entire presentation of the positions of those in support of/opposition to the petition shall not exceed 30 minutes. 
(3)  The city manager shall present a report on the application and make their recommendations. 
(4)  The applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time in which to present evidence to support the proposed amendment or conditional use permit. 
(5)  Those in favor of the proposed amendment shall be allowed a minimum of 10 minutes, or the amount of time as prescribed by State of Georgia law, to speak in favor of the proposed amendment or conditional use permit. 
(6)  Those who oppose the proposed amendment shall be allowed a minimum of ten minutes, or the amount of time as prescribed by State of Georgia law, in which to speak in opposition to the proposed amendment or conditional use permit. 
(7)  The applicant may be allowed a reasonable amount of time in which to respond to any issues raised. 
(8)  The city manager may make additional comments. 
(9)  The city attorney may be asked to discuss any legal issues that have been raised. 
(10)  The planning commission or city commission may then propound questions to any party present and may discuss the proposed amendment or conditional use permit. 
(11)  After the above procedures have been completed, the chairman will indicate that the public hearing is formally closed. 
(12)  Each speaker at the public hearing shall speak only to the merits of the proposed amendment under consideration and shall address remarks only to members of the planning commission or the city commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning decision under consideration. The chairman may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
(13)  Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the chairman from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-144. - Action by planning commission. 
The planning commission, after a public hearing with public notice as is required by this article, shall investigate the proposal and vote its recommendation to the city commission. The planning commission may recommend approval of the application, denial of the application or deferral of the application. If necessary, the city manager shall re-advertise the public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of section 56-141(c), above. 
The secretary of the planning commission shall make and maintain a written record of the planning commission's investigation and recommendations, this record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-145. - Action by the city commission. 
Following review and recommendation from the planning commission, the city commission, after conduct of a public hearing with public notice as is required by this article, shall vote to: 
(1)  Approve the proposed amendment; 
(2)  Deny the proposed amendment; 
(3)  Defer the proposed amendment to a certain time; or 
(4)  Refer the decision or application back to the planning commission for further investigation. 
a.  If the city commission shall vote to refer the amendment back to the planning commission for further investigation, the city manager shall re-advertise the dates of the public hearings before the planning commission and the city commission in accordance with section 56-141(c), above. No proposed amendment to these regulations shall be approved except by the majority vote of the members of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-146. - Clerk of the city commission. 
The clerk of the city commission shall, within ten days from action of the city commission on each proposed amendment to these regulations provide to the city manager a signed and certified copy of each such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XII, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 56-147. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)  Conflict with other regulations: Whenever the regulations of this chapter require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(b)  Severability: Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(c)  Effective date: These regulations shall be in full force and effective upon adoption by the city commission and shall apply to any development for which the first submittal of development plans is received after the effective date of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 022508, § XIII, 2-25-08) 
Chapter 58 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; fire protection and prevention, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; planning, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. 7, sec. 1, par. 3; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas; conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-36; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 14-1 through 14-51 in the 1978 Code comprising all of Chapter 14 entitled "Mobile Homes" is not repealed and shall remain in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals and fowl, ch. 10; cemeteries, ch. 26; courts, ch. 34; nuisances, § 38-26; human relations, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; traffic, ch. 86; vegetation, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit theft by taking when in any mercantile establishment within the city in which merchandise is displayed for sale in such manner as to be readily accessible to persons shopping therein, by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Removes any such merchandise from the immediate place of display; 
(2)  Conceals any such merchandise; 
(3)  Alters any label or marking on such merchandise; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag from another item of merchandise; 
(5)  Transfers any such merchandise from a container in which it may be displayed to any other container; 
with the intent to appropriate such merchandise to his own use, or to deprive the owner of possession thereof, or of the value thereof, in whole or part. 
(b)  The crime of theft by taking under the circumstances of this section shall also be known as shoplifting. 
(Code 1978, § 16-2) 
Sec. 62-2. - Obscenity, lewdness generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place naked, or in any indecent or lewd dress; or make any indecent exposure of his person; or be guilty of any indecent or lewd act or behavior; or exhibit or perform in any hall, house, or public place any indecent, immoral or lewd play or dance; or sing to a public audience any sacrilegious, indecent, vulgar or lewd song. It shall be the duty of the police of the city to arrest every person violating this section in their presence, or on complaint of any citizen of a violation of this section by any person. 
(Code 1978, § 16-8) 
Sec. 62-3. - Display of obscene material. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, display or advertise obscene material of any description, knowing the obscene nature thereof; provided, the word "knowing" as used herein shall be deemed to be either actual or constructive knowledge of the obscene contents of the subject matter; and a person shall be deemed to have constructive knowledge of the obscene contents if the person has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent man on notice as to the suspect nature of the material. 
(b)  Material is obscene if considered as a whole, applying community standards, its predominant appeal is to prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and utterly without redeeming social value and if, in addition, it goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in describing or representing such matters. Undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and the like shall be deemed obscene notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make the obscenity patent or to disseminate it. 
(Code 1978, § 16-9) 
Sec. 62-4. - Discharge of firearm. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire a gun, pistol or any other firearm or airgun (except in cases of military parade and licensed shooting galleries), upon any public square or sidewalk or in any street of this city, without permission from the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 16-10) 
Sec. 62-5. - Carrying concealed weapon. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of carrying a concealed weapon when he knowingly has or carries about his person, unless in an open manner and fully exposed to view, any bludgeon, metal knuckles, firearm, knife designed for the purpose of offense and defense, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character outside of his home or place of business, except as hereinafter permitted by this section. 
(b)  Upon conviction of the offense of carrying a concealed weapon, a person shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(2)  For the second offense, and for any subsequent offense, he shall be guilty of a felony and, upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned for not less than one year and not more than five years. 
(c)  This section shall not permit, outside of his home, motor vehicle, or place of business, the carrying of a pistol, revolver, or concealable firearm by any person unless he has on his person a valid license issued under O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129 and the pistol, revolver or firearm may only be carried in a shoulder or waist belt holster, hipgrip or any other similar device, handbag, purse, attach case, briefcase or other closed container. Carrying on the person in a concealed manner other than as provided herein shall not be permitted and shall be a violation of this section. 
(d)  This section shall not forbid the transportation of any firearm by a person who is not among those enumerated as ineligible for a license under O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129, provided the firearm is enclosed in a case, unloaded and separated from its ammunition. This section shall not forbid the transportation of a loaded firearm in any private passenger motor vehicle in an open manner and fully exposed to view or in the glove compartment of the vehicle. 
(Code 1978, § 16-10.1) 
Sec. 62-6. - Curfew for minors—Hours; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for minors under the age of 18 years to assemble, congregate or be upon the streets or sidewalks of the city unless accompanied by a parent or guardian of such minor, after 12:00 midnight and before 6:00 a.m. This section shall not apply to such minors as may be sent to the business portion of the streets and sidewalks of the city by their parent or guardian with written authority from such parent or guardian for such occasion. 
(Code 1978, § 16-13) 
Sec. 62-7. - Same—Procedure in case of violation. 
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city, on finding any such minors as section 62-6 prohibits from being on the streets, as aforesaid, to admonish such minor to go to his home; and should the minor fail and neglect to comply with the terms of that section, the police officer shall arrest the offending minor, and after arresting, as aforesaid, immediately notify the parents or guardian of such person, that unless such parent or guardian shall come and take such person off the streets as aforesaid, the arresting officer shall then detain the minor until directions shall have been given by the city manager as to custody. 
(Code 1978, § 16-14) 
Sec. 62-8. - Resisting officers; assisting escape. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, or in any manner interfere with, the officers of the city in the discharge of their duties, or aid or assist any person arrested by any of such officers to escape from the custody of such officers, or from the jail when therein confined. 
(Code 1978, § 16-20) 
Sec. 62-9. - Hindering police having custody of prisoner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or impede any police officer in carrying or conducting prisoners to jail; it shall be unlawful to menace or threaten such officers while in the discharge of such duty; and no person shall follow up such officer while in charge of prisoners, after he has been commanded to desist, or after any crowd has been commanded to disperse. 
(Code 1978, § 16-23) 
Sec. 62-10. - Assembling for gambling purposes; renting house for same. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for persons to gather together or assemble in any house, building, room, or upon any vacant lot or property within the city for the purpose of playing or betting for money or other thing of value at any game played with cards, dice, balls or other device of whatever name, kind or description, or to gather or assemble for the purpose of betting on any game of nine-pins or other number of pins or at any pool, billiard or other table. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself, servant or agent, to knowingly rent or let any house, building, room or vacant lot or property within the city for the purpose of and to be used as a place for the assembling or gathering together of persons for the purpose of gambling, playing or betting for money or other thing of value at any game played with cards, dice, balls or other device; or to be used as a place at which persons are to gather together or assemble for the purpose of playing or betting for money or other thing of value on any game of nine-pins or other number of pins or at any pool, billiard or other table. 
(Code 1978, § 16-30) 
Sec. 62-11. - Dispersing on notice. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons assembling and loitering on the streets in sufficient numbers, or in any such manner as to be an obstruction to free passage on the streets, sidewalks or crossings, to fail to disperse upon notification of any officer or member of the police force, or any citizen. 
(Code 1978, § 16-33) 
State Law reference— Obstructing streets, sidewalks and public passages unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 62-12. - Loitering near schools; disrupting discipline of school. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter at or near any public school house, or to engage by conversation, sign or otherwise, the attention of any of the pupils at the school to the disturbance of the same, or the detriment of the discipline of such schools. 
(Code 1978, § 16-34) 
Sec. 62-13. - Giving false name, address, etc., to law enforcement officer. 
A person who gives a false name, address or date of birth to a law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties with the intent of misleading the officer as to his identity or birthdate is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1978, § 16-39) 
Sec. 62-14. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety for his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Endangers lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct. 
(4)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place. 
(7)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes. 
(8)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming. 
(9)  Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device. 
(10)  Assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or aids or abets therein. 
(11)  Utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets. 
(12)  Frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated. 
(13)  Acts in a dangerous manner toward others. 
(14)  Uses fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(15)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another. 
(16)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(17)  Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority. 
(18)  Makes any unreasonably loud and unnecessary noise. 
(19)  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition. 
(20)  Consumes alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk or any other public property within the corporate limits of the city. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. This Code section shall not apply to any area or place where the board of commission has approved an alcoholic beverage special event permit or any other approved catered event. This Code section shall not apply to any sidewalk or area where a business has a valid sidewalk café permit. 
(21)  Consumes alcoholic beverages in a vehicle or not on any public or private parking lot within the corporate limits of the city, except those maintained at establishments holding a valid on-premises license for the retail sale of beer or wine. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(b)  Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
( Ord. No. 12122016(3), 12-12-16 ) 
Sec. 62-15. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The following provisions of the 1978 Code are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city: 
(1)  Section 16-1 regarding drinking alcoholic beverages on public property. 
(2)  Section 16-15 regarding causing congregations on streets. 
(3)  Section 16-38 regarding inflammatory, obscene language and harassing telephone calls. 
Sec. 62-16. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Code section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  A person committing the offense of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 06-12.1-95, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 62-17. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The Board of Commissioners of the City of Douglas, Georgia finds and determines that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Graffiti promotes blight in the neighborhoods in which it occurs and encourages similar acts of vandalism. Without prompt and immediate removal of graffiti, other properties become the target of graffiti and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city and its citizens. The Board of Commissioners of the City of Douglas, Georgia, in the interest of public health, safety and welfare further finds and declares that to be truly effective in the deterrence, eradication and removal of graffiti, it is necessary to implement a comprehensive anti-graffiti ordinance. 
(b)  Definition. "Graffiti" means the defacing, damaging or destroying by spraying of paint, or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public and/or private buildings, structures and places. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to deface, destroy or otherwise damage private or public property without the owner's consent by or through the application of what is commonly known as "graffiti". 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise being in control of any real property within the city to maintain, permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain upon any structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(d)  Graffiti penalty. Any person who is convicted of violating subsection (c) of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such punishment, the court may, in imposing sentence, order the defendant to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed. 
(e)  Graffiti notice of removal. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, public agency or utility owner, or person acting as manager or agent for the owner of property, whether privately or publicly owned, to permit the application of or fail to remove any graffiti from the property within 30 days of receipt of notice from the city to remove such graffiti. 
Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti or other unsightly conditions on any property, including structures or improvements within the city, a police officer or code enforcement officer shall give or cause to be given, notice to the property owner, and/or owner's agent or manager to remove such graffiti or other unsightly condition therefrom. Such notice shall be in writing and have substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI OR OTHER UNSIGHTLY CONDITION FROM PROPERTY 
To the Owner, Agent of the Owner, or Person managing the property hereinafter described: 
Your attention is hereby directed to the provisions of Section 62-17 of the City of Douglas Code of Ordinances on file in the office of the City Clerk. Pursuant thereto, you are hereby notified that a certain unsightly condition exists on premises specifically described as ____________ which injures neighboring property and the public health, safety and welfare. You are therefore notified at once and in any event within ninety (90) days from the date of this notice, to remove such unsightly condition from the property and thereafter to keep the property free therefrom. 
In the event you fail to complete such work within the time hereinabove mentioned, the undersigned shall cause the same to be removed. The costs of removal may be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid. 
Dated at Douglas, Georgia this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________  Officer 
The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners: 
(1)  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property. 
(2)  By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. 
(f)  City cost declared lien. If the person, agent, firm, public agency, manager, or owner of the property fails to remove the graffiti by the end of the 90-day notification period, the city shall cause the graffiti to be removed and charge to the property owner the expenses incurred. If the expenses of the removal remain unpaid for a period of 60 days, the city may place a lien against the property upon which said nuisance existed and from which the graffiti was removed. 
(Ord. No. 10232006, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 62-18. - Noise control. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of City of Douglas through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(b)  Sound measurement standards for law enforcement personnel. For the purposes of this section 62-18, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth below which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest. 
b.  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. 
(2)  Restrictions for areas within apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential dwelling units. It is unlawful for any person(s) to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person at any distance beyond the adjoining property line wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean human-produced sounds of yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or mechanically-produced sounds made by radio-receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound, or any combination thereof. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "property line or boundary" shall mean an imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of (1) adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or (2) adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. Said property line or boundary includes all points of a plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls. 
(3)  Fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks or safe and sane fireworks. Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean roman candles. Safe and sane fireworks are fireworks other than consumer fireworks that do not have aerial effects or explode, but may make a whistling, crackle or screaming sounds. Items that include in safe and sane fireworks are sparklers, snaps, smoke balls fountains, snakes and wheels. 
Exceptions: 
a.  On any day beginning at the time of 10:00 a.m. and up to and including the ending time of 9:00 p.m.; 
b.  On January 1 st , July 3 rd , July 4 th , and December 31 st of each year after the time of 9:00 and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m. 
c.  On January 1 st of each year beginning at the time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the ending time of 1:00 a.m. 
(4)  Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, or commercial entities in the normal course of their business; 
b.  Noises and/or sounds emanating from any official South Georgia State College event on South Georgia State College property or any official Coffee County School District event on Coffee County Board of Education School property; 
c.  Noises and/or sounds that are permitted by a special event that has been approved by the City of Douglas Mayor and Commission provided, however, that the producer or coordinator of the special event must comply with the terms, restrictions and conditions of the special event permit; 
d.  Noises or sounds caused by industrial uses in any Industrial zones established in the zoning code, unless the courts have determined such noise as a nuisance; 
e.  Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions. 
f.  Noises or sounds made by either a person or mechanical devices that are intended to call or summons help for any emergency or person in distress. 
(5)  Time restrictions on use of landscape maintenance motorized devices such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws. It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape maintenance devices, including but not limited to leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws, within any residential zoning district or in areas within 300 feet of any residential zoning district from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
(6)  Construction noise. Between the hours of 9 p.m. and 7 a.m., construction noise of any type, including, but not limited to, noise caused by the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any earth-moving equipment, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment, shall not be plainly audible within any residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noise emanates. 
A variance from the above-referenced hours of operation for construction noise may be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours prior to the proposed construction operation, for consideration by the building inspections and permit department. Such a request shall state: 
a.  The reasons that support a claim of urgent need based on specific loss or inconvenience for such a variation from the allowable work hours; 
b.  The impact that the denial of this request would have on the applicant's project and the surrounding properties; 
c.  The steps which have been taken by the applicant to communicate those needs and impacts to owners of surrounding and nearby properties; 
d.  The steps that have or will be taken to limit the impact of the proposed activity upon surrounding and nearby properties; and 
e.  The possible risks to public health and safety. 
If the building inspector or code enforcement officer finds that the application adequately demonstrates the urgent need for a variance from the above allowable work hours, adequately provides for mitigation of the impact upon surrounding and nearby properties, and poses no additional risk to public health and safety, then permission shall be granted for a variance to alter the allowable work hours during one ten-day period. 
The prohibitions of this subparagraph (6) shall not apply to government road, water, sewer, storm water construction or maintenance projects or to utility company construction or maintenance projects. 
(d)  (1)  Registration of outdoor entertainment events. Registration is required of all outdoor entertainment events that have commercial entertainment and/or electronic amplification. Registration of the event must be 72 hours prior to the event, and must be by the person or persons responsible for the event. Registration is to be with the City of Douglas Police Department, Monday through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., on an application specified by the chief of police and shall include the organization sponsoring the event, the location, the date and time of the event, and security provisions. Registration shall not be accepted for events that include the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings. Failure to register may result in a fine, forfeiture of the right of future registrations, or both. Registration does not exempt the person or persons registering the event from ensuring that the event complies with the requirements of this section. Failure to register shall be a violation of this subsection. 
(2)  A noise waiver permit may be requested for any event which may be in violation of this section. Any waiver must be applied for within at least 72 hours prior to the date in which the waiver is applied for. The waiver must be approved by the chief of police and the code enforcement officer. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(2), 5-8-17 ) 
Secs. 62-19—62-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FALSE ALARMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02112008, §§ 63-1—63-13, adopted Feb. 11, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 63, §§ 63-1—63-13. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. II, §§ 62-51—62-77. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or designee designated by the chief of police to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts. 
Alarm registration means the notification by an alarm company or an alarm user to the alarm administrator that an alarm system has been installed and is in use. 
Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon the police department, fire department or emergency medical services, including local alarm system. The term "alarm system" does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle or a person unless the vehicle or personal alarm is permanently located at site. 
False alarm means the activation of a fire, burglary, and/robbery or personal alarm by other than a medical emergency, fire, unintentional smoke, forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no such fire has occurred, no emergency medical treatment is needed or no burglary, theft, robbery or forcible entry is being committed or attempted on the premises. False alarm shall include negligently activated alarm, alarm which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained, and alarms which are purposefully activated to summon the police, firemen or emergency medical technicians in nonemergency situations, but does not include an alarm caused by violent weather conditions, acts of God or other causes which are beyond the user's control. 
Multiple alarm sites means more than one alarm system on the premises. 
Panic or personal alarm means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal life threatening or emergency situation requiring emergency medical services, fire or law enforcement response. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-1, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-52. - Responsibility of alarm users. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any alarm system, otherwise cause an alarm system to be activated, or operated or maintain an alarm system which is activated at a time when no fire, burglary, or robbery is in progress at the premises that causes a public safety officer to be dispatched and is later determined to be false. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any alarm system, or otherwise cause to be activated, or maintain any alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of an alarm system to any public safety agency of the City of Douglas. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to activate any alarm system as set forth in subsection (a) or (b) of this section with the full knowledge that no fire, burglary or robbery is in progress at a premises. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey a cease and desist or issued pursuant to this section. 
(e)  All alarm users will be required to respond to the location where the alarm is activated, or when requested by the police department, fire department or alarm administrator. The keyholder will be given 30 minutes from the time of the request to arrive at the premises to respond to the alarm, unless other arrangements are made through the alarm administrator. Upon activation, the alarm shall not sound any longer than 15 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-2, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-53. - Responsibility of alarm administrator. 
(a)  The police department, the monitoring agency for this article, will make notification to any owner or occupier of the premises who have violated this article. 
(b)  The alarm administrator will issue a written notice of all false alarms to alarm users. This notice is in addition to the notice issued to the keyholder answering the false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-3, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-54. - Exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be a 30-day grace period following the installation of any new alarm system during which period false alarms shall not be counted. This grace period is provided to allow the installing company or other installer and the user to take necessary corrective actions with regard to the operation of the alarm system. A responsible person at such premises must maintain proof, in the form of an invoice, of the date of installation of an alarm system for exemption under this section. 
(b)  An alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company or designee, the 911 dispatch center, or the police department, or fire department to test the equipment. 
(c)  The police chief shall issue a cease and desist order to any person who has violated subsection 63-52(c). Such order shall direct the alarm system in question to be permanently disconnected immediately upon receipt of such order. 
(d)  The police chief shall also issue a cease and desist order to any person who has violated subsection 63-52(a) and/or subsection 63-52(b) six times within a calendar month or three times within any 24-hour period. Such order shall direct that the alarm system in question be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until it has been inspected and serviced by a properly trained and licensed technician. Such order shall be rescinded upon receipt by the chief of police of written proof that such inspection and service has been performed any malfunction or maladjustment corrected. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-4, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-55. - Offenses. 
(a)  Upon the police, fire or emergency medical service responding to the fifth false alarm within a 12-month period, the owner or occupier of the premises where such alarm or burglary system is maintained shall be given a written notice for the five responses to false alarms have within a 12-month period. Any additional false alarms would result in the alarm administrator assessing a service fee due and payable within 30 days following the notice thereof, and treated as any other municipal liability, such as taxes, and issue a fi fa and an execution for the owner of the premises for violation of this article. The violation would result in fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file. 
(b)  Upon the police or fire department responding to each false alarm, the responding keyholder will be advised of the false alarm. If the keyholder fails to respond to any false alarm, the responding officer or firemen will notify the alarm administrator who will assess a fee to the owner or occupier for violation of this article. If the keyholder fails to respond to any false alarm after the fifth false alarm, the alarm administrator will assess a double assessment. One assessment will be for the owner or occupier for violation of this subsection, and one assessment will issued for the owner or occupier for violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If the owner or occupier fails to register their alarm system, the alarm administrator will assess a fee for the violation of this article. The violation of this subsection would be assessed in the amount of $25.00. 
(d)  If an owner or occupier is a corporation or government entity, the summon will be addressed to the corporation or government entity and made attention to a designated individual. It will be the responsibility of the corporation or government entity to provide the police department with the name of the designated individual. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-5, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-56. - Appeals. 
If a location is assessed a false alarm fee, and the owner, business or legal entity does not agree that the alarm activation should be classified as a false alarm, the owner, business or legal entity may choose to appeal through the proper process as follows: 
(1)  The proper representative of the owner, business or legal entity, having or maintaining the alarm system may contact the chief of the agency that responded to the alarm (fire, police, or emergency medical service) and appeal the ruling. The alarm administrator will present any documentation of behalf of the city. 
(2)  If the owner, business, or legal entity and the chief of police, fire chief or director of emergency medical services are not able to resolve and agree on the alarm classification, the proper representative may request a meeting with the city manager to appeal the ruling. The alarm administrator will present any document on behalf of the city. 
(3)  The ruling of the city manager will be final. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-6, 2-11-08) 
Secs. 62-57—62-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 62-71. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain within the city an alarm system on commercial or residential premises unless the person owning or operating the business or residential location, where such an alarm system is maintained, shall file with the police department a valid alarm registration issued by the alarm administrator or designee. A separate registration is required for each alarm site. Fire alarms, burglary or robbery alarms, or panic alarms (any combination) on one site will be considered as one registration. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-7, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-72. - Application. 
Each alarm registration shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, complete address, and telephone number of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial, government entity or apartment; 
(3)  For each alarm located at the alarm site, the classification of the alarm system, i.e., fire, burglary, holdup, panic or other, for each purpose, whether audible or silent; 
(4)  Mailing address if different from the alarm site; 
(5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present, i.e., attack dogs at the site; 
(6)  Name and telephone number of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation at any time; respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes; and will deactivate the alarm system if such becomes necessary; 
(7)  Type of business conducted at the site; and 
(8)  That law enforcement, fire or emergency medical service response may be based on factors such as: availability of police units, fire or emergency medical technicians, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-8, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-73. - Issuance; conditions. 
Upon receipt of a completed application form for registration under this division, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant and assign an alarm index number unless the applicant has failed to pay a prior fi fa. Assessment or had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-9, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-74. - False application. 
Any false statements of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration under this division shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration or to revoke a registration upon discovery of a false statement of a material fact. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-10, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-75. - Transferability. 
An alarm registration under this division may not be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any changes that alter the information listed on the registration application within five business days. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-11, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-76. - Fees. 
A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall accompany each application for registration under this division, except that governments shall be exempt from paying such registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-12, 2-11-08) 
Sec. 62-77. - Duration. 
Each registration completed under this division shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 02112008, § 63-13, 2-11-08) 
Secs. 62-78—62-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROSTITUTION, PIMPING, PANDERING AND PENALTIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06192017 , adopted June 19, 2017, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore said provisions have been included as Art. III, §§ 62-101—62-104, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 62-101. - Prostitution. 
A person commits the offense of prostitution when he or she performs or offers or consent to perform a sexual act, including but not limited to sexual intercourse or sodomy, for money or other items of value. 
(Ord. No. 06192017 , 6-19-17) 
Sec. 62-102. - Pimping. 
A person commits the offense of pimping when he or she performs any of the following acts: 
(1)  Offers or agrees to procure a prostitute for another; 
(2)  Offers or agrees to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution; 
(3)  Directs or transports another person to a place when he or she knows or should know that the direction or transportation is for the purpose of prostitution; 
(4)  Receives money or other thing of value from a prostitute, without lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from prostitution; or 
(5)  Aids or abets, counsels, or commands another in the commission of prostitution or aids or assists in prostitution where the proceeds or profits derived therefrom are to be divided on a pro rata basis. 
(Ord. No. 06192017 , 6-19-17) 
Sec. 62-103. - Pandering. 
A person commits the offense of pandering when he or she solicits a person to perform an act of prostitution in his or her own behalf or in behalf of a third person or when he or she knowingly assembles persons at a fixed place for the purpose of being solicited by others to perform an act of prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 06192017 , 6-19-17) 
Sec. 62-104. - Penalties for violating this article. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in Code sections 62-101 through 62-103 shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
[(b)](1)  Adjudication of guilt or imposition of a sentence for a conviction of a second or subsequent offense pursuant to this subsection, including a plea of nolo contendere, shall not be suspended, probated, deferred, or withheld. 
(c)(1)  (2)  The convicted person for which notice of conviction is published pursuant to this subsection shall be assessed the cost of publication of such notice and such assessment shall be imposed at the time of conviction in addition to any other fine imposed pursuant to this Code section. 
(3)  The clerk of the court, the publisher of any legal organ which publishes a notice of conviction, and any other person involved in the publication of an erroneous notice of conviction shall be immune from civil or criminal liability for such erroneous publication, provided such publication was made in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 06192017 , 6-19-17) 
Chapter 66 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation commission, § 2-411; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(5); authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; state commission on physical fitness created, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq. 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Other recreational facilities means any publicly owned facilities, buildings or structures including, but not limited to, recreational centers, buildings owned or leased/rented and used under the supervision of the parks and recreation director of the city. 
Park means any tract of publicly owned land on which is located any facilities for use by the public engaged in passive recreation, including, but not limited to, tables, benches, chairs, outdoor cooking facilities, shelters, bandstands and the like. 
Playground means any tract of publicly owned land on which is located any facilities for use by the public engaged in active recreation, including, but not limited to, baseball, football, soccer, softball, volleyball, swimming, handball, and playground equipment including, but not limited to, swings, slides, teeters, sandboxes, climbing devices and the like. 
(Code 1978, § 16-51) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-2. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Parks and playgrounds. The parks and playgrounds of the city shall be open to the public at sunrise each morning and close at sunset each evening, unless prior approval is received from parks and recreation staff. 
(b)  Other recreational facilities. The hours of operation of other recreational facilities owned and/or operated by the city shall have the hours of operation as determined by the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1978, § 16-52; Ord. No. 06082015 , 6-8-15; Ord. No. 05262015, 6-8-15 ) 
Sec. 66-3. - Permit required for use beyond stipulated hours. 
Any person, group of persons, firm or corporation desiring use of parks, playgrounds and/or other recreational facilities of the city beyond the hours of use stipulated in this chapter must first obtain a written permit signed by the parks and recreation director or his designee. The permit shall indicate the location, facilities and hours approved for use by the applicant. 
(Code 1978, § 16-53) 
Sec. 66-4. - Exclusive use of facilities; deposit required. 
When an applicant desires to use recreational facilities, i.e., buildings, shelters, etc., exclusively, the applicant shall first obtain a permit for such use and must make a cleanup deposit in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. If, upon inspection by representatives of the parks and recreation department, it is found the facility has been left in a clean and orderly fashion, the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. If the facility so used by the applicant is found in need of cleanup by the parks and recreation department, the deposit shall be retained by the parks and recreation department and shall be credited to that department toward the expenses of cleanup. 
(Code 1978, § 16-54) 
Sec. 66-5. - Damage to city property. 
When it is determined that the granting of a permit for use of city parks, playgrounds and/or other recreational facilities has resulted in damage to the city property so permitted, the person obtaining the permit shall be responsible to the city for the payment of all costs incurred by the city for repair to such property. 
(Code 1978, § 16-55) 
Sec. 66-6. - Littering prohibited. 
No person using, passing through or visiting the buildings, parks or playgrounds shall deposit any wastepaper, trash, wrappers, bottles, cans, garbage or other material on the grounds of any park, playground or other recreational facilities of the city outside of receptacles provided for receipt of such material. 
(Code 1978, § 16-56) 
Sec. 66-7. - Loud or unusual noise, music, etc., not permitted. 
Unless approved by the recreation commission, no person shall generate or allow to be generated any loud or boisterous or unusual noise or music within the park that shall disturb the residents of the city in the vicinity of any of the parks, playgrounds or other recreational facilities. The use of loudspeakers shall not be permitted in such parks, playgrounds or other recreational facilities of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 16-57) 
Sec. 66-8. - Motorized vehicles. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, place and/or drive any motorized vehicles on and/or within the confines of any city park located within the corporate limits of the city except in those areas designated by department of parks and recreation authorizing the presence of motorized vehicles within the confines of parks located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Restitution. In addition, in the event of any conviction of any person for violation of this section, the sentencing court shall have the right to require restitution in full to the city for any and all damages to property. 
(Code 1978, § 22-17) 
Sec. 66-9. - Penalty. 
The violation of any of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 16-58) 
Chapter 70 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; emergency management, § 30-26; erosion and sedimentation control, § 38-61; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOUGLAS-COFFEE COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 70-26. - Membership. 
The City of Douglas-Coffee County planning commission shall consist of seven members. Four of the members shall be residents of the city, appointed by the board of commissioners of the city and three of the members shall be residents of the county appointed by the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of the county. The terms of the members shall be for four years. Any vacancy in city-appointed membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of commissioners which shall also have the authority to remove any city-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1978, § 17-2) 
Sec. 70-27. - Organization; rules; funding. 
The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city or the county. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning commission and city planners and other consultants for certain services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing authority of the city and the county. 
(Code 1978, § 17-3) 
Chapter 74 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12202012-1, adopted Dec. 20, 2012, repealed former Ch. 74, §§ 74-1—74-15, and enacted a new Ch. 74 as set out herein. Former Ch. 74 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Code 1978, §§ 20-1—20-6, 20-8—20-10, 20-12—20-15; Ord. No. 09-24.1-90, § 5, adopted Sept. 24, 1990; Ord. No. 08-26.1-91, adopted Aug. 26, 1991 and Ord. No. 03-25.02-96, §§ 1—4, adopted March 25, 1996. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - County solid waste resolution—Adopted. 
The city does hereby adopt all the provisions included in the county solid waste resolution. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-2. - Same—Chapter supplemental thereto. 
This chapter is adopted to supplement the county solid waste resolution within the city. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Secs. 74-3—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDLING, STORAGE, COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTING 

Sec. 74-31. - Intent; policies. 
(a)  It is declared to be the intent of the board of commissioners, in furtherance of the city's responsibility to protect the public health, safety and well-being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment by enacting policies governing the collection, storage and handling of solid waste, as that term is hereinafter defined in this article, in accordance with the comprehensive statewide program for solid waste management now in effect in the state. It is the purpose of this article to establish procedures to regulate solid waste handling, storage and collection by the city sanitation department, contracted haulers and by those private collectors licensed to collect, store and handle solid waste generated from commercial and industrial sources within this city and to secure reliable data for solid waste management planning as part of the city's goal for waste load reduction. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to provide each year for the working and keeping of a sanitation department in the city and to provide the funds for keeping the city streets and alleys properly cleaned and to provide for the collection of and disposal of solid waste as in its judgment it shall deem best; and it shall be the duty of the city manager with the cooperation of the superintendent of the street and sanitary department to see that all ordinances, regulations and contracts relating to the sanitary condition of the city are properly observed and enforced. 
(c)  It is further declared to be the policy of the city to educate and encourage generators and handlers of solid waste to reduce and minimize to the greatest extent possible the amount of solid waste which requires collection, treatment, or disposal through source reduction, reuse, composting, recycling, and other methods and to promote markets for and engage in the purchase of goods made from recovered materials and goods which are recyclable. 
(d)  The owner and/or occupant of every premise within the city shall be ultimately responsible for the proper handling, storage and disposal of all solid waste generated upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biomedical waste means pathological waste, biological waste cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biological, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals), sharps, chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, as further defined in rule 391-3-4-15 of the board of natural resources of the state, and other such waste materials. 
Board of commissioners means the board of commissioners of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Bulky waste means such items as large household appliances (i.e., washing machines, clothes dryers, water heaters, stoves, refrigerators and dishwashers), furniture, tree stumps, large timber, car bodies, large bundles of carpet waste, large packing containers, tanks, and other items whose volumes are not significantly reduced through normal compaction methods. 
Business day means a calendar day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1. 
Closure means a procedure approved by the state environmental protection division which provides for the cessation of waste receipt at a solid waste disposal site and for securing the site in preparation for post-closure. 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid wastes from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, this definition shall not include an individual who collects and/or transports waste from a single-family dwelling unit owned or occupied by such individual or his or her immediate family member(s). 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into stable, odor-free humus. 
Construction and demolition waste means solid waste composed of building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations of houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste includes, but is not limited to roofing shingles, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste, and other wastes not likely to cause leachate of environmental concern. 
Contaminant means any physical, biological, or radiological substance or matter. 
Collector permit means a permit required to engage in the business of solid waste collecting in the City of Douglas, Georgia, and issued by the city in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
Curbside means the area of city right-of-way from the edge of the street to the back of the right-of-way. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specified. 
Disposal or dispose means the discharge, deposit, discard, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, throwing, or placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water. 
Drop-off center means any facility or location at which recyclable or compostable materials are taken by individuals and deposited into designated containers. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Environmental protection division means the environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, including but not limited to its director, and any successor entity or entities. 
Generator means any person in this state or in any other state who creates solid waste. 
Hazardous constituent means any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated pursuant to the federal act by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency which is in force and effect on February 1, 1992, codified as appendix VIII to 40 CFR 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which contains hazardous constituents or has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations of the state environmental protection division, chapter 391-3-11. 
Hazardous Waste Management Act shall mean the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, codified at O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-60 through 12-8-83, as the same has been heretofore or may be hereafter amended. 
Household hazardous waste means hazardous waste used or generated in the household or similar source or any item, product or material containing or contaminated by any household hazardous waste. 
Industrial solid waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq., the "Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act." Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: Electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Inert landfill means a landfill used for the disposal of inert waste. 
Inert waste means solid wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate. Such waste is limited to earth and earth-like products, rocks, concrete, bricks, land clearing debris, tree and shrub wastes, yard wastes, cured asphalt, and construction and demolition wastes. 
Landfill means an area of land on which or an excavation in which solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile. 
Leachate means liquid that has percolated through solid waste and the soils surrounding a landfill and has extracted, dissolved or suspended materials from it, which may be potentially harmful to groundwater. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate that prevents its percolation into surrounding soils and groundwater. 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity, composition, origin, routing, and designation of substances in the waste stream from point of generation, through intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the state environmental protection division. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of municipal solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to municipal solid waste landfills and thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a discrete area of land or excavation that receives household waste, and that is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or waste pile, as those terms are defined under 40 CFR part 257.2. A municipal solid waste landfill may also receive other types of solid waste, such as commercial solid waste, nonhazardous sludge, small-quantity generator waste and industrial solid waste. Such a landfill may be publicly or privately owned and/or operated. 
Operator means the person or entity responsible for and having direct supervision of daily field operations at a disposal facility. 
Person means an individual, trust, firm, joint-stock company, corporation (including a government corporation), consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, partnership, association, state, municipality, authority, commission, political subdivision of a state, or any interstate body and shall include each department, agency, and instrumentality of the United States. 
Post-closure means a procedure approved by the state environmental protection division to provide for long-term financial assurance, monitoring, and maintenance of a closed disposal site to protect human health and the environment. 
Processing or processing operation means any method, system or other treatment designed to change the physical form or chemical content of solid waste and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings and other elements). 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Restricted waste, excluding municipal solid waste, means any solid, liquid, or sludge: 
(1)  Contained in a drum, barrel, box, pail, transportable tank, or any other container; 
(2)  Transported in a bulk tank; 
(3)  Residue or waste from a pollution control process; 
(4)  Residue or waste from an industrial process; and 
(5)  Residue, debris, and waste from the cleanup of a spill or a release of a chemical substance or commercial product or waste associated with items (1) through (4) as above-mentioned. Restricted waste shall include hazardous waste but shall not include household hazardous waste, provided that such household hazardous waste is disposed of at a solid waste handling facility designated by the city to accept such household hazardous waste and in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city. Other restricted wastes may include, but are not limited to, animal wastes and carcasses, asbestos, ash, biomedical wastes, chemicals, containers, clothing, debris, equipment and instruments, grease and oil, latex, plant (vegetal) materials, sludge's, wash waters, or other wastes. Sources of such material include but are not limited to research, veterinary and medical laboratories, mortuaries, taxidermists, automobile washes and laundries (both commercial and industrial), publicly owned treatment works, and industrial treatment facilities, food processing and restaurant-related facilities. The city manager has the full authority to determine whether a waste is a restricted waste. 
Retreadable casing means a scrap tire suitable for retreading. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in section 3913-4-19(2.1) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire handling means the storage, collection, transportation, utilization, processing, or disposal of scrap tires by any person other than end users on whose motor vehicles the tires have been affixed. 
Sludge means any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant or facility (including any pretreatment process), water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, exclusive of the treated effluent of a wastewater treatment plant. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
Sanitation department means the sanitation division of the City of Douglas or its hauler. 
Sanitation director means the administrative head or manager of the city's sanitation department, or his designee. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means any location where any storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste, or any combination thereof, occurs. 
Solid Waste Management Act shall mean the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act codified at O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-20 through 12-8-59.2, as the same has been heretofore or may be hereafter amended. 
Special waste means municipal solid waste which is comprised, in whole or in part, of waste requiring special handling; waste containing free liquids; sludge; waste generated by industrial processes; bio-medical wastes; off-specification, outdated or discarded chemical or petroleum products; waste containing asbestos; or contaminated soils or debris resulting from an environmental spill or cleanup. 
Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed for encircling the wheel of an electric or motor vehicle, and which is neither attached to the vehicle or a part of the vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-33. - Collection of residential solid waste. 
(a)  Receipt of service required. In order to protect the public health and sanitation, to prevent the spread of contagious or infectious diseases, and to prevent the breeding of rodents, insects and other vermin, all improved residential properties (single-family and multifamily residences) within the city shall receive regular municipal solid waste collection services from the city sanitation department. All residential customers will be provided once-per-week collection of their solid waste debris (solid waste and/or recycling depending on current schedule). No owner of a residential property shall be exempt or relieved from payment of the monthly sanitation collection and handling fee by reason of failure or refusal to receive services as provided by the sanitation department. Such fee shall be imposed against the property itself and payment of the fee shall be enforceable and collected as provided by law for levy and sale of in rem liens. 
(b)  Outside storage of residential solid waste; curbside containers. All residential solid waste stored outside the residence pending collection shall be placed inside approved containers with lids tightly affixed. Approved containers shall be those issued by the city to residential customers pursuant to this article, designed to be rolled to curbside for periodic collection. All waste must be bagged and placed inside the container. Under no circumstances will garbage outside of city-issued containers be collected. If necessary, extra containers may be obtained for an additional monthly fee, as determined by the current fee schedule in affect at the time such additional cart is provided. Each container shall bear a serial number and shall be registered to the assigned customer. All containers shall remain the property of the city. Additionally, in the event a container is lost, stolen or intentionally damaged, the city reserves the right to charge the customer the replacement cost of the container. Except when taken to the curbside for scheduled collection, containers shall be consistently located behind the residence or to a place that is outside of city right-of-way and out of view to neighbors and passing motorist. Containers shall be used exclusively for the storage and transport of solid waste to the curbside. 
(c)  Time and placement of containers. Beginning the evening before but no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection customers shall place their container(s) at curbside in front of the customer's residence. The container (solid waste and/or recycling depending on current schedule) should be placed approximately four feet from the edge of the roadway, but not so as to pose a physical or visual obstruction to motorists. The containers may be placed at curbside the evening before the scheduled day for collection; for example, if the scheduled day for collection is Monday, containers may be placed at curbside on Sunday evening. All carts shall be placed with the front of the cart squarely facing the roadway, so as to be capable of being picked up by automated collection equipment. Where there is insufficient right-of-way adjacent to the roadway, or other topographical difficulties exist which make it unreasonable to conform to the general requirements, customers should place their container at a location mutually agreeable to the customer and the sanitation department, after consultation with the sanitation director or his designee. All containers should be removed from the curbside and returned to a location behind the customer's residence or to a place that is outside of city right-of-way and out of view from the right-of-way no later than 6:00 a.m. following the scheduled day of service. Due to holidays or other unforeseen circumstances, special collection dates will be announced or published through the local news media. Customers are encouraged to make suitable arrangements with neighbors or friends to set out and remove their containers from the right-of-way if absent during the hours specified herein; customers routinely allowing containers to remain at curbside outside of the hours specified shall be deemed to create a nuisance, punishable as a violation of this Code. 
(d)  Assisted service for households with mobility-impaired residents. Households in which all regular residents are mobility-impaired may apply for assisted collection service at the same fee as levied for curbside collection. The containers must be placed at the street building line, visible from the street. Applications shall be made on forms provided by the sanitation department director or his designee, accompanied by the certificate of a physician licensed in the state stating that, based upon a physical examination conducted within the past 30 days, the applicant is mobility-impaired or has sufficient medical reasons not to place the container at curbside. Any denial of an application shall be in writing, stating the reason therefore. Aggrieved applicants may, within 20 days of the receipt of denial, request a hearing before the city manager, whose decision shall become final. The sanitation department may request recertification of a mobility-impaired customer annually. It shall be the duty of a mobility-impaired customer to report promptly to the sanitation department any change in medical condition or change in occupancy of the residence. 
(e)  Service for multifamily residential developments. 
(1)  Multifamily residential developments with four or less units. Residential developments of four or less dwelling units (detached, attached, duplex or triplex) located on the same tract or parcel shall be served with each unit being assigned a container for curbside collection. 
(2)  Multifamily residential developments with more than four units. All other multifamily developments (more than four units) shall be deemed as residential customers. The owner of the development shall decide on a common collection method to be used by all tenants. The owner shall have the option of being serviced by a centrally located commercial container, compactor or containers for curbside collection. It shall be the responsibility of each multifamily residential development to provide adequate containers for storage of its own waste if using centrally located commercial containers or compactors. Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a new multifamily development, arrangements for the storage and collection of solid waste shall be approved pursuant to city development regulations. Commercial containers at existing multifamily developments serviced by the city sanitation department shall be placed at locations approved by the sanitation director. Any location to be used for centrally located commercial containers or compactors shall have proper infrastructure (i.e. dumpster pad, adequate paving, etc.) to accommodate collection vehicles and personnel. 
(3)  Responsibility for and payment of delinquent bills. See section 44 of Chapter 90—Utilities. 
(f)  Restrictions on residential solid waste other than household garbage. 
(1)  Dangerous or corrosive materials. It shall be a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed in any refuse or recyclables container for collection any acid, explosive material, flammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. No person shall place a used lead-acid vehicle battery in mixed municipal solid waste or discard or otherwise dispose of a lead-acid vehicle battery except by delivery to a battery retailer or wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter, or to a collection or recovered materials processing facility that accepts lead-acid vehicle batteries. 
(2)  Pet litter, disposable diapers, other similar waste. Pet litter, disposable diapers and other similar waste must be contained in a securely tied plastic bag before placing in a refuse container. 
(3)  Paint cans. Paint cans shall be collected if empty or if the paint therein is dry or solidified with sand or pet litter. 
(4)  Other items. Any other items governed by state law and/or city policies. 
(g)  Maintenance of surrounding area. The occupant of a residential dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding the container clean and free of litter. Upon failure of the occupant, and on premises which are not currently occupied, the owner shall have the duty to maintain the premises accordingly. 
(h)  Cleanliness of containers. All refuse and recycling containers, except single use containers, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide, if necessary, to prevent nuisance. 
(i)  Preparation of refuse. All refuse shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight plastic bags with the tops secured prior to being placed in a refuse container. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-34. - Collection of yard trimmings from residential customers. 
(a)  Yard trimmings not to be mixed with municipal solid waste. It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings, as defined by this article, with municipal solid waste within a container intended for storage and collection of residential solid waste. All residential customers will be entitled to one weekly collection of yard trimmings at curbside. For purposes of this article one weekly load shall consist of a pile approximately five feet by five feet by two feet in height. Leaves will be excluded from the measurement of loads. Yard trimmings should be placed on the right-of-way, in front of the residence, approximately four feet from the roadway, provided no yard trimmings shall be placed so as to physically protrude into the roadway or visually obstruct any motorist. No yard trimmings shall be placed at a location where it is likely to wash or blow into the roadway, into a storm drain, or on or near fire hydrants, water meter boxes, mail boxes, utility poles or guy wires, in such manner as to obstruct access thereto or the function thereof. 
(b)  Regulations on yard trimmings. No other debris, such as rocks, glass bottles, wood, pieces of wire, steel or concrete, shall be mixed with or concealed under grass clippings or leaves. Limbs should be cut into lengths of no more than six feet in length and shall be smaller than six inches in diameter. No wire or fencing of any type will be handled by the city sanitation department. 
(c)  Additional fees for excess loads. Customers placing in excess of one load of yard trimmings weekly at the curbside shall be charged an additional handling fee. Customers anticipating having more than one weekly load are encouraged to transport their yard trimmings to the city's compost facility located at 1009 Wendell Sears Road. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-35. - Unacceptable curbside materials; residential and commercial. 
(a)  Commercial contractors, vendors and landlords who's activities generate solid waste are required to properly dispose of appliances, construction materials, carpets, mattresses, box springs, furniture, trees, stumps, fencing, wire, scrap tires, lead-acid vehicle batteries, large automobile parts, and other similar items. It is the responsibility of the prime contractor, vendor or landlord and upon his failure to act, of the property owner, to keep private property free of waste, debris, and litter during new construction or during remodeling, repair and landscaping. 
(b)  Liquid wastes, such as oils, paints, gasoline, and chemicals, shall not be mixed with municipal solid wastes and shall not be collected and handled by sanitation department or their designee. It is the responsibility of every owner of property within the city to dispose of such wastes in a proper manner, by lawful means. It shall be unlawful for any person to pour or introduce liquid wastes into a sanitary or storm sewer or drain. 
(c)  The sanitation department shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, or rock from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes, or other vegetation from or generated by commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors. 
(d)  The sanitation department does not collect or handle solid waste and other matter except in accordance with this article. Whenever waste is placed or left at curbside in violation of this article, the sanitation department director or his designee shall give written notice to the property owner, as shown on the most recent tax digest, and occupant of the premises, if known, to cause the removal and proper disposal of the material. If the conditions are not corrected by the person disposing of the material within two business days after receipt of notice, the sanitation department may remove the material and assess a special handling fee against the person responsible, which fee shall be in addition to any fine imposed under this article upon conviction for its violation. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-36. - Residential solid waste collection and handling fees. 
(a)  Monthly fees are imposed for residential solid waste collection and handling services as approved by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Rates, fees and charges shall be established by the board of commissioners, provided all rates shall be uniform for the same class of service; and revised from time to time as required. All rates, fees and charges shall be available for public inspection and copying. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-37. - Collection of commercial and industrial solid waste. 
(a)  Generally. All commercial and industrial generators of solid waste within the city are responsible for assuring the safe handling, storage and collection of waste from their premises in accordance with the most recent franchise agreement. The city sanitation department or contract hauler can provide regularly scheduled collection and handling services for all commercial and industrial customers, except for the handling of hazardous constituents. 
(b)  Special waste handling. The generator of any special waste shall be responsible for disposing of the special waste in accordance with all state and federal laws. 
(c)  Prohibited wastes. The sanitation department or designee shall not empty a commercial refuse container that contains any of the following items: 
(1)  Scrap tires and heavy motor vehicle parts such as engines and transmissions; 
(2)  Liquids, including paint, cooking oil and motor vehicle fluids and lubricants; 
(3)  Logs or limbs over four feet in length or four inches in diameter; 
(4)  Rocks, dirt, bricks, concrete, stone, plaster, sheetrock, roofing or other similar materials; 
(5)  Uncontainerized refuse, such as lumber that protrudes from the container or refuse placed on top or in front of the container; 
(6)  Any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids, dangerous or corrosive material of any kind, including lead-acid vehicle batteries; 
(7)  Yard trimmings; 
(8)  Any other material prohibited by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-38. - Reserved. 
Sec. 74-39. - Tire disposal regulations. 
(a)  This section is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by providing for the orderly and safe disposal of scrap tires. The improper handling of scrap tires by any person within the city is hereby deemed to constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to store any scrap tires on residential property or to willfully discard or place tires on private property and public rights-of-way. 
(c)  All persons engaged in scrap tire handling, within the city, shall do so in strict compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and chapter 391-3-4-19, Rules of Solid Waste Management, as applicable to scrap tires. 
(d)  Any nuisance created by improper handling of scrap tires or scrap tire materials shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city may abate as a nuisance any threat or potential threat to public health or the environment created or which could be created by scrap tires or other scrap tire materials by removing or processing the scrap tires or other scrap tire materials. Before taking any action to abate the threat or potential threat, the city shall give any person having possession or control of the scrap tires or materials, or owning the property upon which scrap tires or materials are located, reasonable written notice of the city's intentions and ordering the responsible party to abate the threat or potential threat in a manner approved by the city. For purposes of this section, reasonable notice shall be three business days if personally served, and five business days if served by U.S. mail, in a properly addressed envelope with adequate postage thereon. 
(2)  Whenever the sanitation director has reason to believe that a violation of any provision of this section has occurred, he shall attempt to obtain a remedy with the violator or violators (including any scrap tire generator known to have contributed to the violation) by conference, conciliation, or persuasion. In the case of failure of such conference, conciliation, or persuasion to affect a remedy to such violation, the sanitation director may issue an administrative order directed to such violator or violators. The order shall specify the provisions of this section or rule or regulation alleged to have been violated and shall order that necessary corrective action be taken within a reasonable time to be prescribed in such order. Any order issued under this section shall be signed by the code enforcement officer and served upon the violator(s) by the means most likely to afford notice. Any such order shall become final unless the person or persons named therein requests in writing a hearing before the city manager no later than ten days after such order is served on such person or persons. The decision of the city manager shall be final, subject to review by the superior court on application for writ of certiorari. 
(3)  If the responsible party refuses or is unwilling to comply with such order or if no person who has contributed or is contributing to the scrap tires or scrap tire materials which are to be abated can be found, the sanitation director may undertake the cleanup of the site. 
(4)  The sanitation department or its contractors may enter upon private property at any reasonable time and in such manner as deemed necessary to investigate and effectuate the necessary corrective action to protect human health and the environment. 
(5)  The city shall not be responsible for any loss of business, damages, or taking of property associated with the corrective action. 
(6)  The city may bring an action or proceeding against the property owner or any person having possession or control of the scrap tires or other scrap tire materials to enforce the administrative order issued and to recover any reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the sanitation department, including administrative and legal expenses. The sanitation department's certification of expenses shall be prima facie evidence that the expenses are reasonable and necessary. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any generator of scrap tires who is identified as being a contributor to the materials which are the object of the abatement and who can document that he has fully complied with this part and all rules promulgated pursuant to this part in disposing of such scrap tires shall not be liable for any of the cost of recovery actions of the abatement. 
(e)  This section is enacted pursuant to the general assembly's express provision contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1(i)(6), granting municipalities authority to abate or clean up scrap tires which are a threat or potential threat to human health. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-40. - Brown and white goods. 
(a)  Brown goods. Furniture items such as couches, chairs, dressers, mattresses and box springs. 
(b)  White goods. Appliance items such as washing machines, dryers, stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers and hot water heaters. 
(c)  Pickup schedule. The frequency of brown and white good collection will be based on the current contract with the city's solid waste hauler. 
(d)  The city will not pick up bulk brown and white goods from commercial establishments. 
(e)  Brown and white goods must be separated from other waste. Brown and white goods should be placed away from automobiles, mailboxes, fences, low hanging limbs and wires or other items which might hamper collection. 
(f)  No more than two pieces of brown and white goods shall be placed out for pickup at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-41. - Transporting waste. 
Each collector shall comply with the following requirements of transporting solid waste generated in the city: 
(1)  Solid waste shall be suitably enclosed or covered to prevent littering, spillage of solid waste or fluids, and infiltration of rainwater. Tarpaulins must be used to cover compactor box openings, roll-off tops, or other openings. Tarpaulins must be kept in good repair at all times. 
(2)  Any spillage of solid waste on the roads leading to or on any solid waste handling facility is the sole responsibility of the person transporting such waste and shall be immediately cleaned and removed by the person transporting such waste. Any and all costs incurred by the city related to any such spillage shall be immediately remitted to the city by the person transporting such waste. This provision is in addition to any penalties authorized elsewhere by any other provision of law. 
(3)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Secs. 74-42—74-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS 

Sec. 74-75. - Intent; policy declared. 
The City of Douglas Board of Commissioners hereby finds that in order to meet the states goal of solid waste reduction and in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of all the citizens in the city, it is in the citizens best interest to recycle, reduce and reuse as many waste materials as possible in order to eliminate the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste material within the city and reduce the overall amount of solid waste which must be properly disposed of upon pickup by the city. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-76. - Residential recycling program. 
(a)  Recycling. It shall be the responsibility of all residential solid waste customers of the city to dispose of recyclable materials in an approved recycling container. No item that that has been classified as recyclable material shall be disposed in a customer's solid waste container. 
(b)  Containers. Each resident shall be issued an approved recycling container by the sanitation division. All containers shall remain the property of the city. Recycling containers shall be used exclusively for the storage and transport of recyclable materials only. Any customer that fails to place their assigned recyclable container with recyclables at the curb on their scheduled day of pickup shall be in violation of this article, will be subject to not having their household solid waste removed. 
(c)  Time and placement of containers. Beginning the evening before but no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection customers shall place their recycling container at curbside in front of the customer's residence. Containers shall be placed with the same restrictions as solid waste containers as stated in subsection 74-33(c). All recycling containers shall be removed from the curbside no later than 6:00 a.m. following the scheduled day of service. 
(d)  Assisted services for households with mobility impaired residents. Those households with residents already classified as mobility impaired shall be issued a recycling container and collected in accordance with subsection 74-33(d). 
(e)  Recyclable materials. Those materials which have a known use, reuse or recyclable potential shall be diverted from the waste stream by recycling. Currently those items are: newspapers, metal cans, plastic sacks, bottles and jugs, aluminum cans, corrugated cardboard, office paper, magazines, telephone books and junk mail. The sanitation director may, from time to time, modify the list of recyclable materials and provide notice of any modifications to customers. 
(f)  Collection of recyclable materials. All recyclable materials used in the storage and transportation of food shall be clean and free of any food items. All plastic and metal containers shall be rinsed out and no liquids present. Boxes, sacks and bags shall be free of any food or trash. Paper and newspaper shall be clean and dry with no waste or food present. 
(g)  Unacceptable recycling items. Those materials which are unacceptable due to contamination from food or liquids, hazardous materials, or have no value to be recycled. These items are: fast food containers, pizza boxes, paper or foam plates, plastic forks, spoons and knives, aluminum foil, motor oil bottles, pesticide containers, aerosol cans, Styrofoam of any type, glass, windows or mirrors, clothing, toys, wood, food and liquids. 
(h)  Scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove recyclables materials from the designated recycling container which has been property placed at the curb for collection. 
(i)  Multifamily residential recycling and collection. All residential customers living in multifamily developments shall be required to recycle. Those materials that have been classified as recyclable shall be separated from the regular household garbage. 
(1)  Multifamily residential developments with four or less units. Residential developments of four or less dwelling units (detached, attached, duplex or triplex) located on the same tract or parcel shall be served with each unit being assigned a container for curbside collection. 
(2)  Multifamily residential developments with more than four units. All other multifamily developments (more than four units) shall be deemed as residential customers. The owner of the development shall decide on a common collection method to be used by all tenants. The owner shall have the option of being serviced by a centrally located commercial container, compactor or containers for curbside collection. It shall be the responsibility of each multifamily residential development to provide adequate containers for storage of its own recyclables if using centrally located commercial containers or compactors. Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a new multifamily development, arrangements for the storage and collection of recyclables shall be approved pursuant to city development regulations. Commercial containers at existing multifamily developments serviced by the city sanitation department shall be placed at locations approved by the sanitation director. Any location to be used for centrally located commercial containers or compactors shall have proper infrastructure (i.e. dumpster pad, adequate paving, etc.) to accommodate collection vehicles and personnel. 
(j)  Lost/missing recycling carts/bins. It shall be the responsibility of all customers who establish service with the city for solid waste removal to secure the recycling cart or bin assigned to them during the time that the customer has service with the city. In the event that such cart or bin should be lost and unaccounted for when service is either transferred or discontinued, the customer shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost to replace the cart or recycling bin. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-77. - Commercial recycling, policies and reporting requirements. 
Commercial recycling. It is the intent of the board of commissioners to encourage recycling. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Secs. 74-78—74-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER COLLECTION SERVICES 

Sec. 74-100. - Collection of solid waste from county residents. 
The city does not provide sanitation services outside of the city limits unless approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Secs. 74-101—74-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BILLING AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 74-160. - Billing and collection of fees and charges. 
(a)  There is hereby fixed, established and imposed upon and there shall be collected a solid waste fee in accordance with the schedule of fees from each owner or occupant of: 
(1)  Residential properties with active utilities within the city. Residential properties that have active utility services but have been verified by the city as vacant property and are currently listed for sale are temporarily exempt from this service. 
(2)  Business and/or industrial properties with active utilities within the city unless franchise agreement allows otherwise. 
(b)  The city will make monthly billing for the fees and charges for solid waste and recycling collection in accordance with section 90-43 and collect and receive payments thereof not inconsistent with its manner and mode of collecting utility bills for users of utility services located within the city. 
(c)  The fees and charges imposed by this article may be billed upon the customer's city utility bill. The failure to pay all or any portion of such utility bill shall subject the customer to penalties and interest as set forth on such bill. Any delinquent amounts may be collected by the city in the manner provided for collection of delinquent taxes. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 74-161. - Offenses; penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Authority to inspect and institute proceedings. The city shall have the power to enter at all reasonable times upon any private or public property within the city for the purpose of inspection and investigation of conditions of solid waste handling. Whenever the sanitation director has reason to believe any provision of this ordinance is being violated, he shall attempt to obtain a remedy with the violator or violators by conference, conciliation and agreement. If such efforts should be unsuccessful, it shall be the duty of the sanitation director to institute proceedings against any person found to be in violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  Enforcement of this section. All law enforcement agencies, officers, and officials of this city are authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this part. 
(c)  Vandalism, etc., of garbage containers prohibited. It shall be an offense against the city for any person to set fire to the contents of, scavenge in, indiscriminately scatter the contents of, or otherwise vandalize or cause damage to a container provided by the city for the collection and storage of garbage. 
(d)  Dumping or depositing of solid waste. No person shall willfully place, throw, leave, dump, discard, or deposit solid waste, including scrap tires and lead-acid batteries, on public or private property, except in strict accordance with this chapter. Whenever any litter which has been dropped, thrown, deposited, dumped or left on any public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of the person thereon in such manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, there shall be a prima facie evidence that such person is the one who has violated this section. 
(e)  Unauthorized use. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or otherwise leave solid waste in dumpsters that are leased and paid for private use, except by permission of the owner or lessee. This prohibition includes dumpsters on government property. Only dumpsters marked "For Public Use" shall be used by the public and it shall be unlawful to import household trash to these dumpsters. 
(f)  Removal or scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove items from dumpsters, garbage receptacles or recycling receptacles. 
(g)  Penalty for violations. 
(1)  Violations punishable by fine. A citation shall be issued for offenses listed on the schedule of fees. Any person who receives more than two citations in a 12-month period will be considered a habitual violator and will be issued a citation in accordance with subsection 74-161(g)(2). 
(2)  Violations punishable by municipal court. Any person violating any restriction, prohibition or provision of this ordinance not covered in subsection 74-161(g)(1) shall be cited for an offense and tried before the municipal court. Upon a finding of conviction, the court shall impose a sentence as provided in section 1-12 and/or may impose any/all of the following penalties: 
a.  In the sound discretion of the court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way any litter the person has deposited and any litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park, private right-of-way or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(h)  Rental property. It is the intent of this chapter that the land owner bears responsibility for the payment of all solid waste [charges]. 
(Ord. No. 12202012-1, 12-20-12; Ord. No. 09142017(2), 9-14-17 ) 
Secs. 74-162—74-180. - Reserved. 
Chapter 78 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; traffic, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain streets and roads, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Building numbering. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all owners, lessees and/or occupants of buildings (including businesses and/or homes) within the city limits to make application to the city marshal for building numbers (houses and/or all other structures) for all structures not having a designated number, giving the community development department the name of the street and location of such structure and in conjunction with the U.S. Post Office. It shall be the duty of the city marshal to assign correct numbers to the applicant for such premises, and the numbers shall be at least four inches high and at least one-half inch in width and same shall be placed on the front of such dwelling or business structure by the owners, lessees and/or occupants thereof and at the expense of such owners, lessees and/or occupants. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee and/or occupant of structures located within the corporate limits of the city to fail or refuse to make application, as above described, or fail or refuse to place the numbers designated for such structures, as above provided, on such structures. 
(Code 1978, § 21-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Laying or repairing sidewalks—Adjacent to business places. 
(a)  All owners or lessees of real property upon which business houses are located shall, when required by the board of commissioners, cause to be laid in front of such property, under the direction and inspection of the city manager and the superintendent of the street department, well-made pavements, of such width and grade, and of such material as directed by the city manager. 
(b)  All such owners or lessees shall keep the pavements in front of such property owned or leased by them in good order. 
(c)  Whenever such owner or lessee shall be thus required to lay, or cause to be laid, repair, or cause to be repaired, any pavement in front of such property, and shall fail or refuse to commence or complete the work within a reasonable time, the city manager shall have the work done forthwith; and the city marshal shall issue execution against such owners or lessees in the amount expended thereon. 
(Code 1978, § 21-2) 
Sec. 78-3. - Same—Adjacent to street front lots. 
(a)  The owners or lessees of lots fronting on streets in the city shall, upon notice from the city manager, put down in front of their property, and upon grade given them by the city manager, and in accordance with their directions, and in such manner as to secure their approval, good and substantial curbing and sidewalks, of such character and material as the board of commissioners may by resolution prescribe. 
(b)  If any property owner or lessee shall be notified to put down a sidewalk or curbing as hereinbefore prescribed, and shall fail to do so for the space of 30 days, the city shall have such curbing or sidewalks put down at the expense of such owner or lessee. In all such cases the city manager shall have a bill for the cost of such work and material presented to the property owner or lessee; and if same is not paid within ten days, the bill shall be delivered to the city clerk-treasurer, who shall issue execution for the cost and expense thereof against such owner or lessee, to be collected as other executions issued by the city clerk-treasurer. 
(c)  The owners or lessees of lots fronting on streets in the city shall keep the same in good repair, whether put down by themselves or by the city. 
(d)  If they should fail to do so after ten days' notice, the city manager shall have such repairs done at the expense of the lot owner or the lessee, and collect for such repairs as is herein provided in cases where lot owners refuse or fail to put down curbing and sidewalks after notice; provided, should the sidewalk be in a condition dangerous to passersby, the ten days' notice shall not be necessary, but the city manager may have such repairs done at once and collect therefor in the same manner as though the ten days' notice had been given. 
(Code 1978, § 21-3) 
Sec. 78-4. - Barbed wire fences. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of real estate in the city to build or maintain any barbed wire fence adjacent to or along any sidewalk, or so near thereto as to endanger any person passing along or using such sidewalk. 
(Code 1978, § 21-4) 
State Law reference— Enclosure of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11. 
Sec. 78-5. - Encroachments; use of streets for personal gain. 
(a)  No person, except by permission of the city manager with the advice of the board of commissioners, shall make any encroachment, over or under any street, sidewalk or alley; whether a building, fence, railing, platform, steps, portico, shed, awning or other encroachment. 
(b)  No person shall utilize the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city for any operation for personal or private gain. 
(c)  Whenever permission required in subsection (a) is granted, it shall give no right to the land occupied or used, and the permission may be revoked at any time. In addition to the punishment prescribed in section 1-12, any person violating this section shall, upon notice, remove such encroachment; and upon failure to do so, the city manager with the advice of the board of commissioners may cause the same to be removed at the expense of the person so offending, and execution shall issue for the amount so expended. 
(Code 1978, § 21-5) 
State Law reference— Obstructing, encroaching on, or injuring public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1. 
Sec. 78-6. - Gates, etc., opening onto streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have for use any gate, door or shutter which opens on any street, sidewalk or alley of the city; and it shall be unlawful for any person to hang or place any gate, door or shutter which opens upon any street, sidewalk or alley of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 21-6) 
Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 78-7. - Building materials or debris; protection of travelers. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent workers employed in any building or doing other necessary work from depositing lumber, brick, mortar and other building materials and remains of old buildings on the streets, alleys and sidewalks contiguous thereto; but the workers shall obstruct the same as little as possible and remove the materials as soon as it can be done consistent with the prosecution of the work in which they are engaged; and shall remove such obstruction whenever required to do so by the city manager. 
(b)  No person shall leave rubbish, lumber, brick, barrels, mortar, or other building materials of any kind whatever on the open streets or sidewalks at night in quantities large enough to prevent persons or vehicles from passing with safety on that part of the street or sidewalk; nor shall any person leave any such materials make and leave open any excavation on such streets and sidewalks, without placing a sufficient number of caution lights to warn travelers during the hours between sunset and sunrise. 
(Code 1978, § 21-9) 
Sec. 78-8. - Display of fish, meat, goods, wares or merchandise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer to display on the sidewalks in this city any fish or fresh meats, wares and merchandise unless permitted by the city manager. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place as a display or otherwise for any purpose any goods, wares, merchandise or other thing upon any street, alley or sidewalk of the city except as follows: 
(1)  Before any person displays or places for any purpose any goods, wares, merchandise or other thing upon any street or alley, he shall first obtain a written permit from the city for so doing, which permit shall contain instructions as to the exact obstruction of any street or alley allowed thereunder. 
(2)  No permit shall be granted to any person allowing the display of any goods, wares, merchandise or anything upon any sidewalk. 
(3)  No permit shall be granted by the city to any person allowing any goods, wares, or merchandise to be placed upon or displayed on any street or alley in the city if, in the discretion of the city manager, same will constitute an obstruction of the street or alley; and in no event shall the permit be for or allow the placing or displaying of goods, wares or merchandise upon any street or alley in the city where the display or the thing to be placed upon the street or alley will project or extend more than three feet from the curbline toward the center of any such street or alley. 
(4)  The obstructions contemplated by this section of any street or alley shall in no case be a hindrance or prevention in any way or manner of the utmost freedom of the use thereof by pedestrians or by vehicles, and shall in no way interfere with the freedom in alighting from any vehicle onto any sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1978, § 21-12) 
State Law reference— Grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10. 
Sec. 78-9. - Fires. 
No person shall kindle or build a fire upon any sidewalk, or in any street or public square of this city, without permission of the city manager, and then only as authorized by law. 
(Code 1978, § 21-13) 
Sec. 78-10. - Poles and wires—Location. 
No person shall have the right or authority to place poles or wires in the streets, on sidewalks or elsewhere within the fire district of the city. Should it be necessary to make temporary repairs on any poles or wires now standing in that section of the city hereinabove referred to, such temporary repairs may be made pending the change, as follows: The placing of such wires now operated by any person stretched on poles along the streets or sidewalks of the city in the section hereinabove described; it being the purpose and intent of the board of commissioners to require all persons owning or operating wires and poles along the streets and sidewalks along the section to be placed under the surface of the ground or along back alleys. 
(Code 1978, § 21-14) 
Sec. 78-11. - Same—Enforcement; establishment of wiring scheme. 
(a)  The superintendent of the electric department shall be inspector of all wires on the streets and alleys of the city and shall direct any person to repair or remove, lower or elevate, any wires that he may consider unsightly, or dangerous to life or property. 
(b)  The superintendent of the electric department shall have the authority to establish the makeup and wiring scheme for the utility poles within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 21-15) 
Sec. 78-12. - Removal of dirt. 
No person shall dig or haul any dirt from any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds of the city without the permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 21-19) 
Sec. 78-13. - Excavations—Permission required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, any hole or excavation in any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public grounds of the city without the permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 21-20) 
Sec. 78-14. - Same—Location; time; warning devices; segregating materials. 
(a)  Any person desiring to excavate any street, alley or other public grounds, or any parts thereof, in the city, for the purpose of laying sewer or gas pipe, or for any other purpose, shall first obtain written permission from the city manager which shall specify what streets, alleys or other public grounds, or parts thereof are to be excavated and the length of time such excavation will be in progress. 
(b)  During the time such excavation is in progress, it shall be the duty of such person to keep at night lighted red lanterns on each end of excavations and on any pile of material or dirt. 
(c)  In excavating, the topsoil and rocks, if any, shall be carefully kept apart from the clay, or lower earth, and shall be kept or placed in as good condition as before, or to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 21-21) 
Sec. 78-15. - Same—Repair of surface. 
Any person desiring to excavate any street, alley or other public property that is permanently improved, shall, in addition to the requirements of section 78-14, deposit with the city clerk-treasurer such sum of money as the city manager shall deem sufficient to cover the cost of replacing such permanent improvement; and in case such street is, in the opinion of the city manager, not properly repaired, the city manager shall use such portion of the deposit as may be required to replace the street in its ordinary condition, and the surplus, if any, shall be turned over to the owner. 
(Code 1978, § 21-22) 
Secs. 78-16—78-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76. 

Sec. 78-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march or procession consisting of people, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, except funeral processions; and hereinafter shall include any assemblage of persons, upon any public street, sidewalk or other public property or way which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls. 
(Code 1978, § 21-31(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-42. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to organize, participate in or conduct any parade, other than a funeral procession, or to cause a congregation of people on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property or ways of the city unless an application for a permit for a parade has been previously filed and a permit therefor has been granted for such person or organization. However, under no circumstances shall more than one permit be issued to the same person or organization in any 12-month period. 
(Code 1978, § 21-31(b)) 
Sec. 78-43. - Same—Application. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer. Such application shall be in writing, shall be filed at least seven days prior to the proposed parade date and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons and organizations sponsoring, organizing or conducting the parade. 
(2)  The purpose of the parade. 
(3)  The date and time of the parade. 
(4)  The proposed route of the parade; including its beginning and terminating points, or the proposed fixed locations. 
(5)  The number and type of vehicles, animals, marching units, bands and floats to be utilized in the parade including a description of any sound amplification equipment to be used. 
(6)  The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade. 
(7)  The maximum length of the parade. 
(8)  A statement from the person or organization making the application that such person or organization anticipates no unusual problems concerning either police protection or traffic congestion to be experienced as a consequence of the parade; or if such statement cannot be made, the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1978, § 21-32) 
Sec. 78-44. - Investigation of and report on applicant. 
The city clerk-treasurer shall forward the application under this article to the chief of police who shall investigate the application and make a report to the city manager. The report shall indicate whether the requirements of section 78-43 have been met and shall state the official position of the police department regarding the certification specified in section 78-43. If it is the opinion of the chief of police that the parade will require additional personnel above and beyond that number of police normally scheduled to be on duty on the date of the proposed parade, such information shall also be included in the report. 
(Code 1978, § 21-33) 
Sec. 78-45. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
The city manager shall review the report of the chief of police and if all of the requirements specified in this section have been satisfied by the applicant, the city manager shall issue a parade permit, unless such manager finds that: 
(1)  The parade will be of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto that allowing the parade would deny reasonable police protection to the city. 
(2)  The parade will interfere with another parade for which a permit has been issued. 
(3)  The information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
(4)  The purpose of the parade is illegal or in any way prohibited by law. 
(5)  The applicant refuses to agree to abide by and comply with the conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1978, § 21-34) 
Sec. 78-46. - Notice of denial; appeal. 
(a)  A decision to deny a parade permit shall be in writing with all reasons for such denial enumerated and explained therein and shall be issued to the applicant, at the supplied address, with all due promptness. 
(b)  Upon the denial of a parade permit, the applicant may appeal such decision to the board of commissioners within five days of the date of such decision. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall consider the appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting which is at least three days from the date of appeal. Upon such an appeal, the board of commissioners may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the decision to deny the permit. 
(Code 1978, § 21-35) 
Sec. 78-47. - Permit revocation. 
Any permit for a parade issued pursuant to this article may be summarily revoked on the day of the parade by the chief of police when by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the chief of police determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. If a permit is so revoked, the permittee shall be allowed to reapply for a new parade permit. 
(Code 1978, § 21-36) 
Sec. 78-48. - Bond required, when. 
If it is the official position of the chief of police that additional personnel shall be required for traffic and pedestrian control at a parade, the city manager shall require the applicant to post a bond in an amount deemed by the city manager sufficient and conditioned on the payment by the applicant of the additional costs incurred by the city for such personnel, in a sum not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1978, § 21-37) 
Sec. 78-49. - Indigent bond. 
If the applicant for a parade permit alleges indigent status and is unable, for financing reasons, to post the bond required in section 78-48 the applicant may have such bond reduced, reversed or waived by the board of commissioners, by filing with the city clerk-treasurer an appeal of the city manager's determination. An appeal of the determination of the city manager shall be filed not less than four working days prior to the next succeeding regular board meeting and must be made within 30 days from date of the decision of the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 21-38) 
Sec. 78-50. - Parade regulations. 
(a)  For the purpose of controlling traffic and pedestrian congestion and of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare, the following regulations shall pertain to all parades conducted within the city: 
(1)  The standard route for parades in the city shall be as established by the city commission. A description of such route by street name shall be on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer where it is available for reference during normal business hours. Such route may be altered by the city manager as necessary according to the circumstances. 
(2)  There will be no certain days that parades can be conducted. 
(3)  All parade participants shall assemble for the parade at one location to be designated by the city manager. 
(4)  No parade participant shall carry arms or other weapons, nor bricks, bats, sticks, rocks, bottles or other items which may be used as weapons with the exception of military parades. 
(5)  The materials used in the construction of floats in the parade shall be subject to such requirements concerning fire safety as may be determined by the fire chief. 
(6)  Once commenced, the parade shall not stop along the parade route, but shall continue to move at a fixed rate of speed, and any willful delay or willful stopping of the parade, except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, shall constitute a violation of the permit. 
(7)  The parade shall strictly follow the route designated in the permit application as submitted to the city. 
(8)  Literature, publications, leaflets or other written materials, or candy, shall not be distributed along the parade route. 
(9)  Speeches shall be allowed only at the conclusion of the parade and at a location designated by the city manager. 
(10)  In no event shall speeches, rallies, etc., be conducted in the public streets, or along the sidewalks of the city. 
(11)  The permittee shall advise all participants in the parade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit, prior to the commencement of the parade, and shall sign an acknowledgement that the permittee has read, understands and will comply with the regulations specified in this article and the conditions of the permit and has advised all participants as so required in this subsection (a)(11). 
(b)  Any other reasonable regulation or restriction deemed necessary by the city manager for the protection and safety of the parade participants, viewing public or for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, may be imposed by the city manager. However, such additional regulations or restrictions shall be specified in writing to the applicant with all reasons therefor clearly enumerated. 
(Code 1978, § 21-39) 
Sec. 78-51. - Vendor regulations. 
No parade vendor shall, after the commencement of any parade, march or procession, cross the line of march at any point or at any time during the conduct of such parade, march or procession. 
(Code 1978, § 15-35) 
Secs. 78-52—78-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY ACCOMODATION POLICY 

Sec. 78-81. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The City of Douglas (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(10), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(1.1, 1.2), 9-28-09) 
Sec. 78-82. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Douglas, Georgia; 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Douglas, Georgia; 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way; 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way; 
Director means the community development director of the City of Douglas, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
Emergency means a sudden or unforeseen occurrence involving a clear and immediate danger to life, health, property or interruption of utility services that require immediate attention; 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city; 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to facilities related emergencies or situations; 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances; 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities; 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city; 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities; 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, storm water, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(1.3), 9-28-09) 
Sec. 78-83. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right of way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(2.1—2.5), 9-28-09) 
Sec. 78-84. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the community development department in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the community development department. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(3.1—3.8), 9-28-09) 
Sec. 78-85. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The current edition of the utility accommodation policy and standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Douglas municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)  As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no Utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(4.1—4.5), 9-28-09) 
Sec. 78-86. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(5.1, 5.2), 9-28-09) 
Sec. 78-87. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(6.1—6.3), 9-28-09) 
Sec. 78-88. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
Additional permits required. The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(7.1), 9-28-09) 
Sec. 78-89. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 092809-01, § 1(8.1), 9-28-09) 
Secs. 78-90—78-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALK CAFES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07282014 , adopted July 28, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 78-90—78-103. For purposes of classification, to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 78-100—78-113. 

Sec. 78-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for regulation of sidewalk cafes operated by qualified restaurants on public sidewalks, and to more fully promote the public interest by contributing to a viable and attractive commercial and pedestrian environment. In recognition thereof, reasonable regulation of sidewalk cafes is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and the interest of the city and the primary use of the public streets and sidewalks by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the words below shall have the following meaning: 
City manager shall mean the city manager of the City of Douglas and those to whom he delegates or assigns duties under this section, including but not limited to the Douglas Downtown Development Authority. 
Operator or permittee shall mean the person operating the restaurant with its associated sidewalk cafe, and shall include, but not be limited to, an owner, lessor, renter or manager. 
Person shall mean both natural persons, and legal persons such as corporations, partnerships or LLC's. 
Sidewalk cafe shall mean the location and possible use of dividers, tables and/or chairs on the public sidewalk or city-owned property as permitted in this chapter and operated as an extension of a licensed food or beverage establishment in town center district and which sidewalk cafe shall be an incidental activity of the establishment. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-102. - Qualifications. 
The use of sidewalks for restaurant tables shall only be permitted incidental to the operation of a "restaurant" as defined in the City of Douglas Code of Ordinances section 6-1. A permit is required, however, the use of the sidewalk to operate a sidewalk cafe is a privilege, not a right, and any person who violates the conditions of this article may be forbidden to operate a sidewalk cafe after notice and a hearing. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-103. - Permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sidewalk cafe without a permit issued by the City of Douglas, or to fail to comply with all sections of the sidewalk cafe ordinance. Such permit shall be renewed annually at a time to be designated by the manager. 
The issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any leaseholder rights to any person or business. The provisions of this chapter are subject to change and amendment by the mayor and commission from time-to-time. 
Sidewalk cafe permits are non-transferable. Permits will expire upon transfer of ownership, change in use of facility, and December 31 of each year. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-104. - Application. 
Any person desiring to operate a sidewalk cafe shall submit an application, on a form prescribed by the city manager, to the community development department. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of restaurant; 
(3)  A copy of a valid City of Douglas occupational license to operate a business in front of which the sidewalk cafe will be located; 
(4)  A copy of a current certificate of insurance in the amounts and categories required by subsection 78-109(b) of this chapter; 
(5)  A sketch identifying the perimeter area, the dimensions of area, the dimensions from perimeter to curb or nearest obstacle, and the design and materials of the required cafe railing system. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-105. - Issuance of permit. 
Applicant shall be notified within two weeks of application submission of approval/denial of permit. If permit is denied, applicant shall be provided an explanation of the denial. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-106. - Permit fee. 
The annual permit fee to operate a sidewalk cafe shall be $100.00 plus $1.00 per square foot for the approved/permitted area. 
Prior to issuance or renewal of a sidewalk cafe permit, the government's finance department shall verify that there are no outstanding occupational tax or alcohol license fees owed to the government by the person or entity requesting a sidewalk cafe permit. A sidewalk cafe permit will not be issued until all outstanding debts to the City of Douglas are paid in full. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-107. - Temporary closing of sidewalk cafes. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafes may be ordered closed temporarily by the City of Douglas whenever deemed necessary in the sole discretion of the City of Douglas, whenever the area may be needed for a public purpose, including but not limited to, construction, maintenance, public health, safety or welfare, emergencies, and public events such as parades or street parties. 
(b)  The city may order the immediate removal or relocation of all, or parts of, a sidewalk cafe in emergency situations or for safety considerations, without notice. The city and its officers and employees shall not be responsible for sidewalk cafe fixtures relocated during emergencies. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-108. - Restrictions on use of sidewalks. 
(a)  In no event shall the uses permitted by this ordinance reduce that portion of any sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five feet in width. Additionally, contiguous pedestrian flow must be maintained between two or more adjacent sidewalk cafes. The city may designate portions of the sidewalk which must not be obstructed under any circumstance, and may restrict usage in any manner deemed necessary by the city. 
(b)  Nothing will be placed within five feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk or handicapped corner curb cut. 
(c)  The city reserves the right of access to all portions of the sidewalk included in areas permitted for the purposes of sidewalk repair or other necessary purposes. 
(d)  Sidewalk cafe operators shall maintain the sidewalk and the curb and gutter immediately adjacent to it in a clean and safe condition. Full daily cleaning is required. Refuse shall not be disposed of in the city's sidewalk trash receptacles. The area shall be kept clear of all debris. The operator shall also be responsible for cleaning the ground or floor surface on which the sidewalk cafe is located and the gutter area immediately adjacent to the sidewalk cafe. Such cleaning shall include pressure cleaning. If the area is not maintained in a neat and orderly appearance after notice the city may then take steps necessary to place the property in a neat and clean order and charge the operator with the reasonable cost of cleaning or repairs. Such action by the city does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city for any damages to the property if such cleaning or repairs were completed in good faith. 
(e)  No tables, chairs, or any other parts of sidewalk cafes shall be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign or other fixture, curb, or sidewalk in or near the permitted area. 
(f)  Only the area in front of a restaurant, as defined by projecting its interior width outward perpendicular to the street to a point at which it intersects the roadway (or within the sidewalk frontage of the building where the validly licensed restaurant is located provided that written approval is supplied by the building owner), can be used by the restaurant. Placement of tables and chairs will be permitted in areas more than ten feet from the front of the building only when city manager determines it is in the best interest of the public to permit such placement. All tables and chairs must be of a design, material, and specification suitable for outside dining. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-109 - Insurance prerequisite. 
(a)  The operator of a sidewalk cafe agrees to, and does by its operation of a sidewalk cafe, indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any and all claims, liability, lawsuits, damages and causes of action which may arise out of operator's activity on the demised premises. The operator shall provide indemnification to the city in writing on a form provided by the city manager. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a sidewalk cafe, unless the applicant shall furnish in a form acceptable to the city manager evidence of commercial general liability insurance, and alcohol license liability insurance if serving alcohol, naming the city as a co-insured party and insuring the city against any liability resulting from the uses permitted pursuant to this section. The coverage shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(c)  It shall not be lawful to operate a sidewalk cafe at any time the insurance required by this section is not maintained and evidence of its continuance filed with the city. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-110. - Revocation. 
The privilege of an operator to use the sidewalk of the City of Douglas may be revoked at any time by written notice to be served on the operator; such service to be by certified mail or personal service. Upon receipt of such revocation notice, the permittee shall have ten days to appeal such revocation to the mayor and board of commission whose decision after notice and hearing as required by the governing board of zoning appeals section of this Code shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-111. - Sale of alcoholic beverages at sidewalk cafes. 
Only a properly permitted restaurant with a sidewalk cafe, which holds a valid alcohol license for consumption on the premises, may serve alcohol to customers in the sidewalk cafe, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Alcohol may only be possessed in the sidewalk cafe portion of the restaurant between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Alcohol may not be served in its original container, but must be served in a glass or in clear plastic cups. No bottles or cans are allowed. 
(3)  Only a single serving of alcohol may be in possession of any patron. 
(4)  Patrons must be seated while consuming an alcoholic beverage. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages may be consumed on porches, patios or areas where food is regularly served at the restaurant within the town center district or where sidewalk cafes are permitted. 
(6)  Patrons may not remove any alcohol from the premises of the restaurant where the alcoholic beverage was purchased, except as provided in O.C.G.A. 3-6-4. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-112. - Right to limit or deny admission or service. 
Within the designated area of a cafe, the operator holding a permit under this article shall have the right to limit access and occupancy to only bona fide paying customers of that operator's restaurant who are behaving in a lawful manner. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Sec. 78-113. - Penalties. 
In addition to losing the privilege of operating a sidewalk cafe, any person, firm, corporation or agent, servant, employee, officer or contractor for any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision, requirement, term, or condition of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. The performance of any act prohibited by any section or provision of this article, or the failure to perform any act required thereby, shall constitute a violation and an offense hereunder and any person found guilty of a violation of any section or provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 07282014, 7-28-14 ) 
Secs. 78-114—78-150. - Reserved. 
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 8; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-2; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Ad valorem tax. 
The board of commissioners shall annually levy an ad valorem tax upon properties within the city which are subject to taxation according to the charter of the city and the constitution and laws of this state, at such rate and for such purposes as are authorized by the charter and the laws of the state. 
Sec. 82-2. - Contract with county tax commissioner to assess and collect municipal taxes and prepare tax digest. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1 the city has contracted with the county tax commissioner to prepare the city's tax digest, to assess and collect municipal taxes and to invoke any remedy permitted for collection of municipal taxes. 
Secs. 82-3—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTEL EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 82-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the 20th day after the end of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Monthly period means a calendar month. 
Motel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any motel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, hotel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, bed and breakfast inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a motel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishing or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant or guest means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a motel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such motel. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Secretary means the secretary of the city commission. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-31) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-32. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed, and there shall be paid a tax of five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a motel or hotel room in the city, provided that levy and collection of that tax amounting to five percent of the rent which is required to be expended for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows, or for other purposes provided in O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-51(a)(3), shall be suspended during periods of time during which the city has no contract for the expenditure of such funds with the state, a department of the state government, a state authority, or a private sector nonprofit organization, or a contract or contracts with some combination of such entities. Written notice of the dates of the beginning and end of such periods of suspension shall be given to each operator of a motel in the city on or before the date immediately preceding the date each period begins and ends by the secretary of the city commission or such other person as may be designated by him to give such notice. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient when delivered to any person authorized to collect rent for the operator of the motel to whom notice is required to be given. 
(b)  Such tax shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after April 1, 1989, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease, or other arrangement made prior to such date. Where rent is paid, or charged or billed, or falls due on either a weekly, monthly or other terms basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any portion of the month of April 1989, and any portion of any monthly period thereafter. 
(c)  No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-32; Ord. No. 07-11.1-94, 7-11-94) 
Sec. 82-33. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a motel located within the city to collect from the occupants the tax levied and imposed upon the occupancy of guest rooms by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-33) 
Sec. 82-34. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no tax shall be levied as provided in this article upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for use by state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-34) 
Sec. 82-35. - Registration of operator. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a motel in this city shall immediately register with the secretary of the city commission on a form provided by the secretary. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 15 days after the date this article becomes effective, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the secretary may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; and by an executive officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
(b)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(c)  Should the clerk-treasurer deem it necessary, in order to facilitate registration, he may prescribe administrative provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Such provisions shall be made to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-35) 
Sec. 82-36. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as hereinbefore provided, the secretary of the city commission shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax from the occupants, stating the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and shall be returned immediately to the secretary upon the cessation of business by the registered operator at the location named, or upon sale or transfer of such business at such location. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-36) 
Sec. 82-37. - Due date of taxes. 
All taxes levied and imposed by this article shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period in which such taxes are collected. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-37) 
Sec. 82-38. - Returns and time of filing; remittance of tax. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the secretary of the city commission, in such form as the secretary may prescribe, by every operator liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(b)  All returns shall show the gross rent, exempt rent, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the monthly period for which filed, and such other information as may be required by the secretary, and shall be accompanied when filed by remittance of the net amount of tax due. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-38) 
Sec. 82-39. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the secretary of the city commission is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information in his possession or which may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month from and after the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount shall have been returned until the date of payment of such tax and interest. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination the secretary may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on such unpaid tax. 
(d)  Notice of determination. The secretary, or his designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the secretary. 
(e)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-39) 
Sec. 82-40. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the secretary of the city commission shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be used upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the secretary. Upon the basis of this estimate the secretary shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made of the amount due for one or for more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination the secretary may offset overpayments for a period, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period, against penalties, and against interest on unpaid tax found to be due. The interest on such unpaid tax shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month from and after the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax, penalties, and interest. 
(d)  Notice of determination. Promptly after making his determination, the secretary shall give to the operator written notice of his determination, which notice may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-40) 
Sec. 82-41. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  When it is determined by a return filed, or by the secretary having made a determination under the provisions of section 82-39 or 82-40, that tax is due and payable to the city under the provisions of this article, the city manager may at any time within three years after determination that such tax is due and payable bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount of tax payable to the city together with interest thereon and penalties, court costs, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. The bringing of such an action shall not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a fi. fa. under the provisions of subsection (d) hereof. 
(b)  If any operator liable for any amount of tax under this article sells or transfers his business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price of the business to cover such amount of tax, interest thereon, and penalties, and pay such sum over to the city unless the operator liable for such tax delivers to such purchaser or transferee, as the case may be, at the time of such sale or transfer, a certificate from the secretary showing that all tax returns required of such operator have been filed and all taxes shown as being payable on those returns have been paid in full. 
(c)  If the purchaser or transferee of a business fails to withhold the required amount of the purchase price, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells or transfers his business, or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(d)  The secretary is hereby authorized to issue a fi. fa. for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of any tax, penalty or interest due but not paid under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-41) 
Sec. 82-42. - Administration. 
(a)  The clerk-treasurer, under supervision of the city manager, shall administer and enforce the provision of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  The clerk-treasurer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Every operator shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the secretary of the city commission may require. 
(d)  The clerk-treasurer, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(e)  In administration of the provisions of this article, the clerk-treasurer may require the filing of the reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk-treasurer when required by the secretary and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the secretary may require. 
(f)  The clerk-treasurer or any person having an administrative duty under this chapter shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty; or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return; or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this article, except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax, interest, and penalties required to be collected. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-42) 
Sec. 82-43. - Agents for receiving notices. 
When registering pursuant to section 82-35, each operator shall appoint, in writing, an agent to receive for the operator any notice required to be given to the operator under the provisions of this article, stating the full name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of such agent. Such agent shall be either an individual resident of the city or an employee of the operator who regularly works at the operator's place of business on a daily basis, and the appointment of the agent must be accompanied by the written consent of such agent to serve as agent for the operator. Such agent may be changed from time to time by written appointment of, and consent of a successor agent. The operator is required to have such an agent at all times and should an agent cease to be a resident of the city or an employee regularly working at the operator's place of business in the city, as the case may be, the operator shall immediately file a written appointment of a new agent and such agent's consent to serve as such with the secretary. Any agent so appointed by an operator shall be authorized to receive for and on behalf of the operator any notice required to be given to the operator by the provisions of this article. Delivery of such notice to such agent, in person or by mail, shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this article and such notice shall be binding on the operator. This method of giving notice to operators is supplementary and cumulative of the other methods of giving notice set forth in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-43) 
Sec. 82-44. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  Any operator or other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the secretary, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Code 1978, § 21¼-44) 
Sec. 82-45. - Additional penalties. 
(a)  Notice to show cause. In addition to the penalties specified in section 82-44, should any person owning or operating a hotel or motel in the city fail to remit any of the tax imposed in this article then the city manager shall give such owner/operator a notice to appear before the city commission to show cause why the business license and/or alcoholic beverage license of the hotel/motel should not be revoked. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. A notice of such public hearing shall be delivered by registered mail to the business license holder, and owner/operator or secretary responsible for remitting the hotel/motel tax to the city by a member of the police department of the city or other law enforcement agency or delivered to an authorized agent of the hotel/motel, or by posting such notice on the front door of the licensed place of business, a minimum of ten days prior to the conduct of the public hearing established by the city commission. 
(c)  Notice content. A notice referred to above shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  Name and address of license holder; 
(2)  A statement of the amount of hotel/motel tax due; and 
(3)  The date, time, and place at which the hearing will be held. 
(d)  Automatic revocation. Upon conclusion of the public hearing if it is proven by a preponderance of the evidence that the hotel/motel tax is delinquent such business license shall stand automatically revoked; provided, however, the hotel/motel shall have a period of 90 days in which to pay such delinquent sums together with accumulated taxes. Such hotel/motel shall be allowed to operate during this 90-day period. If after 90 days such tax is not paid then the hotel/motel shall cease and desist business operations. 
(Ord. No. 04-13.1-92, 4-13-92) 
Secs. 82-46—82-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 82-66. - Levied. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations at the rate of one-quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1978, § 15-34(a)) 
Sec. 82-67. - Due date; filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the financial information provided in the return. The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1978, § 15-34) 
Secs. 82-68—82-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROSS DIRECT PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal corporation tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county and municipal corporation tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 82-91. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). 
(Code 1978, § 15-40) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-92. - Life insurer's license fees. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each life insurer doing business with the city in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 82-93, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1978, § 15-41) 
Sec. 82-93. - License fee for life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which, in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance there shall be an additional fee per location for each year. 
(Code 1978, § 15-42) 
Sec. 82-94. - Life insurance agency license fees; independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted, and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 82-92, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 15-43) 
Sec. 82-95. - Gross premiums tax. 
(a)  Life insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums," as used in this subsection, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fee imposed by section 82-92. 
(b)  All other insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums," as used in this subsection, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1978, § 15-44) 
Sec. 82-96. - Due date. 
License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1978, § 15-45) 
Sec. 82-97. - False information. 
It is hereby declared to be a violation of this article for any person or agent thereof knowingly to give false or incomplete information on any report herein required to be filed. 
(Code 1978, § 15-46) 
Sec. 82-98. - Enforcement. 
Any person who shall conduct business covered by the terms of this article within the municipal corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license therefor as required by this article, or who shall violate any other provisions of this article, may be refused a license or have his license revoked and the person responsible may be punished in the manner provided for violations of other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 15-47) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Aviation, ch. 14; courts, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, 40-6-1 through 40-6-395 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 22-1) 
Sec. 86-2. - Authority to adopt regulations, permanent and temporary. 
The city manager is empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the sections of this chapter and to make temporary regulations which are not inconsistent with the sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 22-2) 
Sec. 86-3. - Authority to determine crosswalks, stop intersections, traffic lanes, turning restrictions. 
(a)  Subject to state law, the city manager is authorized to establish and to designate, and shall thereafter maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the street, crosswalks approximately equal in width to the adjacent sidewalks at all intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with the sections of this chapter. 
(c)  The city manager is empowered to determine those intersections at which operators of vehicles shall not make a left turn, a right turn, or a U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. 
(d)  The city manager is authorized to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained on each street intersection at through streets and at all other intersections as may be required from a traffic study, and at or near the property line of the through street, appropriate signs upon the streets (in addition thereto may place and maintain any appropriate devices or marks in the roadway), such signs, devices or marks to bear the word "Stop," and to be located in such a position and to be provided with letters of such size as to be clearly legible from a distance of at least 100 feet along the street intersecting the through street. 
(e)  The city manager shall have the authority to determine the location of passenger zones and loading zones as described in this chapter and shall erect and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same. 
(Code 1978, § 22-3) 
Sec. 86-4. - Authority to close streets temporarily; designation by signs or barriers; compliance required. 
The city manager is empowered to close any street or part thereof from traffic by vehicles or pedestrians, either or both, when in the opinion of the city manager it is deemed necessary or advisable while street construction, improvements or repairs are being made; or when traffic thereon would subject persons or property to extra hazard or danger from any cause; or to affect quarantine regulations; or to prevent noises in case of sickness. Such closed streets or portions of streets shall be designated by suitable signs or barriers to show that they are closed. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any street or portion of street so closed. 
(Code 1978, § 22-4) 
Sec. 86-5. - Marking of official vehicles. 
Any motor vehicle which is used on official business by any person authorized to make arrests for traffic violations in this city shall be distinctly marked on each side and the back with the name of the agency responsible therefore, in letters not less than four inches in height. 
(Code 1978, § 22-6; Ord. of 4-25-06) 
Sec. 86-6. - Coasters, bicycles, roller skates, etc.; use of street and sidewalks restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person upon skateboard, roller-skates, coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device to be in the area defined by Columbia Avenue/Tanner Street on the west, Pearl Avenue on the east, Jackson Street on the north and CSX Railroad on the south. 
(Code 1978, § 22-8; Ord. No. 12082003.01, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 86-7—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING 

Sec. 86-31. - Prohibited during certain hours in designated places. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle shall not leave such vehicle parked continuously between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon any of the paved streets of the city, nor parked continuously in the same place on any city street for longer than 48 hours. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to prohibit parking on any portion of a paved street when it is deemed necessary or advisable and shall designate the same by painting the curb yellow. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park and leave standing any motor vehicle for any time whatsoever longer than shall be necessary to load or unload the contents thereof upon any space within the city known, designated or used as an alley. 
(Code 1978, § 22-20) 
Sec. 86-32. - Loading or unloading, location restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the actual loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the actual loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone. 
(Code 1978, § 22-21) 
Secs. 86-33—86-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 98. 

Sec. 86-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial/industrial vehicles means those vehicles weighing in excess of 10,000 pounds, loaded or unloaded and/or utilizing six wheels or more, engaged in the pickup, delivery or transfer of commercial and/or industrial merchandise, products, parts, materials, goods or services. 
Industrial vehicle means any vehicle, motor-powered or non-motor-powered, utilized for the purpose of constructing, excavating, leveling, compacting, hauling, or other similar type uses, either wheeled or tracked, self-propelled or on a trailer. The combined weight of both vehicle and trailer exceeds 10,000 pounds and/or utilize six wheels or more. 
Manufactured homes, trailers, modular homes means those housing units utilized for living, business, sales or other similar uses and are non-motorized and must be towed, trailed or moved by a motorized vehicle of any type in excess of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) and/or utilizing six wheels or more. 
Operator means any person operating a commercial and/or industrial vehicle upon the public streets of the city. 
Semi-trailers means those non-motorized units utilized for the purpose of transporting, hauling, delivering, etc., any merchandise, equipment, products, parts, materials, goods or services or other similar uses and must be towed, trailed or moved by a motorized vehicle of any type in excess of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and/or utilizing six wheels or more. 
(Code 1978, § 22-31; Ord No. 10-12.1-92, § 101, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 08242015(A) , 8-24-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-57. - City streets restricted for use. 
All streets, roads, avenues, courts, drives, circles, lanes, etc., within the city are hereby prohibited for use of vehicles, trailers, etc., unless so designated by the state or the city as "truck route," "truck bypass" or some similar designation indicating availability of use by such vehicles, trailers, etc. Such truck routes shall be as identified and posted in the traffic schedule. 
(Code 1978, §§ 22-32, 22-35; Ord. No. 10-12.1-92, § 201.1, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 08242015(A) , 8-24-15) 
Sec. 86-58. - Exceptions to truck route use. 
Those owners or operators of vehicles, trucks, trailers, etc., and owning, leasing or operating a place of business within the city requiring the use of vehicles having over six wheels may utilize those streets determined to be the most direct route to a designated truck route, truck bypass, etc., or from a designated truck route, etc., to a predetermined business or address within the city exceptions shall include all vehicles, trucks, etc., owned and operated by a federal, state, county or city government or agencies thereof. Additionally, all trucks delivering ready mix concrete and not exceeding six wheels shall be an exception. 
(Code 1978, § 22-33; Ord. No. 10-12.1-92, § 201.2, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 10-28.02-96, § 1, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 08242015(A) , 8-24-15) 
Sec. 86-59. - Vehicles, trucks, trailers, etc., passing through the city; restrictions. 
Those vehicles, trucks, trailers, etc., having no point of origin or destination within the city are hereby required to utilize only those routes designated by the state or the city as truck routes, truck bypass, etc., while traveling within the corporation limits of the city. The use of undesignated streets, roads, avenues, etc., by such vehicles, etc., shall subject the operator and/or owner thereof to the penalties defined in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 22-34; Ord. No. 10-12.1-92, § 201.3, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 08242015(A) , 8-24-15) 
Sec. 86-60. - Regulating commercial truck traffic in residential subdivisions. 
(a)  Definition of commercial trucks. The following classes of vehicles are hereby declared to be commercial trucks: 
Bobtail means a truck tractor without a trailer. 
Dump trucks, earth movers, crane trucks, and other heavy equipment: when such vehicle or equipment is not necessary for the construction, renovation, or maintenance of the road or structures within the subdivision. 
Pole trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads, such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Semi-trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Tractor means any self-propelled vehicle designed for use as a traveling power plant or for drawing other vehicles but having no provision for carrying loads independents [independently]. 
Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property; except, that class of vehicles known as pickup trucks shall not constitute commercial trucks unless they are towing a pole trailer or a semi-trailer. 
Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(b)  Operation prohibited. The operation or parking of a commercial truck or other vehicle, as defined in paragraph (a), regardless of whether such trailer or semi-trailer is attached to another vehicle, upon the residential streets of the city is hereby prohibited; provided, however, commercial trucks, while being used in making deliveries or taking on cargo for transportation from within a residential subdivision, shall not be prohibited and/or those vehicles meeting the requirements of section 86-60(c), shall not be prohibited. 
(c)  Owner/operators. Owner/operators that live within the city may park their bobtail trucks on their property provided they can park it completely off of the roadway and/or right-of-way of the road. 
(1)  Owner/operators that park their bobtail trucks on their property will do so without any damage to the roadway, sidewalks, curbing, gutters or any other city property. Owner/operators will be liable for any damage to city property caused by the operation of their vehicle under this section. 
(2)  Owner/operators that park their bobtail trucks on their property within the city shall not perform any maintenance on the vehicle other than the washing of the vehicle. 
(3)  Owner/operators of vehicles located within the city shall not allow their vehicles to run while parked upon their property, nor shall they utilize any radio system to create noise while parked in any residential area of the city. 
( Ord. No. 08242015(A) , 8-24-15) 
Sec. 86-61. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of article. Any person or operator found guilty of violation of the terms and conditions of this article shall be subject to punishment in the discretion of a court of competent jurisdiction by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than 180 days. Each incident shall be construed to be a separate violation, plus any cost of repair and/or replacement of any public property damaged and/or destroyed by the violator while acting in violation of the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 22-36; Ord. No. 10-12.1-92, § 505, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 08242015(A) , 8-24-15) 
Sec. 86-62. - Same—Enforcement. 
(a)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public. 
(b)  The city engineer shall cause those streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly sign-posted to give notice that section is in effect. 
(c)  The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to show proof they fall within the exceptions or a citation may be issued for violation. 
( Ord. No. 08242015(A) , 8-24-15) 
Secs. 86-63—86-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 

Sec. 86-81. - Definition. 
As used in this article, "traffic schedule" means the official list or schedule of the regulations compiled by the city and maintained in the city clerk-treasurer's office for the following purposes: 
(1)  Designation of the location of traffic control devices. 
(2)  Designation of areas or zones where regulations are applied to parking, loading, bus stops or taxicab stands. 
(3)  Establishment of speed limits. 
(4)  Restriction or regulation of traffic at certain times on certain streets or to certain types, weights or sizes of vehicles. 
(5)  Designation of the location of through streets, stop intersections, yield-right-of-way intersections, waiting lanes, one-way streets or truck traffic routes. 
(6)  Establishment of regulations upon vehicle turns at designated locations. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-82. - Speed zones. 
Speed limits are hereby established for certain streets and portions of streets. The location of such streets and portions thereof shall be as established and posted in the traffic schedule. 
(Code 1978, § 22-10) 
State Law reference— Authorization to alter or establish speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(10). 
Sec. 86-83. - Stop streets. 
Stop signs shall be erected at certain intersections as established and posted in the traffic schedule. Such signs shall require the driver of any vehicle to stop before entering the intersection. Unless otherwise specifically provided, stop signs shall not be erected on any such intersecting streets at which a traffic control signal light, flashing caution light or yield right-of-way sign may be placed and maintained. 
(Code 1978, § 22-15) 
State Law reference— Stop signs and yield signs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-72. 
Sec. 86-84. - One-way streets. 
Certain streets or portions of streets as designated and posted in the traffic schedule are hereby designated as one-way streets, and travel along or upon the designated streets shall be in the direction indicated. 
(Code 1978, § 22-19) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to designate particular roadways for use by traffic moving in one direction, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; one-way roadways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-47. 
Sec. 86-85. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
The stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at any time is prohibited on certain streets as posted and established in the traffic schedule. 
(Code 1978, § 22-19) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Sec. 86-86. - Two-hour parking. 
(a)  The parking of motor vehicles, motorcycles, trailers, bicycles, carts or other like means of transport of any nature whatsoever shall be prohibited for a period exceeding two consecutive hours on the streets or portions of streets as posted and established in the traffic schedule, and on any other streets of the city directed to be posted for such restricted parking by the installation of two hour parking signs by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, bicycle, carts, etc., motorized or otherwise and registered or unregistered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked more than two consecutive hours in any parking space designated on the above-named streets or in any parking spaces designated by order of the board of commissioners to be posted. 
(c)  The minimum distance required between the installation of two hour parking signs shall be 300 feet, but may be less in the discretion of the police chief of the city. 
(d)  The regulations embodied in this section governing two-hour parking shall be effective from Monday through Friday of each week from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon, city-observed holidays excepted. 
(e)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be as set forth in section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 22-22) 
Sec. 86-87. - School zone hours. 
School zone hours are effective: 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time—School days only. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time—School days only. 
(Ord. No. 3102008, §§ 1.01, 1.02, 3-10-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3102008, §§ 1.01, 1.02, adopted Mar. 10, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, these provisions have been included as § 86-87, at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 86-88—86-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RAILROADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping at railroad crossings, etc., O.C.G.A. § 40-6-140 et seq.; railroad companies, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 86-106. - Blowing whistles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person upon any of the railroads in the city to blow the whistle of the locomotive within the city, except the necessary signal of approach to the city, and in case of accident, or to prevent an accident. 
(Code 1978, § 19-1) 
Sec. 86-107. - Blocking crossings—Maximum time; stopping to discharge passengers or freight. 
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train, locomotive, car or any other railroad vehicle to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes; except that this section shall not apply to trains or cars in continuing motion. It shall be unlawful for any train or car to stop within an intersection or on a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers or freight. 
(Code 1978, § 19-2) 
Sec. 86-108. - Same—Persons responsible for violation. 
Any master of trains, yard master or other railroad officer who shall issue, or cause to be issued, any order providing for the stopping up of such street crossings for a longer period than five minutes shall be deemed guilty of violating this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 19-3) 
Sec. 86-109. - Mechanical warnings at certain crossings. 
Every person operating a railroad through the city shall be required to provide mechanical warning systems at the following crossings: 
(1)  Baker Highway. 
(2)  Gaskin Avenue. 
(3)  Madison Avenue. 
(4)  Peterson Avenue. 
(5)  Shirley Avenue. 
(6)  State Route 32. 
(Code 1978, § 19-5) 
Sec. 86-110. - Placing articles on tracks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any railroad track any stone, timber, brush, iron or any other article or thing, with the intention of derailing, obstructing or retarding the cars while in motion; or to injure or damage any track, wire, motor, locomotive, car or any other appliance of such railroads. 
(Code 1978, § 19-6) 
Sec. 86-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-27.01-97, adopted May 27, 1997, repealed § 86-111, which pertained to speed limits. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 86-112. - Construction permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or other person to build any railroad, lay crossties or track or grade a railroad track across any street or sidewalk in the city without first securing a written lease or permit to do so from the board of commissioners. Such person or railroad company, when building such road across the streets and sidewalks and public crossings shall make good and sufficient crossings and openings for the safe travel of the public by vehicles or otherwise, same to be approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 19-8) 
Sec. 86-113. - Suits against railroad companies, application of traffic regulations. 
The failure to observe the provisions of the traffic regulations of the city shall not be considered an act of negligence of any person in any action against the railroad company for injury to person or property; but the facts relating to any failure to observe the requirements of such traffic regulations may be considered along with the facts in the case of determining of questions of negligence, if any. The provisions of state law to the effect that the presumption against the railroad shall not be affected, that in the trial of no civil case shall state law be charged or referred to in any manner, shall apply and control the traffic regulations of the city the same as such provisions apply and control in state law. 
(Code 1978, § 19-9) 
Secs. 86-114—86-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WRECKER AND TOWING SERVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Removal of junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; flashing or revolving lights on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-92; local ordinances, etc., relating to wrecker services, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.1. 

Sec. 86-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tow means towing, hauling and removing vehicles by the use of a wrecker. 
Vehicle means, unless otherwise indicated, a vehicle to be towed shall be: 
(1)  A vehicle damaged to such an extent that it is unable to be moved safely under its own power; 
(2)  A vehicle abandoned by its owner, driver, or other person; 
(3)  A vehicle impounded or under the control of a city police officer or other lawfully empowered officer of the city or state; 
(4)  A vehicle, the owner or operator or person in possession of which is under arrest or in the custody of the city police or other lawfully empowered officer of the city or state; 
(5)  A vehicle, the owner or operator or person in possession of which is not in physical or mental condition to operate a vehicle. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. This definition includes "rollback" or "slide back" wreckers. Passenger cars, light truck and similar vehicles means any vehicle weight up to 10,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight ("GVW"). Passenger cars, light truck and similar vehicles means any vehicle weight up to 10,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight ("GVW"). 
Wrecker service means any entity, corporation, partnership or individual person, either as principal, agent or employee, in the business of removing, towing and/or storing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles by the use of a wrecker or other towing device within the city. 
Wrecker service company means any person furnishing wrecker service within the city. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 1, 12-14-15 ) 
Sec. 86-132. - Conditions prerequisite to furnishing towing service at request of city. 
Unless the person needing wrecker services specifically requests that a wrecker service unauthorized under this article be called, all persons engaged in the wrecker service business within the city shall not be called upon by police officers or other authorized employees of the city to furnish the service of towing any vehicle upon the streets of the city, unless the person engaged in furnishing the wrecker service shall have complied with the following conditions: 
(1)  The wrecker service shall be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, to provide the service. 
(2)  The wrecker service shall have qualified licensed employees, skilled and knowledgeable in performing their duties, and available at all times to avoid delay. 
(3)  The wrecker service shall operate at least a 8,000 pound dual cable winch or "rollback" wrecker with wheel lifts. The wrecker shall: 
a.  Be in good operating condition, meeting all requirements of state law, and be equipped with a flashing light mounted on top of the tow car, or on top of the crane or hoist, which light will be visible for a distance of 1,000 feet, and mounted in such a manner that it can be seen both by approaching and rear traffic. To have flashing lights the wrecker company must have a permit from the state and have the sticker placed on the windshield of the wrecker. 
b.  Be equipped with sufficient red flares, lanterns or warning lights and reflectors to be able to mark the scene of a wreck on both sides of the same, so as to warn all traffic on the highway of the emergency existing while the wreckers are in operation. 
c.  Carry brooms, shovels, oil dry, sand, and fire extinguishers suitable for extinguishing fires in wrecked vehicles, and for cleaning up the debris, fluids and glass from the area where the wreck has occurred. The fire extinguisher shall be of a type capable of extinguishing a fire of flammable liquid. 
(4)  Wrecker services placed on call list to receive large wrecker calls shall have available heavy duty wrecker(s) having a 26,001 pound minimum gross weight rating with a 20-ton winch, or an equivalent vehicle having the same minimum capabilities for moving vehicles, including large trucks, buses and loaded and unloaded tractor trailers. 
(5)  The wrecker service shall have attached and displayed in a conspicuous place, on both the right and left sides of the wrecker, the name of the towing service or company, business address and business phone number. Magnetic or removable decals or signs do not satisfy the requirements of this paragraph. 
(6)  The wrecker service shall maintain in the wrecker service's name, at a minimum, the following insurance policies: 
a.  An automobile liability insurance policy having a combined single limit of not less than $300,000.00; 
b.  A comprehensive general liability policy providing bodily injury coverage limits of $100,000.00 per occurrence and property damage coverage limits of $100,000.00 per person and $100,000.00 annual aggregate; 
c.  Cargo and garage keepers' liability insurance with a limit of $100,000.00; and 
d.  Workers' compensation insurance meeting the minimum coverage mandated by current Georgia law. If required by current Georgia law, said insurance policies shall name the City of Douglas as an additional insured under the policy, and shall provide for written notification at least 15 days prior to any modification, expiration, or cancellation of the policy. The wrecker service shall provide to the chief of police a full copy of the insurance policy no later than five days from execution of agreement or extension thereof or any modification or renewal of the policy. If wrecker company is exempt from the requirement of having workers' compensation insurance based on Georgia law then the wrecker company must provide a notarized affidavit which states they are exempt and which outlines the reason for being exempt. 
(7)  The wrecker service shall provide a storage area located within the city limits or within Coffee County for the storage and safekeeping of vehicles towed under this article but must maintain a 20 minute response time. The area shall be enclosed with a solid wall made up of brick, cinder blocks, concrete, or a substantial chain link fence. No wood fencing, mess fencing or any other type fencing will be acceptable. Such fence shall not be less than six feet in height which will be measured from the top of the fence to the ground and measured six feet at all points. This does not include barbed wire. All fences must enclose entire area vehicles will be stored, and have a capacity for a minimum of ten cars. The fencing will have a gate which can be locked for entry of towed vehicles and the storage area should have sufficient lighting to light up the entire area vehicles are stored. Wrecker storage lots will be inspected annually by an official from the City of Douglas Police Department. 
(8)  The wrecker service shall employee operating personnel of wrecker units that shall be technically qualified and physically capable of responding immediately to all calls received. 
(9)  The wrecker service must maintain registration with the Georgia Public Service Commission and possess all state-required permits which include a nonconsensual towing permit. Also must meet the state requirements through the Georgia Department of Public Safety and maintain Georgia Intrastate Motor Carrier Registration (GIMC). Failure to have proper registration and meeting State of Georgia requirements will result in dismissal from wrecker list or denial of application during enrollment period. 
(10)  Each year wrecker companies will be required to provide a copy of current safety inspection by Georgia Motor Carrier Compliance Division with copy attached to application and shows wrecker being in compliance for the wrecker rotation period being applied for. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 2, 12-14-15 ) 
Sec. 86-133. - Responsibility of wrecker service companies. 
(1)  Wrecker service companies shall maintain a daily list of vehicles towed and/or stored for police-initiated towing and storage services. The list shall contain details as to the make, year, model, color, vehicle I.D. number, license plate number, name of owner, and the purpose of removing and/or storing vehicle. The records shall be retained for a period of 12 months and shall be made available to the police department upon request during normal business hours, Monday through Friday (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.). 
(2)  Wrecker service companies shall be responsible to the vehicle owner for all damages done during towing and storage of any vehicles entrusted to them under this article. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of every driver of a wrecker service vehicle to tow vehicles in a professional manner and to deal with the public in a professional and courteous manner. 
(4)  Reasonable care shall be taken by wrecker service personnel to ensure no further damage will occur to the vehicle towed, either through carelessness or from natural elements, and the wrecker service shall use the proper equipment necessary (e.g. dollies, wheel lifts) to prevent further damage to the vehicles towed. 
(5)  Wrecker service companies shall cooperate with all duly authorized law enforcement officers in the protection of any evidence or in any investigation arising out of a wreck or seizure of a vehicle by any officials. 
(6)  Wrecker service companies shall have a response time of 20 minutes. Response time is the time elapsed from the time the 911 center dispatches the wrecker service until the time that the wrecker actually arrives at the location of the vehicle that is to be towed. 
(7)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276, it shall be the responsibility of the wrecker service company, prior to leaving the scene of any collision, to clean the pavement and right of way of all debris of the collision, including the removal of all glass from paved roadways. In the event that engine fluids have spilled on the roadway, the wrecker service shall provide and spread only that amount of oil dry material on the affected area in order to render the roadway safe for vehicular traffic. 
(8)  A wrecker service company may release any vehicle to the registered owner, unless a hold has been placed on the vehicle by the arresting officer, or a court order prohibits the release. 
(9)  Wrecker service companies shall not go to any accident scene unless: 
(a)  Called by the police department; 
(b)  Called by the vehicle owner/operator; or 
(c)  There exists an extreme emergency immediately endangering life or property. 
(10)  Wrecker service companies shall provide information to the police department under the following circumstances: 
(a)  Whenever any wrecked or abandoned vehicle is removed without the request, direction or participation of the police department, the wrecker service performing the removal shall, if the owner is unknown and within 72 hours of such removal, furnish to the police department the following information with respect to such vehicle: tag number and description, including year, model, make, color and vehicle identification number. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such information, the police department shall immediately take steps to ascertain the identity of the vehicle owner and notify them of the time and place of removal and of the present whereabouts of the vehicle. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall relieve any wrecker service of any of the requirements imposed by virtue of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., or by virtue of any other law with respect to the duties, among others, to make diligent inquiries as to the ownership of vehicles and notification to owners. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 3, 12-14-15 ) 
Sec. 86-134. - Regulation of fees for services rendered. 
(1)  Fees for on-call services rendered under this article shall not exceed the schedule of fees for services rendered and as agreed upon by all parties. The agreed upon fees allowed will be spelled out in a contract. The wrecker company owner will sign said agreement and have it notarized. Any violation of the agreement will be cause for taking the wrecker company off the wrecker rotation. 
(2)  The wrecker service shall post all towing fees, reflecting the prices to be charged to the public. Fees shall be posted in open view to the public in the wrecker service's lobby. In addition, the wrecker service shall deliver to each owner or representative of every towed vehicle present at the scene of the tow a pre-printed disclosure form approved by the City of Douglas Police Department that clearly provides: 
(a)  The fees to be charged by the wrecker service; 
(b)  Location of storage lots; 
(c)  Times of vehicle release; and 
(d)  Phone number(s) of the wrecker service. 
(3)  The wrecker service shall furnish the person who pays for wrecker services a written receipt on a pre-printed form approved by the City of Douglas Police Department which contains the following information: 
(a)  An itemization of all charges; 
(b)  The name of the person on the scene who recovered the vehicle; and 
(c)  The schedule of fees for on-call services rendered may only be modified by approval the Douglas Police Department and would cause for a new agreement to be put in place with appropriate signatures and notarization. 
(d)  The maximum wrecker companies allowed on the wrecker rotation list will be 15. First consideration will be given to those wrecker businesses which have their business within the city limits of Douglas. Next consideration will be given based on first come first serve and those who are on the present wrecker rotation listing. Once the 15 wrecker companies are chosen the rotation list will be final. If there are less than 15 wrecker companies who qualify for placement on the wrecker rotation list the list will be final until the next enrollment period and rotation consideration. No wrecker companies will be added after list is determined and new wrecker rotation list begins. The wrecker rotation will be good from midnight January 1 st to 11:59 pm on December 31 each year. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 4, 12-14-15 ) 
Sec. 86-135. - Procedures for city police officers and employees. 
(1)  A schedule shall be set up by the chief of police on a rotating basis for all qualified wrecker service companies which have qualified under this article, which wreckers service companies shall be used as herein after provided, except in extreme emergency, where persons are trapped or pinned in or under vehicles, or in burning vehicles, or in danger of drowning by submersion, or where traffic is blocked to prevent normal flow of vehicles, in which event, and only in which event, a police officer or other lawfully authorized officer shall be authorized to call the nearest, most qualified company to prevent serious injury or death. 
(2)  The police officer or other lawfully authorized officer shall first determine whether or not a wrecker is needed, and if a wrecker is needed, shall ascertain whether the owner or operator is in condition to make a preference known, what wrecker service company the owner or operator desires to be called, and shall then call the preferred company desired by the owner or operator of the vehicle if the wrecker service can respond within a reasonable time. Officers can advise the owner or operator that they may request an estimated cost of the towing service. 
(3)  In the event the owner or operator is unable, due to injury or due to a physical or mental impairment, to make a choice, or does not have any preference, then said police officer or other authorized officer shall request through dispatch the next list wrecker by rotation. 
(4)  If the wrecker service company on the schedule is reached, but is unable to furnish the service, then the next listed wrecker company on the rotation will be called. Other substitutions are not allowed. 
(5)  Except in extreme emergencies, the police officer or other authorized officer shall await the arrival of the wrecker and shall in the meantime try to make the scene safe for other vehicles, using the road in the vicinity thereof, giving warnings and directing traffic. 
(6)  The police officer or other authorized officer shall make a tow-in report, which shall contain the information and details prescribed by the city (especially the name of the operator and owner), on a form made up for that purpose. The officer shall have the wrecker operator sign the wrecker inventory form and provide a copy of it to the wrecker operator before leaving the scene. The officer shall retain the original for department records. 
(7)  A thorough inventory shall be made by the officer on the scene of personal articles and equipment in the vehicle to be towed, such inventory to be written upon a form provided by the police department. If the officer requests that a vehicle be towed to the police department for law enforcement purposes, the wrecker company shall send a bill to the police department with the charge being the agreed to amount in the agreement signed by the wrecker company. 
(8)  Officers will give the 911 dispatch center as much information as possible about the size of the vehicle and the circumstances. This information will be passed on to the wrecker service, which will make the determination as to which equipment is necessary for the situation. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 5, 12-14-15 ) 
Sec. 86-136. - Wrecker while in use designated authorized emergency vehicles. 
All wreckers used by wrecker's service companies, when used in an emergency while carrying on the business of the wrecker service companies, are hereby declared to authorize emergency vehicles, under the purview of the applicable laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 6, 12-14-15 ) 
State Law reference— "Authorized Emergency Vehicle" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(5); regulations pertaining to authorized emergency vehicles, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-6, 40-6-74. 
Sec. 86-137. - Responsibility for payment. 
All charges and fees for towing and storage of the vehicle towed shall be at the expense of the owner of the vehicle, and against the vehicle itself, as provided by state law. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 7, 12-14-15 ) 
Sec. 86-138. - Qualification of wrecker service companies. 
(1)  Any wrecker service company desiring to be qualified to be placed on the rotating schedule for use by the city, under the conditions set out herein, shall file an application starting September land before October 31 of the calendar year with the chief of police. The wrecker company must have a City of Douglas business license to be approved on the City of Douglas Wrecker Rotation List. If a wrecker company has been found in violation of this ordinance and is taken off the wrecker rotation they will not be refunded any portion of this required fee. This administrative fee is to be paid annually and irrespective to any other license fees, permits, etc. that may be required. 
(2)  After the creation of the official on-call schedule, all wrecker services seeking to be placed on the rotating schedule shall, if qualified, be placed on the next calendar year, following receipt of an acceptable application before the October 31 deadline. If October 31 falls on a weekend then the deadline will be 5:00 pm on the Friday before. 
(3)  A continuing responsibility for eligibility shall include an adequate and reasonable response time to calls made to the scheduled wrecker service company to assure efficient service on a 24-hour basis. Companies failing to remain qualified will be notified of the problem, in writing and shall be given a 15-day period to correct the condition. The wrecker service may be temporarily suspended from service and removed from the approved list during this period. If the company fails to correct the condition within the 15-day period, the company shall be removed from the wrecker service schedule. Appeals to decisions of the police department may be filed in writing with the city manager. 
(4)  Wrecker service companies desiring to be qualified on the rotating schedule shall agree that the fee schedule published by the city shall apply to all calls initiated by a police officer or other authorized official to which the wrecker service responds while on call. 
(5)  Any wrecker service that has an owner or operator that has been convicted of a felony within five years will not be on the City of Douglas's rotating schedule for police-initiated tows. All wrecker services desiring to be placed on or to remain on said rotating schedule agree to provide the Douglas Police Department, at the time of seeking qualification under this article and thereafter, annually, with a release executed by all owners of each wrecker service and all operators for each wrecker service, which authorizes the Douglas Police Department to conduct a criminal records search of said individuals. All wrecker services desiring to qualify or to remain qualified shall also provide a release to the Douglas Police Department with respect to all new owners or operators of the wrecker service. 
(6)  The authorized fee schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the qualified wrecker service company's place of business, and each wrecker vehicle of the company shall carry a copy of the schedule, for the purpose of furnishing the same for vehicle owners or operators. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 8, 12-14-15 ) 
Sec. 86-139. - Penalties for violations. 
Violations of provisions of this article by any wrecker service list. If removed from the wrecker rotation list wrecker company may file, in writing, an appeal request to the mayor and city commission within five business days of being removed from the wrecker rotation. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 9, 12-14-15 ) 
Sec. 86-140. - Fee schedule and operating fees procedures. 
As per the agreement signed and notarized by wrecker companies authorized to be on wrecker rotation. Fee schedule may change with an agreement between wrecker companies and the Douglas Police Department and upon approval of the city commission with the agreed upon fee scheduled signed and notarized by the wrecker companies. 
( Ord. No. 12142015, § 10, 12-14-15 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 86-141. - Findings; definitions. 
The city commission finds that the municipal streets located within the corporate limits of the city, other than the streets hereinafter specifically excepted, are designated and constructed so as to safely permit their use by motorized carts (as hereinafter defined) in combination with regular vehicular traffic. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this article except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized street means the public roadways of the city by whatever name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.) that: 
(1)  Has a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less; 
(2)  Provides for no more than one lane of vehicular traffic per direction; 
(3)  Is not designated as part of either the state or federal highway system; 
(4)  Has not been designated as an unauthorized street by ordinance or resolution by the city commission. Unauthorized street means the public roadways of the city by whatever name what has been designated by the city commission by ordinance or resolution as an unauthorized street. 
Driver means the person driving and having physical control over a motorized cart. 
Motorized cart means any motor vehicle that has no less than three wheels, capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour with a maximum gross vehicle unladen or empty weight of 1,300 pounds, and is commonly referred to as golf carts. Specifically excluded from this definition are those motorized conveyances commonly referred to as ATVs (including four-wheelers, three-wheelers, mules, gators) and mobility aids. 
Owner means the person holding title to the motorized cart or who has a majority ownership interest of the motorized cart. 
Parking area means those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for the temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Sec. 86-142. - Registration 
Before any motorized cart may be operated over an authorized street or parking area of the city it shall be registered with and inspected by the Douglas Marshals Office. If the motorized cart is compliant with local and state law, then a decal shall be issued from that department signifying its registration. The registration requirements include the following specifics: 
(1)  Only those persons 18 years or older may register a motorized cart. 
(2)  The person registering the motorized cart is the owner of the motorized cart. 
(3)  The decal received from the Douglas Marshals Office upon registration shall be attached and displayed upon the motorized cart so as to be plainly visible. 
(4)  The registration application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of owner. 
b.  Model, make, name and motorized cart identification number. 
c.  Current driver's license number of owner. 
d.  Such other information which the city may require. 
(5)  The registration application shall be accompanied by a fee of $15.00. 
(6)  The registration application shall be accompanied by evidence of person liability insurance covering consistent with the minimum requirements of Georgia law for operational motor vehicles. 
(7)  The registration shall be effective until such time as revoked or the motorized cart is transferred to a new owner. If the registered owner transfers ownership of the motorized cart, the registered owner must notify the Douglas Marshals Office of the transfer. 
(8)  It shall be the owner of the motorized carts responsibility to ensure the information on the application remains current and accurate. 
The Douglas City Commission may, at its discretion, waive registration requirements for city sponsored special events of a limited duration. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Sec. 86-143. - Revocation. 
The registration permit may be revoked if: 
(1)  The permit holder no longer has a valid driver's license. 
(2)  The owner or driver of a motorized cart fails to abide by the rules and regulations of this article. 
(3)  The owner or driver of a motorized cart fails to abide by the traffic laws in the use of a motorized cart on an authorized street or parking area. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Sec. 86-144. - Transfer. 
Upon transfer of ownership of the motorized cart to a person who intends to operate it over the authorized streets and parking areas, the new owner must register the motorized cart as outlined hereinabove in section 86-142. Such registration by the new owner must occur within ten days of the transfer of ownership. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Sec. 86-145. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized cart on any street within the city that is not an authorized street. 
(b)  Only those persons who hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license may drive a motorized cart on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city. The driver must have their valid license on their person while operating the motorized cart. 
(c)  All drivers of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the authorized streets and parking areas of the city. 
(d)  A motorized cart shall not be operated on the sidewalks at any time. 
(e)  A motorized cart may be operated over those authorized streets and parking areas only during daylight hours unless such motorized cart is equipped with functional headlights, taillights and turn signals. 
(f)  Every driver of a motorized cart shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the rules of the road and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under this chapter except as to special regulations in this article and to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(g)  All motorized carts are entitled to a full use of a lane on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorized cart of the full use of a lane. 
(h)  The driver of a motorized cart shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(i)  No driver shall operate a motorized cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines of rows of vehicles. 
(j)  The driver of a motorized cart operating on the authorized street may cross a multi-lane road only at a signalized intersection designated for such purpose. 
(k)  The driver of a motorized cart operating on an authorized street may cross a state highway or federal route only at intersections that have been designated for such purpose by the state department of transportation. 
(l)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city shall also apply to drivers and occupants of motorized carts. 
(m)  All drivers and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the motorized cart. No person may sit on the driver's lap during the operation of the motorized cart. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Sec. 86-146. - Equipment. 
Each motorized cart shall display an amber strobe light so as to warn approaching travelers to decrease their speed because of the danger of colliding with such vehicle. Such amber strobe light shall be mounted in a manner so as to be visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet from the front and rear of such vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Sec. 86-147. - Liability. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the operation of a motorized cart or by the failure of the city to revoke said permit. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Sec. 86-148. - Prohibited. 
(1)  Children under the age of four are prohibited from riding as a passenger of a golf cart. Children four years of age until they reach eight years of age must be properly restrained in a child passenger restraint system approved by [statute], "a child passenger restraining system" shall be provided in all passenger vehicles (O.C.G.A. 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1). Seat belts shall be properly used for all persons, between the age of eight years of age and 17 years of age, while the motorized cart is in motion. 
(2)  Off-road vehicles (ATVs, UTVs, etc.) may not operate on any public roadway at any time, or on any city sidewalk and may only operate on private property with express written permission of the owner (O.C.G.A. 40-7-4. Off-road vehicles include, but is not limited to, any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of travel over land, water, snow, ice, march, or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads that include, but not limited to, low pressure tire vehicles (four wheelers, three wheelers, quad runners, air boats, etc. 
(3)  Scooter, motorized mini-bikes, etc.: These small cycles typically have a 50cc or smaller engine and may not be operated on any public roadway at any time or on any sidewalks within the city. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ; Ord. No. 05142018, 5-7-18 ) 
Sec. 86-149. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punished as follows: 
In addition to whatever violations the driver of the motorized cart may be subject to pursuant to Georgia law and elsewhere found within the Code of Ordinances and the City Charter, the registered owner of the motorized cart shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less than $50.00; and, if not timely paid, revocation of the permit. 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $100.00; and, if not timely paid, revocation of the permit. 
(3)  For the third offense, the registration for the motorized cart shall be revoked. In the event the registration is revoked under this section, the motorized cart cannot thereafter be re-registered by the same owner or any family member for a period of two years. Further, such other penalties shall be [applied] as provided in the Code of Ordinances and City Charter in the sound discretion and judgment of the presiding Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Douglas. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Sec. 86-150. - Vehicle for hire. 
Under no circumstances whatsoever can a motorized cart be used as a vehicle for hire. 
( Ord. No. 10232017, 10-23-17 ) 
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Regulations establishing uniform requirements and providing for the quality of wastewater discharged into the city's wastewater collection system and treatment works are compiled and printed separately by the city as its "Industrial Pretreatment Program Update" published in September 1992. A copy of this publication is on file in the clerk-treasurer's office. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; floods, ch. 46; private water wells, § 50-26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. B. 
State Law reference— Power of city or county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Interfering with property of systems. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to interfere with or have anything to do with the city wells, reservoirs, treatment plants, mains or other equipment related to the city water supply, or any equipment, pipes, wires, conduits, installations, plants or property of the city gas, electrical or sewer systems. 
(Code 1978, § 23-2) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 90-2. - Interfering with utility meter; diverting electricity, gas or water. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally prevent an electrical, gas or water meter from duly registering the quantity of electricity, gas or water supplied, or to in any way interfere with its proper action or just registration; and it shall further be unlawful to intentionally divert any electrical current, gas or water from any wire, pipe or conduit or intentionally use or cause to be used without the consent of such public utility supplier any electricity, gas or water distributed by the utility supplier, provided that the acts occur within the city. 
(b)  No person shall make any connection to any unmetered pipe, main or wire containing water, gas or electricity from the city system. 
(c)  Proof that any appliance, tools, devices or instruments of any kind have been used to improperly pass current, gas or water around the meter so as to prevent same from duly registering shall constitute prima facie evidence of the committing or the intent to commit the acts described in this section. 
(Code 1978, § 23-3) 
Sec. 90-3. - Laying conduits, etc., near center of street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay new mains for water, gas or sewerage, or conduit for any purpose, in any street, alley or public way, within four feet on each side of the centerline of any street, unless by and with the permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 21-23) 
Sec. 90-4. - Supervision of extensions to systems. 
The appropriate city departments will make, or supervise, all extensions of mains, wires, conduits, etc., in the public streets and roads, both inside and outside the city, of any city utility. 
(Code 1978, § 23-4) 
Sec. 90-5. - Conditions for extending water mains outside city. 
The city will make no extension of any water line or main outside the city unless the person desiring such line or main to be constructed shall agree to pay the total cost of the project, including labor and material, and provided further that such person agrees to use electrical service through the electrical department of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-5) 
Sec. 90-6. - Maintenance of pipes connected to city sewer. 
Each customer, wherever residing and however defined herein, is hereby required to maintain and keep clean the sewer pipes leading to and connecting from his plumbing system to the city street line or city sewer main, whichever is nearer. 
(Code 1978, § 23-6) 
Sec. 90-7. - Fluoridation of water. 
The city approves the fluoridation of the water supply in the city and approves the application by the city manager to the state department of health to fluoridate the water supply in the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-9) 
Sec. 90-8. - Water tap prerequisites. 
The applicant for a water tap shall have his service pipe extended to the property line, at a point designated by the water department and terminating in a water-gate valve. In consideration of the tapping fee, which shall be paid to the water department in advance, the city will tap the main and extend service to the customer's valve at the property line. 
(Code 1978, § 23-10) 
Sec. 90-9. - Exemption from certain self inspection regulations. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 3 of Act 1046 Georgia Laws, 1996 Page 1326, subsection (d) of Code Section 8-2-26 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to self-inspections of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 07-08.1-96, § 1, 7-8-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-08.1-96, § 1, adopted July, 8, 1996, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new Chapter 91. For purposes of classification and indexing, said provisions have been included herein as § 90-9 at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 90-10. - Connection to publicly owned water system; private wells. 
Any residential, commercial or industrial facility within the city limits shall be required to connect to publicly owned water system provided the publicly owned water system is within 100 feet of the property line of the facility. No private wells shall be installed within the city limits of Douglas for any purpose if the City of Douglas has a water line within 100 feet of the property line of the person attempting to install the private well. 
( Ord. No. 08242015(C) , 8-24-15; Ord. No. 08242015(D) , 8-24-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08242015(C) and Ord. No. 08242015(D) , both adopted Aug. 24, 2015, set out provisions to amend Ch. 50, Health and Sanitation. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included herein as § 90-10. 
Secs. 90-11—90-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 90-36. - Tap fees for water, gas and sewer. 
(a)  Water. For making taps and setting meters inside and outside the city limits the prices set forth in the schedule of fees and charges apply. Any meter larger than two inches, actual cost of meter plus backflow valve plus gate valves and customer builds the meter box. For the fire tap only, the actual cost of tap plus an amount per year/per riser. 
(b)  Sewer. Sewer tap fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Water meters installed for the purpose of watering lawns, filling pools, etc., shall not be charged sewer usage. 
(c)  Natural gas. For making taps and setting meters inside and outside the city limits, the prices set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall apply. 
(Code 1978, § 23-20; Ord. No. 08-27.1-90, § 23-20, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 12.09.1-91, § 23-20, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 90-37. - Water rate schedule. 
The water rates shall apply in the furnishing of water services by the city through its municipally owned water system: 
(1)  Inside city. The monthly water rates set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall apply to commercial, industrial and residential users within the city. 
(2)  Outside city. The charge for the provision of water outside the corporate limits of the city shall be twice the current rate charged for the provision of water to all classes of users of water inside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-21; Ord. No. 12.09.1-91, § 23-21, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 90-38. - Sewer rate schedule. 
(a)  Inside city. The rates set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall apply in the furnishing of sewer services by the city through its municipally owned sewer system. 
(b)  Outside city. The charge for the use of sewer facilities outside the corporate limits of the city shall be twice the current rate charged for all classes of users of sewer facilities inside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-22; Ord. No. 12.09.1-91, § 23-22, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 90-39. - Gas rates. 
The rates and other charges for metered gas service to customers in the city shall be according to the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1978, § 23-23) 
Sec. 90-40. - Gas metering, billing. 
(a)  In the operation of the gas department of the city all services shall be fully metered and no free services shall be rendered to any person. 
(b)  There shall be a monthly rendition of bills. 
(Code 1978, § 23-24) 
Sec. 90-41. - Electric rate schedule. 
The schedule of rates and charges applicable to the service furnished by the electric department shall be according to the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1978, § 23-25) 
Sec. 90-42. - Change of rate schedules without notice. 
The rate schedules for water, electricity and sewage disposal services of the city hereinafter specified are subject to review and change by the board of commissioners without notice to the user. 
(Code 1978, § 23-26) 
Sec. 90-43. - Due date; discontinuance of service for nonpayment. 
The charges for utility services shall be payable within 15 days from the billing date. A ten percent penalty shall be assessed as of the 16th day. Should any of the charges not be paid within an 18-day period from the billing date any or all of the service may be immediately discontinued. 
(Code 1978, § 23-27) 
Sec. 90-44. - Execution in case of delinquency. 
The city shall have the authority and be vested with the power to issue an execution and the same placed on record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county, to enforce the collection of any sum owed to the city by any person for the use of water, wastewater, electrical current, gas or other public utility of the city and such executions shall be issued, handled and collected under the same rules and regulations as set forth in the charter of the city, section 6-12, for the issuance, handling and collection of executions for taxes due the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-28) 
Secs. 90-45—90-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXTENSION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF WATER AND SEWER UTILITIES SYSTEMS 

Sec. 90-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City inspector means any person designated by the city to perform inspection of the transmission and/or lateral utility systems. 
Cut-in means attachment to the utility transmission systems of the city. 
Cut-in fees means those fees required to be paid to the city for the act of performing a connection to the city's transmission system. 
Fire systems means any connection to a water transmission system for the purpose of providing water for firefighting purposes. 
Lateral systems means those utility lines connecting from the city's transmission system to the structure or location of use by the individual property owner or user. 
Licensed contractor means any person, firm or corporation in possession of a bona fide license issued by the city. 
Permits means those documents permitting the connection to the utility systems of the city to be obtained prior to the commencement of any installation, repair or connection to the transmission and/or lateral utility system whether privately or publicly owned. 
Transmission system means: 
(1)  Water: That system designated and sized to transport potable water from the point of supply (storage facility) to a point of connection by a property owner. 
(2)  Sewer: That system designated and sized to transport liquid waste from a point of connection to the sewage disposal system to and including sewage disposal facilities. 
Transmission system extension means the extension of the water/sewer transmission system beyond its current location. 
Utility easement means that portion of land dedicated to the city for the purpose of installing and/or maintaining a utility transmission system. 
Utility system includes the water and/or sewer owned and operated by the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-40) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-67. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. Any person who shall find it necessary to install, remove, repair or cut into any utility transmission and/or lateral utility system shall first obtain a permit for so doing from the city clerk of the city after payment of such fees herein required. 
(b)  Fees generally. Permit fees for connection to the utility system of the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Such permit fees are charged to assist in the defraying of costs of recording and inspection of the connection to the city's utility system. 
(c)  Contractor/owner connecting, removing, repairing water and/or sewer lines located on private property. The permit fee for the installation, removal, repair or connection to the water and/or sewer utility system when such actions are accomplished entirely within the property lines of the owner of such property shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Such permit fee shall include inspection of such installation by the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-41) 
Sec. 90-68. - Inspection. 
(a)  Required. The connection to, repair and/or maintenance of and/or the extension of the utility system of the city shall be inspected and approved by an authorized inspector of the city prior to use of the utility system of the city. Record of all inspections shall be maintained. 
(b)  Discontinuance of service. The city, through its utility inspectors, reserves the right to discontinue service to any property found to be connected to the city's utility system not in keeping with the conditions of this article. 
(c)  Utility trench fully exposed. Upon inspection, the work requested to be inspected by the city shall be fully exposed to the city's inspector. If any work performed is not so exposed, the inspector shall have the right to require the installation be uncovered to reveal, to the satisfaction of the inspector, the quality of materials and workmanship so installed. 
(d)  Authority of inspector. The city's inspector shall have the authority to require the party making a faulty or inadequate installation to remove such installation and replace same with materials and/or workmanship required to meet city standards. Such action shall require an additional permit fee as provided in section 90-67. 
(Code 1978, § 23-42) 
Sec. 90-69. - Current city license required. 
No installation, removal or repair of any transmission and/or lateral utility system shall be made by any person not in possession of a current license issued by the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-43) 
Sec. 90-70. - Cut-ins. 
(a)  Cut-in request. Request for cut-ins of the utility system shall be made in writing on forms provided for that purpose by the city clerk and accompanied by the appropriate fee established in this article. 
(b)  Inspection. All cut-ins shall be inspected by the city inspector prior to activation of the cut-in. 
(Code 1978, § 23-44) 
Sec. 90-71. - Extensions. 
(a)  Requests. Requests for extension of the city's water transmission systems shall be made in writing on forms provided by the city for that purpose. Requests for extension of the city's sewer transmission system shall, prior to final approval, be accompanied by an engineering drawing showing, as a minimum, the route, size, elevations, distances and property lines connected with the applicant's request for a sewer extension. 
(b)  Engineering drawing for sewer extension. The engineering drawing required in subsection (a) above shall be prepared by a qualified engineer registered in the state. Any review of the drawing so submitted by the applicant that requires either the assistance of the city's consulting engineer or shall require redrafting, recalculations, etc., for which a charge to the city is made, shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(c)  Methods of extension installation. The applicant shall have the option of the method utilized for installation of utilities as follows: 
(1)  Installation by the applicant's contractor with inspection by the city. 
(2)  Installation by the city on a time available basis. 
(d)  Costs of extensions. All costs incurred in the utilization of either method (1) or (2) above shall be paid in full by the applicant. In utilization of method (2), all costs estimated by the city shall be paid in advance. If the final installed costs shall be less than the amount estimated and paid by the applicant, the city shall rebate such difference to the applicant. If the final installed costs shall be in excess of the amount estimated and paid by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse the city all such excess costs within ten days of such determination. 
(Code 1978, § 23-45) 
Sec. 90-72. - Lateral installations. 
(a)  The installation of water and/or sewer lateral lines extending from the city's transmission system to the property line of the applicant may be made in the same method as required for the installation of the transmission system set out in section 90-71(c). 
(b)  The cost to the applicant for connection to the city's transmission system shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. All water installations requiring larger than a two-inch meter shall be billed at time and materials cost to the city. The water and sewer connection fee schedule is based upon costs calculated on the basis of 30 feet from connection point in the city's transmission lines to the property line of the applicant. Any distance in excess of 30 feet shall be calculated on a time and materials cost basis. All sewer connections to the city's transmission system larger than eight inches shall be calculated on a time and materials cost to the city. 
(Code 1978, § 23-46) 
Sec. 90-73. - Connection to utility systems crossing under roadways. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to place its utility systems in established rights-of-way outside of the required paved widths of any highway, roadway, street or alley, etc., where utility easements are available, located along property lines or other utility easements. 
(b)  The applicant shall be advised at the time it is determined that the connection to the city's utility transmission and/or lateral system will require the crossing of any highway, roadway, street, alley, etc. 
(Code 1978, § 23-47) 
Sec. 90-74. - Subsequent connection; reimbursement. 
(a)  Connections to transmission system installed by others. If an applicant has had installed a utility system in keeping with the requirements of the city and has paid for such installation in full, such applicant shall be entitled to a reimbursement of a pro rata share of the cost incurred from other parties connecting to the transmission system installed by the original applicant/installer of the transmission system. 
(b)  Determination of amount of reimbursement. If the original applicant installs the transmission system and the applicant shall desire to be reimbursed by those parties subsequently connecting thereto, the applicant shall present to the city clerk-treasurer all original bills paid by the applicant for the transmission system. The original applicant shall sign an affidavit swearing to the authenticity of such bills and to the fact that such billings are the sole billings connected with his installation of the utility transmission system. Any subsequent discovery that such affidavit is false in any manner shall void the entitlement of the applicant to reimbursement of any kind. 
(c)  Review of billings presented. The city, through its water and sewer department, shall review all billings presented by the applicant and determine if such billings are within the range of cost that would have been incurred by the city had the city made the original installation. Any reimbursement shall be determined upon the lower of the actual billings and the city's determination of cost of the installation. 
(d)  Method of reimbursement. The original applicant shall be reimbursed by other parties connecting to the applicant's utility extension up to the cost of installation less the applicant's pro rata share of such installation less ten percent of the installation's costs to be retained by the city for its administration of the reimbursement granted. 
(e)  Determination of reimbursement. The reimbursement noted in this article shall be determined by the city in the following manner: 
(1)  Residentially zoned property (all classes). The maximum number of structures or living units allowed to be located on a given tract or parcel of land zoned residential shall be utilized under the terms of this article, in the determination, by the city, of the amount of the rebate to the original installer of the water and/or sewer utilities serving such parcel or tract of land requesting connection to such utility system. Such determination shall be based upon the following formula: one living unit for the first bedroom contained in any living quarters occupied by a related family or persons with one living unit assigned for each additional bedroom unit in the same living quarters. 
(2)  Commercially zoned property (all classes). The maximum number of square feet allowed to be constructed on any given tract or parcel of land zoned commercial shall be utilized under the terms of this article in the determination, by the city, of the amount of the rebate to the original installer of the water and/or sewer utilities serving the tract or parcel of land requesting connection to the utility system. Such determination shall be based upon the following formula: 

 
If it is determined by the city that any given commercial use (restaurant, etc.) will exceed the use determined by use of the above formula by ten percent or more, the rebate shall be determined by volume of anticipated use within the structure of the owner requesting to be connected to the utility transmission system installed by others. If the applicant for connection to the utility system installed by others is applying for such service of an existing structure, the determination of the rebate shall be determined in keeping with the policy hereinabove established. 
(3)  Industrial zoned property (all classes). The maximum number of square feet allowed to be constructed on any given tract or parcel of land zoned industrial shall be utilized under the terms of this article in the determination, by the city, of the amount of the rebate to the original installer of the water and/or sewer utilities serving the tract or parcel of land requesting connection to the utility system. Such determination shall be based upon the relationship of use generated by the applicant's maximum use of industrially zoned property to the use generated by all property capable of being served by the utility transmission system installed by others. The determination shall be made prior to the issuance of any building or occupancy permit. If the applicant for connection to the utility system installed by others is applying for such service of an existing structure, the determination of the rebate shall be determined in keeping with the policy hereinabove established. 
(f)  Time limitation. The reimbursement to the original applicant shall remain in effect until such time as the costs noted in subsection (d) above have been recovered by the original applicant or for a period of five years from the date of approved installation, whichever shall first occur. 
(g)  Reimbursement to original applicant only. The reimbursement noted in this article shall be paid only to the original applicant and may not be assigned or in any way inure to subsequent owners of the property originally served by the subject utility installation and shall terminate upon change in ownership of the property originally served by the utility extensions. Should the original owner include in the cost of any lot sold the pro rata cost of such installation, the "reimbursement" shall be null and void. 
(h)  City to administer reimbursement. The city, through its water and sewer department, its building permit office and city clerk-treasurer shall administer the reimbursement noted in this section. The building permit office shall issue no building permit to an affected party unless and until there has been paid to the city the determined reimbursement. The city shall, upon receipt of such reimbursement, transmit to the original applicant such payment less the ten percent thereof noted in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 23-48) 
Sec. 90-75. - Fire systems. 
(a)  When the city shall provide to any property connection to its water transmission system that is for the purpose of fire protection (i.e., fire sprinkler, etc.) for the property so connected and is unmetered, the party to whom the utility billing is made shall pay to the city utility department annually the sum set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  The payment contained in subsection (a) may be billed monthly at the option of the user or may be paid in its entirety on or before March 1 of each calendar year. 
(Code 1978, § 23-49) 
Sec. 90-76. - Utility installations outside city. 
(a)  Standards of installation. The standards and specifications for the installation of utilities installed and connected to the utility system of the city outside of the corporate limits of the city shall be the same as those applied to installations made within the city. 
(b)  Reimbursement. The conditions of section 90-75 shall be applicable to all water and sewer utility extensions and/or use by any person utilizing such utilities outside the corporate limits of the city. Any reimbursement determined to be applicable shall be made prior to connection to the utility system of the city or extension thereof. 
(c)  Commission approval required. All applications for extension of the utility transmission system of the city outside the corporate limits of the city shall first be approved by the mayor and city commission prior to the granting of any permit for such installation. 
(Code 1978, § 23-50) 
Sec. 90-77. - Connection of toilet facilities to public sewer when available. 
The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city, abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or in the future may be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is required at his expense to install approved toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1978, § 23-51; Ord. No. 01-14.2-91, 1-14-91) 
Secs. 90-78—90-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER USE ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 062608(2), adopted June 26, 2008, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 90-101—90-293, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 01-10.1-94, adopted January 10, 1994. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-99. - Title. 
This article may be known as and may be cited as the "Sewer Use Ordinance of the City of Douglas." 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-100. - Purpose and policy. 
The purpose of this article is to set forth uniform requirements for users of the City of Douglas wastewater collection system and treatment works, to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [U.S.C.] Section 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 403), and to provide for the public's health and welfare by regulating the quality of wastewater discharged into the city's wastewater collection system and treatment works. This article provides the city a means for determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics; the setting of charges and fees; authorizing the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits; requiring user reporting; providing for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; and establishing administrative review procedures. This article establishes effluent limitations and other discharge criteria for all users and provides that certain users shall pre-treat waste to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's publicly owned treatment works (hereinafter referred to as POTW) that will interfere with the operation of the POTW; contaminate the sewage sludge; pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; harm POTW personnel in the course of their POTW operations and the general public, and spoil opportunities to reclaim and reuse wastewater and sludge from the POTW. This article provides measures for the enforcement of its provisions and abatement of violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-101. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the following phrases and words shall have the meaning assigned below, except in those instances where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or "the Act. " The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority. The Director, Environmental Protection Division (EPD), Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) or the Regional Administrator, Region IV, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions of the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
(5)  If an authorization under paragraph (4) of this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph (4) of this section must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
Best management practices or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in division 5, sections 90-184 and 90-185 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. [Note: BMPs also include alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical pretreatment standards or effluent limits.] 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. A measure of the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L). 
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Categorical industrial user. An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
Chemical oxygen demand. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
City. The legal governing body of the City of Douglas, Georgia, or its duly authorized representative. 
Control authority. The director, after the city receives approval of its pretreatment program. 
Director. The city's director of water and wastewater, or his duly authorized representative, designated to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article. 
Domestic sewage. Water carrying wastes of human origin, as opposed to commercial or industrial activities. 
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge that is not a "New Source." 
Flow proportional composite sample. A sample consisting of several individual portions in which each portion of the sample is proportionate to the flow and combined to form a representative sample. 
Garbage. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
General pretreatment regulations. "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," published in the Code of Federal Register, 40 CFR 403, in July 2006, and any revisions to same. 
Grab sample. A sample that is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream. 
Holding tank waste. Any wastes from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source. 
Instantaneous limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, 
(2)  Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Local limit. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
Mass emission rate. The weight of material discharged to the POTW during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit. A permit issued to a POTW or an industry pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
National Pretreatment Standards, Pretreatment Standards or Standards. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits that apply to Industrial Users, such as prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)b., or (1)c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government entities. 
Pollutant. Any dredged soil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; chemical wastes; medical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, and agricultural wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of, discharging such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the City of Douglas as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1362), which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
Publicly owned treatment works treatment plant or POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed, intended and/or used to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage. A combination of the water carrying wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters) to the POTW; 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in paragraph (2) of this subsection has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that the user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance. A user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in division 5; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits as defined in division 5, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in a POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Slug discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of sections 90-184 and 90-185 of this article. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge, which has reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
Storm drain or storm sewer. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling waters. 
Total suspended solids or suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant defined in Section 307(a)(1) (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act and include metals and manmade organic compounds. 
User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city POTW. 
Waste. Includes wastewater and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operations. 
Wastewater. Waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a POTW. 
Watercourse. A natural or artificial channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state. Any water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  BOD-Biochemical oxygen demand (five day). 
(2)  C-Celsius. 
(3)  CFR-Code of Federal Regulations. 
(4)  CIU-Categorical Industrial User. 
(5)  COD-Chemical oxygen demand. 
(6)  EPA-U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(7)  EPD-Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(8)  F-Fahrenheit. 
(9)  mg/L-milligrams per liter. 
(10)  NPDES-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(11)  pH-Logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion activity in moles per liter. 
(12)  POTW-Publicly Owned Treatment Works. 
(13)  TSS-Total Suspended Solids. 
(14)  USC-United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-102—90-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

Sec. 90-111. - Unsanitary, offensive deposits on property generally. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited any human excrement, garbage or other noxious waste on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-112. - Discharging wastes to natural outlets. 
It shall be a violation of this article to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-113. - Sewer connection required if available. 
The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided the public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line and access is available over public land. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-114. - Sewer service to adjacent unincorporated areas. 
In the event the city extends the sewer system to adjacent unincorporated areas, all provisions of this article will apply. Rates for sewer service will be established as necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-115—90-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 90-131. - Private disposal prohibited unless expressly permitted. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be a violation of this article to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-132. - Compliance required. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 90-113, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-133. - Permit required; application, fee. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-134. - Approval of installation. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the director. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection, which inspection shall be made within 48 hours (Saturdays and Sundays excluded) of the receipt of the notice by a representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-135. - Type, capacity, location, and layout. 
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all of the recommendations of the Department of Human Resources of Georgia. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot size is less than the minimum area recommended by the Department of Human Resources of Georgia. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-136. - Discontinuing use when sewer becomes available. 
Within 90 days of the time a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 90-113, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal filters shall be filled with suitable material and abandoned at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-137. - Requirements of other authorities not affected. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction over private sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-138. - Private operation and funding. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city, unless an agreement in writing has been made with the director for such operation and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-139. - Septic tank hauler. 
It shall be a violation of this article for a private septic tank pumpout hauler to deposit sewage in a manhole or other point of discharge in the city POTW without approval of point of discharge and payment of fees as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-140—90-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 90-151. - Permit required to uncover, connect with, etc., public sewer. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-152. - Same—Classes. 
A building sewer permit is required before any residential, commercial, or industrial user connects to the public sewer. 
There shall be three classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, (b) for food service and processing establishments, and (c) for establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. A permit and inspection fee as prescribed in article 23 for a building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-153. - Responsibility for cost of installation and connection: indemnification of city. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-154. - Separate and independent building sewers. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided by the owner for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available nor can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-155. - Old building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-156. - Specifications and installation standards. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the building code, plumbing code and all other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. All joints of the building sewer shall be tight and waterproof. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-157. - Building sewer elevation; lifts. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-158. - Connections permitting surface runoff. 
No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-159. - Connection standards. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-160. - Notice of readiness for, and supervision of connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-161. - Excavations, protection, restoring streets, etc. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored by the building owner in a workmanlike manner satisfactory to the city. Construction shall comply with the applicable provisions of P.L. 91-596, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-162. - Toilet facilities and connection after notice. 
The owner of any housed building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-163. - Connection application form—Residential and commercial. 
Each applicant for a residential or commercial building sewer connection along with the director shall fill out and sign a form prescribed therefore before a permit or license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-164. - Same—Industrial. 
Each industrial sewer applicant along with the director shall fill out and sign the prescribed form before a permit or license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-165—90-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-181. - Purpose and policy. 
This division establishes limitations and prohibitions on the quantity and quality of wastewater which may be lawfully discharged into the POTW. The specific limitations set forth in section 90-194 of this division and other prohibitions and limitations of this division, are subject to change to ensure that they are sufficient to protect the operation of the POTW, to enable the POTW to comply with its NPDES permit, to provide a cost effective means of operating the POTW, and to protect the public health and the environment. The director shall recommend changes or modifications to the city manager, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-182. - Discharge of stormwater, etc.—Prohibited into sanitary sewers. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-183. - Same—Required to be into storm sewers or natural outlet. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the EPD, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-184. - Discharges prohibited into public sewers—Absolute prohibition. 
No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. The general and specific prohibitions in this section and section 90-185 apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. These prohibitions, in addition to all other provisions of the general pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution (40 CFR Part 403), apply to all users of the POTW. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW any of the following described waters or wastes: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may become, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21, or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, or to the environment. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, fuel oil and any other substance which is a fire hazard to the system. 
(2)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65.5 degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference. Also prohibited is any wastewater that will cause the temperature of the POTW treatment plant influent to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C). 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 9.5, or otherwise having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW or the environment. 
(4)  Any slug discharge of wastes, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will result in interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Any solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or result in interference such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(6)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause pass through or interference, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, cause acute worker health and safety problems, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitations set forth in this article or an individual wastewater discharge permit. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act. In the event of toxicity being found in the POTW, the city may at its discretion require industrial users to participate in a toxicity reduction evaluation in accordance with the provisions of the city's NPDES permit. 
(7)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(8)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(9)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(10)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause pass through or interference. 
(12)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director. 
It shall also be a violation of this article to discharge to any storm sewer within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-185. - Same—Conditional prohibition. 
No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, POTW treatment plant processes or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature and capacities of the treatment plant processes, capacity of the treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any POTW treatment plant process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard to the environment or in the receiving waters of the treatment plant. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees F. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.75 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(6)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(7)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the POTW treatment plant processes, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement of arrangement between the city and any user of the POTW, whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to any payments of user charges as may be applicable. In no case shall the city enter a special agreement such that any applicable federal or state regulations would be violated. 
No statement in this division or in this section is intended or may be construed to prohibit the appropriate agency from adding, deleting or changing specific requirements or from making specific requirements more restrictive where wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the POTW, or to create a public nuisance, or to cause the discharge from the POTW to violate effluent or stream quality standards imposed or as may be imposed by the EPD or the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-186. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A CIU may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the CIU can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(b)  All industrial users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall comply with all requirements of such standards, and shall also comply with any additional or more stringent limitations contained in this division or established by the State of Georgia. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for existing sources subject to such standards shall be within three years following promulgation of the standard unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the standard. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the standard. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-187. - Septic tank pumping, hauling, and discharge. 
No person owning "septic tank" pump trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks shall discharge directly or indirectly such sewage into the POTW, unless such person shall first have obtained approval from the director. All operators must agree to abide by the provisions of this article and any special conditions or requirements, including fees, established by the director. The director shall designate the locations and times such trucks may discharge into the POTW, and may refuse to accept any truckload of waste at his absolute discretion when it appears that the waste could interfere with the effective operation of the POTW. The director may require septic tank waste or other liquid waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the septic tank waste or other liquid waste haulers to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-188. - Pretreatment requirements. 
Industrial users shall design, construct, operate, and maintain wastewater pretreatment facilities, at the user's expense, as necessary to achieve compliance with the local limits set forth in section 90-194, the categorical pretreatment standards, and the prohibitions set out in this division of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, EPD, or the director, whichever is more stringent. These pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the city and maintained in proper working conditions at all times. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-189. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Plans, specifications, and operating procedures for such wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the director for and acceptance before such facilities are constructed. The director shall review said plans within 60 days and shall recommend to the user any changes. Prior to beginning construction of said pretreatment facility, the user shall also secure such building, plumbing, or other permits that may be required by the city. The user shall construct said pretreatment facility within the time provided in the user's wastewater discharge permit. Following completion of construction, the user shall provide the director with "as-built" drawings to be maintained by the director. 
(b)  Any review and acceptance by the director such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility of producing a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Nor shall any fixed or verbal agreement as to the limits of constituents or volumes of waters or wastes be considered as final approval for continuing operation. These limits will be subject to constant study and change as considered necessary to serve their intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-190. - Accidental/slug discharges. 
(a)  All industrial users shall provide facilities and/or institute procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, in-plant transfer or processing and materials handling areas, and diked areas or holding ponds. 
(b)  In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume, and corrective actions taken. 
(c)  Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, the waters of the State of Georgia or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(d)  All industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could potentially cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, and follow the procedures outlined in this section when such an occurrence arises. 
(e)  Upon evaluation and decision by the director, any industrial user may be required to develop, submit for approval, and implement a plan to control slug discharges. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for promptly notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a discharge prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b) or section 90-184, including procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
(4)  Any necessary procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge; including, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-191. - Fats, oils, and grease traps/interceptors. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) traps/interceptors shall be provided in accordance with article V, City of Douglas FOG Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-192. - Rates for water and sewer service. 
Rates for water service are set by the "water rate schedule," section 23-21 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglas and its subsequent amendments. Rates for sewer service are set by the "sewer rate schedule," section 23-22 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglas and its subsequent amendments. The effective rate schedules are available at the city clerk's office. In addition, the city may assess a separate fee to industrial users for costs incurred by the city and related to the pretreatment requirements stated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-193. - Special agreements and arrangements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial user, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial user. The terms and conditions of any such agreement may not, however, result in a violation of any industrial pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-194. - Local limits. 
No person or user shall discharge wastewater in excess of the following concentration limits unless a special permit condition is issued with an individual wastewater discharge permit. Special permit conditions may be issued for the following reasons: 
(1)  The industrial user is in compliance with categorical pretreatment standards, and the receiving plant's influent wastewater characteristic is within the guidelines established to protect the treatment plant operations and receiving stream water quality, 
(2)  A higher interim concentration level is allowed in conjunction with a requirement that the user construct a pretreatment facility or institute changes in operation and maintenance procedures to reduce the concentration of pollutants to levels not exceeding the local limits set forth within a fixed period of time, or 
(3)  For users having discharges of less than 10,000 gallons per day, a mass limit may be applied based on the maximum acceptable concentration at a flow of 10,000 gallons per day. 
The following limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations below. 
25 mg/L ammonia-nitrogen 
0.01 mg/L arsenic 
300 mg/L BOD5 
0.008 mg/L cadmium 
0.01 mg/L total chromium 
0.05 mg/L copper 
Cyanide prohibited 
0.05 mg/L lead 
Mercury prohibited 
0.04 mg/L molybdenum 
0.02 mg/L nickel 
0.01 mg/L selenium 
0.025 mg/L silver 
40 mg/L Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 
0.1 mg/L total phenols 
4.0 mg/L total phosphorus 
300 mg/L TSS 
0.15 mg/L zinc 
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards may establish limits for pollutants not listed above, including specific organic substances. All users must comply with the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. In addition, the director may limit the discharge of other specific substances not listed above on a case-by-case basis, if the discharge of that substance is shown to interfere with the operation or performance of the receiving POTW, violates any receiving stream water quality standards, jeopardizes POTW worker health or safety, or endangers the environment. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-195. - Dilution prohibition. 
No user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the categorical pretreatment standards, or any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or the state. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-196. - Right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-197—90-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS BY POULTRY OR ANIMAL PROCESSORS 

Sec. 90-211. - Screening of sewage and waste required. 
No person engaged in the processing of poultry or animals in the city shall empty any sewage or waste from such poultry or animal processing plant into the sewer system of the city without first screening said waste through a screen or screens to be installed and operated as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-212. - Maximum size of screen openings. 
The screen through which said sewage and waste shall be passed before emptying into the sewer system of the city shall have clear openings in said screens not larger than twelve ten-thousandths (0.0012) of a square inch. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-213. - Removal of solids from screens: Disposition. 
Said persons are required to remove all solids from said screens as the solids accumulate thereon. Such solids shall not be placed in the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-214. - No solids to escape; pipes for liquids. 
The screen shall be so installed that no waste of any kind shall go into the sewer system of the city without passing through the screen. Liquids from which solids have been removed shall be conveyed to the city sewer system in a closed pipe or conduit. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-215. - Approval of drawing and word description. 
Before the installation of any wire screen, a drawing and word description of the proposed screen and installation thereof shall be submitted to the director for his review and no such screen may be installed until said drawing and description have been accepted in writing by the director. The drawing shall show a diagrammatic layout of the drain system and shall show how all waste is to be conveyed to the screen and to the city sewer system. The description of the screen shall include specifications and size capacity. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-216—90-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT, DISCHARGE REPORTS, AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 90-231. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Significant industrial users shall discharge wastewater only in accordance with the conditions of their individual wastewater discharge permits. All significant industrial users of the POTW shall apply for and obtain a wastewater discharge permit in the manner hereinafter set forth. Permit application forms will be sent to affected users by the director following promulgation of a categorical pretreatment standard or a determination by the director that a permit be issued. A permit application shall be submitted by the user, accompanied by a fee set by the city, within 180 days after promulgation of a categorical standard or a determination by the director that a permit be issued. 
(b)  The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-232. - Permit issuance. 
All wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations including the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for New and Existing Sources set out in 40 CFR, Subchapter N, parts 401 through 471. Permits must contain the following: 
(1)  Statement of permit duration (in no case more than five years); 
(2)  Statement of nontransferability without prior notification to the city and provisions for furnishing a copy of the existing discharge permit to the new owner or operator; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on federal, state, and local law; 
(5)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; 
(6)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the director to be necessary. 
Permits may contain, but need not to be limited to, the following: 
a.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the POTW; 
b.  Limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
c.  Limits on average and/or maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
d.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measuring devices; 
e.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
f.  Compliance schedules; 
g.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
h.  Requirements for retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge; 
i.  Requirements for notification to the director of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the POTW; 
j.  Requirements for notification to the director of slug discharges; 
k.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW; 
l.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
m.  Requirement for notification of any bypasses around treatment systems; 
n.  A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit; and 
o.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
Prior to issuing an individual wastewater discharge permit, a draft permit will be sent to the user which will show the conditions and discharge limitations. The user will be allowed 30 days to show cause why any of the conditions of this permit should not be required. Upon approval of the draft permit or after resolution of permit conditions with the director, a formal permit will be issued to the applicant which will remain in effect until revoked by the city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-233. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing Categorical Industrial Users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (1)(b) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsections (2)a.—e. below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of Pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated process for existing sources. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
3.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
4.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection 90-234(a) of this article. 
5.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsections 90-234(b) and (c) of this article. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection 90-233(b) of this article. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 90-233(f) of this aricle. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 90-233(a)(2)g. of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in subsections 90-233(a)(2)d.—f. of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 90-233(f) of this article. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any industrial user subject to the permitting requirements established in this section shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities as required by the permit. All industrial users shall submit to the city at least once every six months (on dates specified by the director) reports describing the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. The report shall be based on sampling and analyses performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136. The sampling and analyses may be performed by the city in lieu of the industrial user. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities and equipment shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user, subject to the reporting requirement in this section, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in subsections 90-234(b) and (c) of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Changed conditions reports. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least five days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 90-232 of this article. 
(2)  The director may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit under section 90-231(b) of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 90-236 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. 
(1)  All reports and applications shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(2)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user, independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(g)  Wastewater survey questionnaire. When requested by the director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(h)  Notification of hazardous waste discharge. An User shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months. All users shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d), and (e). 
Discharges are exempt from the above requirements of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. 
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-234. - Samples and analyses. 
(a)  All sample analyses performed for the purpose of determining permit compliance or developing wastewater characterization data, whether performed for the user or the city, shall be at the user's expense. All wastewater sample analyses shall be performed in accordance with the wastewater procedures described in the "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants," 40 CFR 136, or other procedures approved by the director. 
(b)  Except as indicated in subsections (c) and (d) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(c)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(d)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in subsections 90-233(a) and (c) [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs in subsection 90-233(d) (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(e)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if: 
(1)  The city performs sampling at the user's facility at a frequency of at least once per month. 
(2)  The city performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(f)  When required by the director, the industrial user shall provide for adequate documentation of pretreatment controls such as standard operating procedural manual and/or quality control programs. 
(g)  If the city performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the city will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-235. - Duration of permits. 
Wastewater discharge permits, as provided for herein, shall be of full force and effect only so long as user complies with all terms and conditions of said permit, city ordinances, and any and all other applicable rules and laws of the State of Georgia and/or federal statues. Said permit may be revoked by the city upon determination by the director or his duly authorized representative that user is in violation of any city ordinances, and/or any and all other applicable rules, regulations and laws of the State of Georgia and/or federal statutes. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. A user must apply in writing for a renewal permit within the period of time not more than 90 days and not less than 60 days prior to the expiration date of the current permit. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-236. - Changes to permits. 
The terms and conditions of a permit are subject to modification by the director for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of individual wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, the city's POTW beneficial sludge use, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or condition of the individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentation of failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
Users shall be notified of any proposed changes in their permit by the director at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any change or new condition in a permit shall include a provision for a reasonable time schedule for compliance. The user may appeal the decision of the director to the city manager in regard to any changed permit conditions as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-237. - Transfer of a permit. 
Individual wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. An individual wastewater discharge permit shall not be transferred to a new owner, new user, or for different premises, unless approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-238. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article is subject to be modified, suspended, or revoked in whole or in part during its term for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit or other applicable law or regulation; 
(2)  Obtaining of a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts; 
(3)  Failure of a user to report factually the wastewater constituents and characteristics of their discharge; 
(4)  Failure of the user to report material changes in his operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(5)  Refusal of access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, testing, or monitoring; or 
(6)  A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-239. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-240—90-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - INSPECTIONS, MONITORING, AND ENTRY 

Sec. 90-251. - Right of entry. 
The director, or his/her designee, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director, or his/her designee, ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties: 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director, or his/her designee, will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director, or his/her designee, shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The director, or his/her designee, may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a frequency recommended by the manufacturer to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director, or his/her designee, access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-252. - User operation of monitoring facilities. 
The user shall provide and operate at its own expense monitoring facilities to provide sampling, and flow measurement of the user's discharge to the POTW. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the User's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the monitoring facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. In addition, the city may at any time and without prior notification to the user, inspect and sample, at the expense of the user, any user of the POTW. 
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed in accordance with a schedule established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-253. - Observance of safety rules. 
While performing necessary work on private properties the director or his duly authorized representative shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-254. - Inspections where city holds easement. 
The building inspector and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-255—90-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT 

Sec. 90-271. - Authority to enforce. 
The City of Douglas, Georgia, and its designees, are hereby granted all of the authority of Douglas, Georgia to deal with, exercise or apply all of the powers and authority of Douglas, Georgia, with respect to the subject matter of this artcle, all of the authority and powers contained in the subject of water pollution and control, and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, in thereto, in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as presently amended and/or federal law on the subject of water pollution and control, and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
The city, and its designees, are hereby authorized to develop formulas and promulgate regulations, including enforcement actions, to provide, but not limited to, the sharing or paying of costs according to benefit or otherwise, or facilities, connections, service charges, discharge fees, pretreatment charges, retainers, interceptors, permit fees, user charges and fees, sampling, testing, measuring and monitoring fees. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-272. - Notification of violation. 
Whenever the director finds that a user has violated or is violating this article, or an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon said User a written notice of the violation. Within 10 days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-273. - Consent orders. 
The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurance of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 90-275 and 90-276 below. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-274. - Show cause hearing. 
The director may order a user which causes or contributes to violation of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-275. - Compliance order. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-276. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a representative for, taking any other actions against the user. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-277. - Administrative fines. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permits, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the director shall have such other collection remedies as he has to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request for the director to reconsider the fine within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where the director believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the request from the user. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-278. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(b)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the individual wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in section 90-279 are initiated against the user. 
(c)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director prior to the date of the hearing described in section 90-274. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-279. - Termination of permit. 
Significant industrial users proposing to discharge into the POTW, must first obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit from the city. Any user who violates the following conditions of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or any applicable or state and federal law, is subject to permit termination: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions. 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection (including photocopying necessary documents), monitoring, or sampling. 
A noncompliant user will be notified of the proposed termination of its individual wastewater permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 90-274 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-280. - Other enforcement remedies. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, the director, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the city court. 
(1)  Injunctive Relief. When a User has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director, through counsel may petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the industrial user. The director shall have such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges. 
(2)  Falsifying information. Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both. 
(3)  Damaging facilities. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, remove, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city POTW. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to section 90-280 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-281. - Supplemental enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Annual publication of significant noncompliance. The director shall publish, at least annually, in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those users which are found to be in significant noncompliance, with any provisions of this article or any permit or order issued hereunder during the period since the previous publication. Significant noncompliance is defined in section 90-101 of this article. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months. This notification shall be sent to the U.S. EPA and the Georgia EPD. 
(b)  Performance bonds. The director may decline to reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(c)  Liability insurance. The director may decline to reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge. 
(d)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(e)  Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director or his designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(f)  Contractor listings. 
(1)  Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. 
(2)  Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-282. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  Treatment upsets. 
(1)  Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (3), below, are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Treatment bypasses. 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(3)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of paragraphs (4), (5), (6), and (7) of this section. 
(4)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. 
(5)  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(6)  Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraphs (4) and (5) of this section. 
(7)  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse affects, it the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (6) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-283—90-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 90-291. - Actions by the city. 
If water or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the POTW in violation of any provision of this article, the city may after notifying the offender and providing a hearing before the city: 
(1)  Terminate or reject the discharge of water and wastes by the violator into the POTW; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to a condition as authorized and/or required by this article, or any water or waters into the POTW; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and flow rates of waters or wastes entering the POTW as authorized and/or required by this article; 
(4)  Require payment by the violator to cover the added capital and operating costs, not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, of handling and treating otherwise prohibited wastes which can be documented as reasonable charges for the materials, supplies, labor and other costs actually required; 
(5)  Revoke the user's permit. 
Any person failing to pay any sewer use charges authorized by this article shall be subject to termination of his sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-292. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any user who has violated or continues to violate this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the director for a civil penalty of at least $1,000.00, state law permitting, plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the director may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(b)  The director shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-293. - Criminal prosecution. 
Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(Ord. No. 062608(2), 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-294—90-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FATS, OIL, AND GREASE FOR FOOD SERVICE AND PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-310. - Purpose. 
The objective of this article is to help prevent sanitary sewer blockages that can cause untreated wastewater to back-up into homes and businesses and overflow into the environment. Many of these obstructions can be caused by the introduction, discharge, and contribution of fats, oils, and greases (FOG) into the city's publicly-owned treatment works (POTWs) by commercial, industrial, institutional, and all other nonresidential food preparation and processing activities. The City of Douglas, as a Georgia EPD delegated control authority, is required to regulate FOG to comply with the federal Clean Water Act (40 CFR 403) and the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20) and to protect state waters, public health, and its POTW. 
The requirements of this article shall be in addition to the requirements of the city's sewer use ordinance (SUO). 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 1, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-311. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following phrases and words shall have the meaning assigned below, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where certain terms or words related to pretreatment regulation are not herein defined, those words shall have the meaning defined in the city's SUO, article IV. 
Best management practices shall mean schedules of activities, such as prohibitions of practices; general good housekeeping, pollution prevention, and educational activities; operations and maintenance procedures; and other practices established by facility management to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the city's stormwater system or waters of the state or the United States. 
City shall mean the City of Douglas, Georgia, or its duly authorized representative. 
Commercial wastes shall mean nontoxic, nonhazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities. 
Contact person shall mean the individual responsible for overseeing the daily operation of the food service or processing establishment and who is also responsible for overseeing the establishment's compliance with the city's FOG ordinance. 
Establishment or facility shall mean a building or a location, as identified by the address used for postal deliveries, where food service or processing, as defined in this section, occurs. 
Fats, oil, and grease (FOG) shall mean all greases, grease complexes, fats, oils, scum, sludges, and all other organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules, that may solidify or become viscous between the temperatures of 32 degrees F and 150 degrees F (0 degrees C to 65 degrees C), and that separate from wastewater by gravity. Such substances are detectable and measurable using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR 136. While FOG is most commonly associated with fried foods, FOG also comes from cooking meats, dairy products (butter, cheese, ice cream, etc.), mayonnaise, salad dressings, creams, and sauces. 
In the wastewater collection system, FOG coats the interior surface of pipes, eventually clogging the pipes and causing backups and overflows into the environment (ground, waterways, etc.). At the treatment plant, FOG can interfere with treatment operations, resulting in insufficient treatment of pollutants before discharge into state waters. FOG is a regulated pollutant (city's SUO division 5). 
FOG trap or FOG interceptor shall mean a device that is designed, installed, and operated in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for separating and retaining FOG in the trap or interceptor prior to the wastewater entering the city's POTW. The FOG interceptor also collects floating and settleable materials generated by or incidental to food service and processing activities. 
* FOG trap usually refers to a small indoor reservoir built into the kitchen wastewater piping, a short distance from the FOG bearing drain(s) that discharge into it, installed above or below the floor level. Baffles in the reservoir retain the wastewater long enough for the FOG to congeal and rise to the surface. The FOG can then be removed and disposed of properly. FOG trap maintenance is usually performed by maintenance staff or other employees of the establishment. 
* FOG interceptor usually refers to a large capacity underground vault with a minimum capacity of 750 gallons that is located outside of the establishment. The vault includes a minimum of two compartments and flow between each compartment is through a 90 degree fitting designed for FOG retention. 
The large capacity of the interceptor provides a higher residence time (than a FOG trap) so that the wastewater has time to cool and FOG can congeal and rise to the surface as solids settle out. FOG interceptor maintenance consists of removing the entire contents (liquids and solids) from the interceptor and properly disposing of the material in accordance with federal, state, and/or local rules and laws and is performed by a permitted commercial waste transporter. 
Food processing establishment shall mean a permitted user primarily engaged in the manufacture or packaging of foodstuffs for human consumption, without using any form of cooking at the establishment. Such establishments include, but are not limited to, raw poultry and meat handling/packaging facilities and poultry slaughterhouses. 
Food service establishment shall mean a permitted user primarily engaged in the activities of cooking, preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for human consumption, any form of foodstuff and which uses one or more of the following cooking or preparation methods in connection with such activities: cooking or preparation by frying (all methods); baking (all methods); grilling; sauteing; rotisserie cooking; broiling (all methods); boiling; blanching; roasting; toasting; poaching; or any type of cooking or preparation that produces a hot nonpotable or nonedible product in or on a receptacle that requires washing, rinsing or other form of cleaning. Such establishments include, but are not limited to, restaurants, coffee shops, luncheonettes, taverns, take out facilities, institutional food service facilities (e.g., schools, extended care, nursing homes, etc.), supermarkets, daycare facilities where meals for more than six children are prepared, and similar facilities by whatever name called. 
Georgia FOG alliance shall mean the nonprofit organization (see http://www.georgiafog.com/) established, by and for peers participating in FOG programs, as a resource for information, education, and networking for any user, designee or governing authority of a municipality or county with a FOG program. The website also offers tools for commercial waste transporters to operate within the Laws of Georgia. 
Pretreatment coordinator shall mean the person designated by the city to be responsible for monitoring what is discharged by a user into the city's wastewater collection system, for ensuring that what is received can be treated or removed at the city's treatment plant, and for ensuring user compliance with city's ordinances and federal, state, and/or local rules and laws. 
Sampling port shall mean the last point downstream of a FOG trap or interceptor that will allow effluent sampling to take place, prior to its mixing with sanitary flows from the establishment. 
Tank truck shall mean any vehicle that removes and transports commercial wastes. 
Transporter shall mean any person or firm, which owns or operates one or more waste tank trucks that receive or dispose of commercial wastes in Georgia. 
User shall mean an establishment primarily engaged in any commercial, industrial, institutional, or other nonresidential activity that introduces, contributes, or discharges (or causes or permits the introduction, contribution, or discharge of) wastewater into the city's POTW, including any person or group who introduces, contributes, or discharges wastewater into the city's POTW through any mobile source or temporary source (such as catering/banquet halls). 
Waste transporter permit shall mean the written authorization granted by the city for an individual tank truck that receives or disposes of commercial wastes in Georgia. 
Wastewater discharge permit shall mean the written authorization granted by the city for the user to discharge into the city's POTW, with the user's agreement to comply with the city's ordinances and federal, state, and/or local rules and laws. The permit is valid for up to two years and is nontransferable. 
Wastewater shall mean any substance introduced, contributed, or discharged into the city's POTW. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 1, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-312. - Abbreviations. 
The abbreviations used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
"CFR" shall mean Code of Federal Regulations. 
"Degrees C" shall mean degrees Celsius. 
"Degrees F" shall mean degrees Fahrenheit. 
"EPD" shall mean the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
"mg/L" shall mean milligrams per liter. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 1, 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-313—90-322. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 90-323. - Discharge limits and requirements. 
(a)  All food service and processing establishments shall only introduce wastewaters that meet the requirements and standards established in this article and the city's SUO. 
(b)  All food service and processing establishments that discharge or have the potential to discharge FOG bearing wastewaters into the city's POTW shall not exceed the FOG concentration limit of 100 mg/L. The facility shall bear all the expense of proving compliance with this limit. 
(c)  All food service and processing establishments required by the city to provide FOG pretreatment shall, at their expense, install, operate, and maintain FOG traps and/or interceptors to meet the above discharge limit. All FOG traps and interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for sampling, cleaning, and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 2, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-324. - Regulations for new installations. 
(a)  Food service and processing establishments, which are, after the effective date of this article, proposed, constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated, shall be required by the city to install FOG traps and/or interceptors properly sized to handle the establishment's FOG bearing wastewaters. 
The prospective user shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before being issued a building sewer permit from the city's community development inspection and permits division. This permit shall also be obtained prior to the city's issuance of any business license or certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  New installations of FOG traps and interceptors shall be subject to the applicable design requirements presented in section 90-348 of this article. 
(c)  Design drawings and specifications of the proposed FOG trap and/or interceptor installations sufficiently sized to meet the city's ordinances shall be part of the permit application, along with proposed establishment's site plan, floor plan, plumbing plans, and contact person's phone number. A prospective user may submit a request for an exception to the FOG trap or interceptor requirement with the permit application if the prospective user demonstrates that the establishment's upcoming discharge will be in consistent compliance, based on defensible analytical results, with the city's ordinances. 
(1)  The permit application shall apply to all FOG traps and interceptors located at the same facility, to be operated by the same user. Each FOG trap and interceptor shall be identified by a unique identifier selected and noted in the permit application by the prospective user. The pretreatment coordinator shall review complete applications for approval within 30 days of receipt. 
(2)  All information requested by the city's permit application shall be certified by the applicant as true and complete prior to submittal for review and approval. 
(d)  As part of the permit application process, the prospective user shall notify the pretreatment coordinator that the FOG traps and/or interceptors are ready for inspection prior to connection to the city's POTW. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city's building inspector. A reinspection fee in accordance with the current fee schedule established by the city's community development inspection and permits division shall be charged to any establishment that fails its initial installation inspection. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Permit duration; 
(2)  Discharge limits, requirements, and prohibitions; 
(3)  Permit nontransferability clause; 
(4)  Frequency of maintenance and inspections; 
(5)  Operations and maintenance requirements; 
(6)  Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports; 
(7)  Statement of permission for the pretreatment coordinator and other duly authorized employees of the city to enter the user's property without prior notification for the purposes of inspection, observation, photography, records examination and copying, measurement, sampling, or testing; and/or 
(8)  Other conditions deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to ensure user compliance with city's ordinances and federal, state, and/or local rules and laws. 
(f)  The applicant will be notified within 30 days of receipt of the permit application of the pretreatment coordinator's determination to deny a permit to an establishment. 
(1)  Notification. The applicant will be advised in writing of the specific cause for the denial. 
(2)  Process. An applicant who is denied a permit under this article shall have the right to appeal such denial to the director of water and wastewater. The appeal shall be filed with the pretreatment coordinator within three business days after the notice of denial is received. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 2, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-325. - Regulations for existing installations. 
(a)  Permit requirement. Food service and processing establishments discharging wastewater into the city's POTW before the effective date of this article shall submit a permit application to obtain a wastewater discharge permit within six months of adoption of this article. Failure to submit a permit application by this date shall be grounds for revocation of any business licenses issued by the city. 
(b)  Design drawings and specifications of existing or proposed FOG trap and/or interceptor installations sufficiently sized to meet the city's ordinances shall be part of the permit application, along with establishment's site plan, floor plan, plumbing plans, and contact person's phone number. A user may submit a request for an exception to the FOG trap or interceptor requirement with the permit application if the user demonstrates that the establishment's discharge is in consistent compliance, based on defensible analytical results, with the city's ordinances. 
(1)  The permit application shall apply to all FOG traps and interceptors located at the same facility and operated by the same user. Each FOG trap and interceptor shall be identified by a unique identifier selected and noted in the permit application by the user. The pretreatment coordinator shall review completed applications for approval within 90 days of receipt. 
(2)  All information requested in the permit application shall be certified by the applicant as true and complete prior to submittal for review and approval. 
(c)  As part of the permit application process, the pretreatment coordinator shall inspect the establishment's existing FOG traps and/or interceptors. 
(1)  Food service and processing establishments requiring new FOG traps and/or interceptors, as determined by the city, shall have approved FOG traps and/or interceptors installed and in operation no later than two years after the adoption of this article. New installations of FOG traps and interceptors shall be subject to the applicable design requirements presented in section 90-348 of this article. 
(2)  Food service and processing establishments with existing FOG traps and/or interceptors may, at the discretion of the pretreatment coordinator, keep the existing FOG traps or interceptors in operation if demonstrated by the user to be designed and sized to meet the criteria defined in section 90-323 of this article. 
(3)  Food service and processing establishments with existing but noncomplying FOG traps and/or interceptors, as determined by the city, shall have approved FOG traps and/or interceptors installed and in operation no later than two years after the adoption of this article. New installations of FOG traps and/or interceptors shall be subject to the applicable design requirements presented in section 90-348 of this article. 
(4)  A reinspection fee in accordance with the current fee schedule established by the city's community development inspection and permits division shall be charged to any establishment that fails its initial FOG trap or interceptor inspection, in addition to any fines that may be imposed by the city for any other violations of city ordinances and federal, state, and/or local laws and regulations. 
(d)  Permit conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Permit duration; 
(2)  Discharge limits, requirements, and prohibitions; 
(3)  Permit nontransferability clause; 
(4)  Frequency of maintenance and inspections; 
(5)  Operations and maintenance requirements; 
(6)  Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports; 
(7)  Statement of permission for the pretreatment coordinator and other duly authorized employees of the city to enter the user's property without prior notification for the purposes of inspection, observation, photography, records examination and copying, measurement, sampling, or testing; and/or 
(8)  Other conditions deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to ensure user compliance with city's ordinances and federal, state, and/or local rules and laws. 
(e)  If a permit application for an existing establishment is denied, the applicant will be notified within 30 calendar days of the pretreatment coordinator's determination to deny the application. 
(1)  Notification. The applicant will be advised in writing of the specific cause for the denial. 
(2)  Process. An applicant who is denied a permit under this article shall have the right to appeal such denial to the director of water/wastewater. The appeal shall be filed with the pretreatment coordinator within three business days after the notice of denial is received. 
(3)  Suspension. Upon an order of suspension by the pretreatment coordinator, the user shall immediately cease and desist its discharge of any FOG bearing wastewater and shall have no right to discharge any FOG bearing wastewater directly or indirectly to the city's POTW for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the user. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 2, 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-326—90-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 90-336. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Permit application fee/annual discharge fee. The applicant shall submit an application fee in accordance with the current fee schedule established by the city's community development inspection and permits division. This fee must be submitted with the permit application and is nonrefundable if the permit request is denied. If the permit is granted, this fee applies as the annual discharge fee for the first year after permit issuance. The permit application/annual discharge fees are based on the number of FOG traps and interceptors required to handle the establishment's FOG bearing wastewaters. 
(b)  The pretreatment coordinator will evaluate the fee schedule annually, based on the cost to the city for its management of its FOG program, and adjust such fees administratively to ensure full cost recovery; provided however, a fee increase of less than ten percent per year shall not require approval of the city's board of commissioners. Any such fee adjustment shall be posted at the city clerk's office and permit holders shall be given written notice prior to the due date of the annual discharge fee. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 3, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-337. - Permit suspension and appeal. 
(a)  The pretreatment coordinator may suspend any wastewater discharge permit when it is determined by the pretreatment coordinator that a user: 
(1)  Has failed to comply with the conditions of its wastewater discharge permit or any other directive from the pretreatment coordinator pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Knowingly provided a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the pretreatment coordinator, the city, or other regulatory agency; 
(3)  Refused to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the pretreatment coordinator, the city, or other regulatory agency to determine user compliance with its wastewater discharge permit conditions or other city's ordinances and federal, state, and/or local rules and laws; 
(4)  Falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
(5)  Refused reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring or as otherwise provided in this article; 
(6)  Caused interference, sewer blockages, or sewer overflows to the city's POTW; 
(7)  Failed to pay sewer charges; 
(8)  Failed to pay fines; 
(9)  Failed to meet federal, state, and/or city compliance schedules. 
(b)  When the pretreatment coordinator has reason to believe that grounds exist for suspension of a wastewater discharge permit, he shall give written notice thereof by certified mail or overnight mail delivery to the user, setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist. 
(c)  Upon an order of suspension by the pretreatment coordinator, the user shall immediately cease and desist its discharge bearing wastewater and shall have no right to discharge any FOG bearing wastewater directly or indirectly to the city's POTW for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the user. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 3, 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-338—90-347. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FOG TRAPS 

Sec. 90-348. - FOG trap and interceptor design requirements. 
All food service and processing establishments discharging FOG to the city's POTW shall install FOG traps and/or interceptors necessary to achieve and maintain compliance with the [paragraphs] below: 
(1)  The FOG traps or interceptors shall be installed on a separate building sewer line servicing kitchen flows and shall be connected only to those fixtures or drains which would allow FOG to be discharged. This shall include: 
a.  Pot sinks; 
b.  Pre-rinse sinks; 
c.  Any sink into which FOG are likely to be introduced; 
d.  Soup kettles or similar devices; 
e.  Wok stations; 
f.  Floor drains or sinks into which kettles may be drained; and 
g.  Any other fixtures or drains that is likely to allow FOG to be discharged. 
(2)  No fixture or drain other than those listed above shall be directly connected to the FOG traps or interceptors unless approved by the pretreatment coordinator. 
(3)  Except as provided by Item 4 below, the FOG bearing wastewaters generated from a food service or processing establishment shall be treated using an outdoor FOG interceptor. It is effective to keep ongoing pump out costs at a minimum by installing a FOG interceptor with sufficient volume to contain pollutants longer. A larger FOG interceptor that requires fewer pump outs per year can be cost effective for the user. Outdoor FOG Interceptors installations shall have the following design features: 
a.  A capacity not less than two 1,500 gallons interceptors in series for a total capacity of 3,000 gallons. 
b.  Watertight and constructed of precast concrete by city-approved manufacturers of FOG interceptors and installed and tested as per manufacturer recommendations. Proper building ventilation and interceptor design along with gastight manhole covers will prevent odors from escaping the interceptor and allow them to escape through the roof vents. Labels or signs of warnings, hazards, or dangers should be securely attached and readable. 
c.  The user shall be responsible for providing reasonable access to the FOG interceptor for convenient inspection and maintenance. No permanent or temporary structures or containers shall be placed directly over the FOG interceptor. FOG interceptors installed in areas subject to traffic shall be designed to accommodate traffic loading. 
d.  The following minimum separating distances shall be maintained between the FOG interceptor and the items listed below: 
1.  Property line: ten feet. 
2.  Building served (no footing drains): 15 feet. 
3.  Groundwater intercepting drains, footing drains and storm drainage systems: 25 feet. 
4.  Open watercourse: 50 feet. 
(4)  Exceptions: 
a.  Limited outside space available. The pretreatment coordinator may approve the installation of a single 1,500-gallon FOG interceptor in cases where site conditions prevent the installation of two 1,500-gallon interceptors in series. 
b.  Seating capacities of 100 persons or less. The pretreatment coordinator may approve the installation of a single 1,500-gallon FOG interceptor in establishments having a seating capacity of 100 persons or less. 
c.  Seating capacities of 20 persons or less. The pretreatment coordinator may approve the installation of a single 750-gallon FOG interceptor in establishments having a seating capacity of 20 persons or less. 
d.  Indoor FOG traps. The pretreatment coordinator may approve the installation of indoor FOG traps provided the establishment is not equipped with a dishwasher or a food waste grinder without solids screening. All indoor traps shall be sized, installed, and maintained in accordance with the requirements of The Plumbing and Drainage Institute's Standard PDI-G 101, Testing and Rating Procedure for Type 1 Hydro Mechanical Grease Interceptors with Appendix of Installation and Maintenance, 2007 or latest version (http://www.pdionline.org/publications.htm). The standard includes guidance for sizing indoor FOG traps when the final details of an establishment are not known. The sizing criteria are based on the maximum flow that specific drain line sizes can carry. Solids (e.g., from garbage disposals and pre-rinse stations) must be removed from the waste stream before allowed into an indoor FOG trap. 
(5)  Alternative FOG trap technologies. The pretreatment coordinator may approve the use of alternative FOG trap technologies for controlling FOG bearing wastewaters in lieu of the aforementioned indoor FOG trap and interceptor technologies if he determines such a device will satisfy or exceed the criteria specified in section 90-323 of this article. 
a.  The user shall provide the following information to allow the pretreatment coordinator to evaluate the proposed technology: 
1.  A proposal that is specific for the establishment under consideration. The pretreatment coordinator will not consider a general or generic proposal. 
2.  Complete information regarding the actual performance criteria and proof of effectiveness in removing FOG for the proposed alternative FOG trap technology, including specifications for maintenance service frequency and other performance related documents as may be required. 
3.  The manufacturer's installation and operation manuals. 
b.  If approved, the user shall install and maintain such device in accordance with the manufacturer's installation and operation specifications, provided however, frequency of maintenance shall not be less than as specified in the user's permit. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 4, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-349. - Prohibited discharges into FOG traps and interceptors. 
The following shall not be discharged into FOG traps and interceptors: 
(1)  Wastewater that does not contain FOG and that otherwise does not require FOG removal. 
(2)  Wastewater from dishwashing machines or wastewater with temperatures exceeding 140 degrees F. FOG will initially dissolve, but the FOG can re-congeal and cause blockages further downstream, as the wastewater cools. 
(3)  Discharge from food waste grinders or garbage disposals without solids screening first. Ground food takes up volume in FOG traps and interceptors, resulting in increased cleaning frequency and can cause worse problems with blockages. 
(4)  Sanitary waste. 
(5)  Caustics, acids, solvents, other chemicals, emulsifiers, and enzymes. Some of these additives may break up FOG only to have FOG re-congeal and cause blockages further downstream. Caustics, acids, and solvents are harmful to the biological processes at the treatment plant and employees working on the wastewater collection system. 
(6)  Animal entrails or tissues, bones, or feathers. 
(7)  Biological agents for FOG remediation or FOG interceptor maintenance without permission from the pretreatment coordinator. Biological agents may be harmful to the biological processes at the treatment plant of the POTW. 
(8)  Waste cooking oil. All waste cooking (fryer) oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other methods of disposal acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 4, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 950. - Maintenance, recordkeeping, and inspection. 
(a)  FOG traps and interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary, at the user's expense, to ensure that sediment, FOG, and other floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the FOG trap and/or interceptor and to ensure the establishment's wastewater discharges are in compliance with the criteria in section 90-323 of this article. The effectiveness of each FOG trap and interceptor is directly related to the amount of FOG it receives, the maximum flow rate through it, and the cleaning frequency. 
(b)  An outdoor FOG interceptor shall be completely cleaned a minimum of every 90 days, or more frequently when: 
(1)  Twenty-five percent or more of the total wetted height of the FOG interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains FOG, sludge, solids, and other floating materials; or 
(2)  The wastewater discharged from the FOG interceptor to the POTW is not in compliance with the criteria in section 90-323 of this article; or 
(3)  The pretreatment coordinator deems it necessary to require a specific schedule. 
(c)  Indoor FOG traps and under-the-counter type FOG traps shall be cleaned at least once on days the establishment is operating until the optimum cleaning frequency is established by the user and agreed upon by pretreatment coordinator. Recovered FOG must be disposed of properly. 
(d)  An authorized representative of the establishment may submit to the pretreatment coordinator a request in writing for an exception to minimum required cleaning frequency of its FOG traps and/or interceptors. The pretreatment coordinator may grant an extension of the required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
(1)  The establishment has demonstrated that, between cleanings, the specific FOG trap and/or interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with city's ordinances and federal, state, and/or local rules and laws; 
(2)  Between cleanings, less than 25 percent of the total wetted height of the FOG interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediments, or FOG; and 
(3)  A consistent rate of FOG accumulation can be established for the establishment. 
(e)  A FOG trap or interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and inspected by the user at least once per year. FOG interceptor cleaning shall include scraping excessive solids from the wall, floors, baffles, and all piping. The user shall ensure that all fittings and fixtures inside the FOG interceptor are in good condition and functioning properly after the FOG interceptor is pumped out. 
(f)  The user shall retain detailed records on-site (which are subject to review by the pretreatment coordinator) reflecting all monitoring and maintenance carried out carried out for each FOG trap and interceptor for a minimum of three years. At a minimum, such records shall contain the following information: date and time of pump out/cleaning service, name of the person doing the service, measured depths of FOG and solids inside the FOG interceptor, deficiencies, and a receipt reflecting all services rendered by waste haulers, including removal of waste cooking oil. The user shall make these records available to the pretreatment coordinator or his designee upon request. These records may be used by the user or the pretreatment coordinator to evaluate the required maintenance frequency of the FOG trap and/or interceptor. Materials collected in the FOG trap and interceptor or waste cooking oil receptacle shall not be introduced or discharged into the city's POTW or stormwater sewer system. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials must be performed by currently licensed waste transporter. 
(g)  The user shall also require the commercial waste transporter to indicate on a manifest each collection made from the user. The state's standardized manifest form must be used (provided by Georgia FOG Alliance at http://www.georgiafog.com/formsandfiles.htm). A manifest is considered complete after the waste is delivered and disposed of at the waste disposal or processing facility and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. Users shall sign complete manifests and maintain such records on site for a period of three years for inspection by the pretreatment coordinator. 
(h)  The user shall document employee training and obtain employee signatures indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the establishment's FOG management procedures, such as best management practices and FOG trap and/or interceptor operations and maintenance requirements. Training records shall be available for review by the pretreatment coordinator and/or his designee upon request. 
(i)  Users shall supply: 
(1)  An adequate sampling port downstream of the FOG trap and/or interceptor, prior to its effluent mixing with other sanitary flows from the establishment; and 
(2)  An accessible entry into each chamber of the FOG interceptor. 
The minimum requirement for the sampling port of a FOG interceptor shall be a four-inch vertical clean-out. The city may require that a user monitor and test its discharge(s) for FOG in accordance to a sampling schedule and with such methods as are specified in the user's wastewater discharge permit. All monitoring results shall be submitted to the city in accordance to the requirements of the user's wastewater discharge permit. 
(j)  The user shall allow, upon the presentation of credentials, the pretreatment coordinator or his designee to enter the user's premises, without prior notice and at reasonable times, to inspect FOG traps and/or interceptors, witness the implementation of best management practices, sample any discharge, and to access and copy any records required to be kept under the conditions of this article. Inspections of FOG traps and/or interceptors shall be performed at frequencies determined to be necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to ensure protection of state waters, public health, and the city's POTW. Inspections will be pursuant to division 8 "inspections, monitoring and entry" of the SUO. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 4, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-351. - FOG trap and interceptor requirements exemptions. 
Upon the prior written approval of the pretreatment coordinator, food service or processing establishments may be exempted from the requirements of this article after an inspection of the subject premises and submission of adequate supporting documentation, as deemed necessary in the sole and absolute discretion of the pretreatment coordinator. At a minimum, a permit application must be completed and permit application fee submitted. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 4, 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-352—90-361. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 90-362. - Requirements of transporters. 
Users shall ensure that all waste material removed from FOG traps and interceptors is disposed of in a manner that complies with all federal, state, and local statutes, rules, regulations, policies and ordinances. users that contract for the removal of the FOG and other materials collected from the FOG trap or interceptor shall have the contract available on site for inspection by the pretreatment coordinator. The user shall require the contractor to complete a form provided by the city indicating the ultimate disposal destination of the FOG collected or whether the FOG is being reprocessed or rendered. 
(1)  In the event this section is in conflict with Chapter 391-3-6-.24 (Regulation of Commercial Waste Originators, Pumpers, Transporters, Processors, and Disposal Facilities) of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, EPD, the more stringent requirement shall prevail. 
(2)  Waste transporters permits requirements. Users shall not allow a contractor without a current waste transporter permit issued by the city to remove waste from their facilities. A permit shall be required of each individual tank truck owned and operated by a person or firm. No city permit shall be issued if the owner of the tank truck(s) is not registered with EPD and has not obtained a complete registration number from EDP. A complete registration number is obtained only after the tank truck(s) pass inspection. This registration number shall be on display on each tank truck operating in the city and shall be part of the permit number issued by the city. 
(3)  EPD approved and inspected waste transporters. To assist in the management of FOG, Georgia FOG Alliance (http://www.georgiafog.com/) maintains an updated list of commercial waste transporters registered with EPD. Commercial waste transporters must register with EPD every two years. 
(4)  Manifest requirements. The transporter shall: 
a.  Use a manifest for each FOG trap and interceptor being serviced. 
b.  Sign the transporter portion of the manifest and leave a copy of the manifest with the owner or user of the FOG trap and/or interceptor. 
c.  Present the manifest to the disposal operator to complete and sign the disposal section, and shall leave one copy of the manifest with the disposal site operator. 
d.  Send a completed copy of the manifest to the owner or User of the FOG trap and/or interceptor with the signature of the disposal site operator within 30 days. 
e.  Keep one copy of the completed manifest form demonstrating delivery to the disposal site operator for their records and shall maintain such records for a period of three years; except that the transporters manifest (or copy thereof) covering not less than the immediately preceding a 30-day period for a particular tank truck shall be kept in the transporter's tank truck. All such records shall be available for inspection. 
f.  Ensure that the manifest contains all the information required on the state's standardized manifest form. 
g.  A transporter must remove the entire contents of any tank truck and dispose of such contents, unmingled with hazardous wastes or septic wastes, only at a facility authorized to receive such waste. 
h.  A transporter shall provide a copy of the waste transporter permit for the tank truck to each disposal site where the transporter disposes of commercial wastes. 
i.  A processing or disposal facility of commercial waste shall maintain copies of all manifests of tank pumping at their principal place of business for a period of three years and make such records available for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 5, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 90-363. - Best management practices. 
Best management practices shall be used to ensure the efficiencies of the FOG traps and interceptors are not impaired and cleaning frequencies can be minimized, thereby reducing maintenance costs. Examples of best management practices: 
(1)  Provide training and refresher training to kitchen staff and other employees on how they can help ensure best management practices are implemented. 
(2)  Post "No Grease" signs above sinks and on the front of dishwashers. 
(3)  Recycle waste cooking oil. Yellow grease has reuse value and should be properly placed, without spilling, in a secured and covered receptacle, such as a barrel or drum. Contract a rendering service to haul yellow grease off-site for beneficial reuse. 
(4)  Use water temperatures less than 140 degrees F in all sinks, especially in the pre-rinse sink before the mechanical dishwasher. 
(5)  "Dry wipe off" FOG from pots, pans, dishware, food preparation surfaces, and work areas prior to washing. Use absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped. 
(6)  Maintain kitchen exhaust filters by cleaning as frequently as necessary to keep filters in good operating condition. If FOG escapes through the exhaust system, it can accumulate on the roof of the establishment and enter the storm sewers during rain or become a fire hazard. 
(7)  Dispose of food waste by recycling and/or solid waste removal to reduce amount washed down the drain. Use sink and floor drain screens to prevent solids from entering drain pipes and FOG traps and interceptors. Food particles take up volume in FOG traps and interceptors, resulting in increased pump out frequency. 
(8)  Keep the FOG traps and interceptors free of inorganic solids such as grit, towels, gloves, cigarettes, eating utensils, straws, etc., which could clog or settle in the FOG trap and interceptor, thereby reducing the effective volume or capacity of the FOG trap and interceptor. 
(9)  Observe the contract cleaning of FOG interceptors to ensure full removal of interceptor contents. Haulers may take shortcuts and only partially remove contents. 
Additional information on best management practices and reference materials may be obtained from the pretreatment coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 5, 6-26-08) 
Secs. 90-364—90-373. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 90-374. - Enforcement. 
The city shall enforce this article pursuant to the provisions of division 9, enforcement and abatement, of the city's SUO, except as provided herein: 
(1)  For a period of two years following the adoption of this article, no enforcement actions will be taken for failure to achieve with the installed FOG traps and interceptors the criteria specified in section 90-323 of this article and the maintenance requirements of section 90-350 of this article, while the optimum cleaning frequency is being established. However, once a FOG trap or interceptor fails an inspection, the user shall be notified that the FOG trap or interceptor must be pumped out within two days. 
(2)  If, during this two-year period: 
a.  An obstruction of any city sewer lateral, sewer main, storm drain, or public right-of-way occurs and causes a sewer overflow, spill, leak, causes interference to the POTW, or other event with any environmental impact; and 
b.  Such overflow, spill, leak or other event may be attributed in part or in whole to a particular user's discharge, then the user shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such discharge. 
The city shall bill the user for the costs incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a separate violation of the city's SUO. 
(Ord. No. 062608(1), § 6, 6-26-08) 
Chapter 94 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cemeteries, ch. 26; erosion and sedimentation control, § 38-61; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 74; subdivisions, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Trimming of trees interfering with utility lines. 
The city shall have the right, power and authority to cut the limbs from the trees which cause or may cause damage to overhead utility lines. The city shall use proper pruning techniques. 
(Code 1978, § 21-18) 
Sec. 94-2. - Trees and shrubbery; planting. 
All persons planting trees or shrubbery of any nature or kind upon the sidewalks of the city or on property owned by the city shall plant such trees and shrubbery according to such rules and regulations as might be established by the city manager, the director of the community services department, grounds maintenance division and the board of commissioners. All trees shall be planted in a line with other trees on the same sidewalk. In case of any failure to comply with this section the city manager may have all trees and shrubbery that are planted in violation of the same removed at the expense of the person so offending. 
(Code 1978, § 21-16) 
Sec. 94-3. - Area between property line and street. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or lessee within the city to allow any weeds, or rank vegetation of any character to grow within the area between the property line and the outer edge of the street curb. It shall be the duty of such owner or lessee to keep grass plots between the property line and the outer curb properly cut or mown. 
(Code 1978, § 12-3) 
Sec. 94-4. - Vacant property—Overgrowth prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for owners of vacant property within the city to allow same to become encumbered by growth of weeds or other vegetation not contemplated in the city's tree ordinance or in the cultivation of a garden or truck farm. 
(Code 1978, § 12-4) 
Sec. 94-5. - Same—Periodic clearing by owner. 
All property covered by growth of weeds or undergrowth prohibited above shall be cleared of the same by the owner thereof not later than August 1 each year, and not later than July 15 each year. 
(Code 1978, § 12-5) 
Sec. 94-6. - Same—Removal of vegetation obstructing utility meters. 
Where an electric, gas or water meter is located on private property, the city shall at all times have the right and authority to go upon such premises for the purpose of trimming and pruning vegetation which obstructs the reading of such meter. 
Sec. 94-7. - Same—Failure to remove. 
(a)  A failure or refusal on the part of the owner to cut the weeds or growth and remove the same from the property as above provided shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties, the city may enter upon the premises and abate the nuisance as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 12-6) 
Secs. 94-8—94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 94-31. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Tree Ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-1) 
Sec. 94-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved trees means those trees approved for planting within street rights-of-way, consisting of the following: 
(1)  Cedar. 
(2)  Dogwood. 
(3)  Ginko. 
(4)  Holly. 
(5)  Live Oak. 
(6)  Magnolia. 
(7)  Palm. 
(8)  Redbud. 
(9)  Cherry laurel. 
(10)  Crepe myrtle. 
(11)  Red maple. 
(12)  Other species of trees approved by the grounds maintenance division director of the city. 
Building department means the building department of the city under the direction of the building official, building inspector or code enforcement official. 
Diameter breast height (d.b.h.) means diameter of a tree 4½ feet above the ground level. 
Plantings means any flower, bush, vegetable, grass, etc., other than a tree or shrubbery. 
Shrubbery means any perennial woody growth with branches at or near the ground. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody plant usually with one or more main stem or trunk normally growing to a minimum overall height in excess of 15 feet. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-33. - Intent. 
By the adoption of this article it shall be the intent of the city commission to ensure the preservation and maintenance of trees within the city; to establish protective regulations for the planting and maintenance of trees, shrubbery, plantings, etc., within the public rights-of-way and within publicly owned land; to establish minimum regulations governing the removal and/or destruction of certain trees within privately developed land areas within the city; to encourage the planting and growth of enumerated tree species within the city; to prescribe the location and species of tree planting on public property; to protect the public utilizing public rights-of-way and property by regulating the installation and/or maintenance of any structure, fencing, trees, shrubbery, plantings or growth of any nature interfering with the safety and welfare of persons utilizing the public rights-of-way within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-2) 
Sec. 94-34. - Properties affected. 
The terms and conditions of this article shall apply to all real property within the city with the exception of that property occupied as a single-family residence and including all public lands and rights-of-way. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-4) 
Sec. 94-35. - Permit—Required for removal of trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit from the building official of the city to do so as herein provided to remove, or effectively remove through damaging, any tree with a trunk d.b.h. of four inches within the city. Any trimming of trees in the public rights-of-way shall be under the direction and supervision of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-5) 
Sec. 94-36. - Same—Plot plan required. 
The request for a tree removal permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing: 
(1)  Location of all trees and general identification of species. 
(2)  Location of existing and/or proposed structures. 
(3)  Identification of trees to be removed and those to be retained. 
(4)  Location of all means of ingress and egress to the property affected. 
The above items shall be field checked by the building official and his approval or disapproval with any conditions attached shall be noted on the permit application. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-6) 
Sec. 94-37. - Same—Application review. 
The building official, utilizing the technical assistance of the beautification department or such other technical assistance as it may require, shall review the application and plot plan and shall consider and determine what impact the request will have upon drainage, topography and natural resources of the area in the granting or denial of the application. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-7) 
Sec. 94-38. - Hazardous conditions. 
(a)  Danger to life or property. If the building official shall determine that any tree presents a condition so as to endanger the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city or it is infected with any form of disease that could be transmitted to other trees within the city, and requires immediate removal, verbal authorization may be given by the building official or in his absence the head of the street department or the city manager for removal of the tree. 
(b)  Removal of diseased trees. At any time the building official shall determine that any tree located within the city shall have become diseased and the disease may not be effectively treated and the existence of the diseased tree may present a danger of transmittal of the disease to other trees in the area, the building official shall require such tree to be immediately removed and destroyed at the expense of the property owner. If the removal is not accomplished within 30 days of the date of notification, the city may have the tree removed at the expense of the property owner on which the trees are located. 
(c)  Emergency conditions. During those periods wherein an act of nature has created conditions requiring removal of trees, the requirements of this article may be waived by the city manager. 
(d)  Exception for tree nurseries or farms. All licensed tree nurseries or tree farms shall be exempt from the conditions of this article in relation to those trees offered for sale only. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-8) 
Sec. 94-39. - Protection of trees during development. 
(a)  General provisions. It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any structure or other improvement to place materials, machinery or soil deposits within the dripline of any tree having a four-inch or greater d.b.h. for all species of trees except the pine species with a d.b.h. of eight inches or more. The builder shall be required to erect protective barriers approved by the building official around such trees to be preserved. No attachments, wires, ropes, etc., shall be made to such trees, nor shall soil be removed from within 25 feet of any remaining trees on any tract or parcel under development. 
(b)  Commercial-industrial development. In the development of commercial and/or industrially zoned property, all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plot plan as outlined in section 94-36. In the establishment of parking areas required to serve commercial and industrial property, there shall be presented by the developer of such property a plot plan on which is shown those trees to be removed and those which shall remain after installation of the parking facilities. 
(c)  Minimum trees required in parking facilities. There shall be required within the overall landscale plan of any commercial or industrial parking lot development a minimum of one tree for every ten parking spaces contained in the developed parking lot, with a minimum of one tree for each business establishment served by the parking lot. 
(d)  Substitution of trees. If, due to development conditions beyond control of the developer of any commercial or industrial property within the city, there does not exist the minimum number of trees as required in subsection (c) of this section, the developer/owner of the property shall ensure the installation and continued maintenance of the required number of trees as directed by the community services department of the city or in the alternative, the developer/owner shall install and maintain shrubbery and/or planting as directed by the community services department of the city up to the value of the trees required to be installed under the terms and conditions of this article. All trees required to be installed under the conditions of this section shall be a minimum of eight feet in height at time of installation, one inch caliper, and comply with the American Standard for Nursery Stock, on file in the community development office. 
(e)  Paving around trees. No pavement consisting of concrete, asphalt or other impervious material shall be permitted within three feet of the outside diameter of any tree located in any parking lot area within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-9) 
Sec. 94-40. - Attachments to trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tie on, tack, nail or attach in any manner any banner, sign or placard of any kind to any tree. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-10) 
Sec. 94-41. - Removal of trees partially on public lands. 
The removal of any trees located partially on public land shall be permitted only when it is determined the trunk of such tree at ground level is located more than 50 percent on private property. The person requesting removal of such tree shall be responsible for all costs incurred in connection with the removal, including restoration of public land, utilities and appurtenances to their original condition. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-11) 
Sec. 94-42. - Obstructions at intersections of public rights-of-way, drives, walkways, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain any tree, shrub or planting at the intersection of any public right-of-way that will in any way interfere with the clear vision of any person operating any vehicle or a pedestrian entering the intersection. It shall be further unlawful to construct, install or maintain on private property any fence, structure, post, sign, tree, shrub or planting that will interfere with the clear vision of any person operating any vehicle or of a pedestrian entering the intersection. 
(b)  The removal of any such fence, structure, post, sign, tree, shrub or planting upon direction of the building official shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-12) 
Sec. 94-43. - Overhang onto public property. 
No person shall install or maintain any structure, article, fencing, shrubbery, plantings or growth of any nature whatsoever that shall intrude, hang over or extend into any public right-of-way or land wherein such intrusion into the public right-of-way shall prohibit free, unimpeded and safe passage of any person or vehicle utilizing such right-of-way within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-13) 
Sec. 94-44. - Enforcement. 
The community development department through its code enforcement official or his designee shall be charged with the enforcement of this article and is hereby authorized to do all acts necessary to ensure the compliance to the terms and conditions hereof, including, but not limited to, the issuance of citations for violations hereof. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-14) 
Sec. 94-45. - Appeals. 
If any person shall feel aggrieved with the decision of the building official adversely affecting such person involving the application of this article such person may, within ten days of the decision of the building official, make a written request to the city commission which shall hear such appeal within 30 days of its receipt. After a full and complete hearing of the appeal thus submitted, the city commission shall render its decision by majority vote of the commission either affirming, overruling or modifying the decision of the building official. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-15) 
Sec. 94-46. - Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. The removal or destruction of each tree covered by the terms and conditions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 21½-16) 
Chapter 98 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; commercial and industrial vehicles, § 86-56. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

Sec. 98-1. - Declaration of privilege status of business. 
It is hereby declared that the business of transportation of passengers in vehicles for hire, other than over fixed rails, within the city is a privilege and subject to the provisions, rules and requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 24-1) 
Sec. 98-2. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or permit the operation of a taxicab or bus owned by him over the streets of the city unless there has been issued, and is in force at the time, a license from the city authorizing such use and operation of the vehicle. 
(Code 1978, § 24-2) 
Sec. 98-3. - Driver's permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a bus or taxicab over the streets of the city unless there has been issued, and is in force at the time, a permit from the city authorizing the driving of such vehicle. 
(Code 1978, § 24-3) 
Sec. 98-4. - Application for license or permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating a taxicab or bus within the city, for hire, or desiring to drive a for-hire passenger vehicle, shall secure from the city clerk-treasurer a printed form which shall be filled out by, signed in the applicant's handwriting and verified under oath stating truthfully the following information: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Age. 
(3)  Race. 
(4)  Resident's address and phone number. 
(5)  Address from which business will be operated or office maintained and phone number. 
(6)  Years of experience in for-hire transportation of passengers. 
(7)  Whether or not he has a court record, including traffic courts, and if so a complete statement of the date, court, nature and disposition of each offense or alleged offense. 
(8)  Such other information as shall be required by the board of commissioners. 
(9)  Each application blank shall bear the fingerprints of the applicant. 
(b)  Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating taxicabs or buses within the city shall fill out an application showing: 
(1)  The number of vehicles to be owned by the applicant including the year, model, make, motor numbers, and types of each vehicle and location of proposed depots or terminals. 
(2)  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicles of the applicant. 
(3)  His financial status, including amount of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of transactions or acts giving rise to such judgments. 
(Code 1978, § 24-4) 
Sec. 98-5. - Vehicle ownership. 
The applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with his application a bill of sale, or a certified copy thereof, with a certified copy of his application for his state motor vehicle license tag; and no license shall be granted unless the vehicle is registered by the state in the name of the applicant. If the applicant does not comply with this section, the applicant shall file a copy of the lease, contract or other agreement by which he exercises control over the vehicle to be licensed; and such lease, contract or other agreement must be approved by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion, as it may deem proper. 
(Code 1978, § 24-5) 
Sec. 98-6. - Granting or denying license or permit. 
(a)  Upon denial the applicant for a license or permit under this chapter shall not be permitted to file another application within 12 months. 
(b)  The granting or denying of a license or permit to operate or drive a taxicab or bus for hire shall be in the sole and complete discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 24-6) 
Sec. 98-7. - License numbers. 
All taxicabs or buses owned by the same person shall bear the number assigned the license by the clerk-treasurer, followed by a dash, and the second number assigned by the operator. The second number assigned by the operator shall begin with one and advance numerically for each vehicle owned by the operator, but the number assigned by the clerk-treasurer shall remain the same for all vehicle licenses issued to the same operator. 
(Code 1978, § 24-7) 
Sec. 98-8. - Permit numbers; passenger limit designation. 
Each permit issued by the city clerk-treasurer shall bear a number assigned to it by the clerk-treasurer and shall specify the number of passengers which may be carried in each vehicle. 
(Code 1978, § 24-8) 
Sec. 98-9. - Permit fee. 
A fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be collected by the clerk-treasurer for the issuing of the permit under this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 24-9) 
Sec. 98-10. - Displaying permit; form of permit. 
The driver's permit shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place in the vehicle, and each permit shall bear the driver's permit number with the driver's picture posted thereon of not less than two inches by three inches in size. 
(Code 1978, § 24-10) 
Sec. 98-11. - Suspension or revocation of license or permit—Authorized at any time by board. 
The board of commissioners may at any time within its sole and complete discretion suspend, forfeit, revoke or cancel any license or permit issued by the city under this chapter for any reason which might seem proper to it in its sole discretion. 
(Code 1978, § 24-11) 
Sec. 98-12. - Same—Suspension by chief of police. 
(a)  A license or permit under this chapter shall be suspended by the chief of police for any of the following causes until the license or permit shall be reinstated by the commission: 
(1)  Conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of any of the traffic or motor vehicle laws of the city or state, endangering the safety of the citizens thereof, in the operation of a taxicab or bus. 
(2)  Upon finding any intoxicating or alcoholic beverages within a taxicab or bus in possession of or under the actual control of the holder, and same must be in the possession of a passenger to except the operator from this possession. 
(b)  Whenever a license or permit has been suspended by the chief under subsection (a)(1) or (2) above, he shall report the suspension and the reasons therefor to the board of commissioners, whereupon the board shall either revoke or cancel the license or permit or reinstate the license or permit upon such terms and conditions as it shall fix. 
(Code 1978, § 24-12) 
Sec. 98-13. - Insurance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, use or operate on the streets of the city any taxicab or bus unless there has first been filed with the clerk-treasurer, and in full force, a standard form policy of liability insurance providing insurance on such vehicle against liability for any injury to persons or property that may be caused by the operation or running of such vehicle in the sums of not less than $10,000.00 for injury to or death of any one person and $20,000.00 for injury to or death of more than one person resulting from any one accident, and $5,000.00 for damage to property. The insurance shall be carried in some reputable and solvent insurance company with an agency and place of doing business in the city and subject to the approval of the city manager. The policy shall remain on file in the office of the clerk-treasurer for a period of three years after its expiration date. 
(Code 1978, § 24-13) 
Sec. 98-14. - Established place of business. 
No person shall operate a business of carrying passengers for hire unless the person has an established place of business registered with the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 24-14) 
Sec. 98-15. - Accident reports. 
When an accident involving personal injury or property damage in excess of $50.00 occurs by reason of the operation of vehicle for hire, a report shall be made to the clerk-treasurer within 24 hours after the occurrence thereof and when required by the clerk-treasurer, a written report, setting out all available facts and information concerning the accident, shall be filed within ten days of the date of the accident. 
(Code 1978, § 24-15) 
Sec. 98-16. - Parking restricted. 
No parking of taxicabs or buses shall be permitted on the streets for business purposes unless actually engaged in taking on or discharging a passenger except at a place designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1978, § 24-16) 
Sec. 98-17. - Rate cards. 
A rate card shall be posted at all times in every vehicle licensed by the city for taxicab or bus purposes and it shall be unlawful to charge more than the rates posted on the card. 
(Code 1978, § 24-17) 
Sec. 98-18. - Taxicab identifying lettering and numbering. 
Each vehicle used as a taxicab within the city shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The name of the company shall appear on each front door of the vehicle so that same is easily readable by the public. 
(2)  The city license number for the company for which the vehicle is being used as a taxicab shall appear immediately below the name of the company. 
(3)  If the word "taxi" is not included in the company's name the word "taxi" shall follow the city license number. 
(4)  Any and all writing appearing on the outside of each front door as hereinabove stated shall be in letters no smaller than four inches in height and in a contrasting color to the color of the automobile on which the sign is placed so that same shall be easily readable by the public. 
(Code 1978, § 24-18) 
Sec. 98-19. - Condition and equipment of vehicles. 
Each vehicle for which a license has been issued shall at all times be kept and maintained in a good and serviceable condition and mechanically safe for operation over the streets of the city, and shall meet all requirements of the laws of the state with respect to brakes, lights, dimensions, and otherwise, during its use and operation under such license. No car shall be used as a taxicab which has less than four doors. 
(Code 1978, § 24-19) 
Sec. 98-20. - Truck and bus terminals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bus or truck for hire, which includes peddler trucks, within the city unless such person so operating the bus or truck shall provide a drive, dash-in terminal station or such point of embarkation or debarkation or a point from which to load or unload, situated upon private property. No bus or truck operating for hire, including peddler trucks, operated by any person shall use any street, highway or other public place in the city as a terminal point for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight of any nature. 
(Code 1978, § 24-20) 
Sec. 98-21. - Penalty. 
Upon conviction of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the suspension or revocation of the license or permit, the violator shall be punished as provided for in section 1-12. 
(Code 1978, § 24-21) 
PART III - UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02282011, adopted Feb. 28, 2011, repealed App. A pertaining to zoning and App. B pertaining to subdivisions, in their entirety and replaced them with this new Unified Land Development Code. Amendments to the original regulations are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended provision(s). The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original regulations. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The lettering/numbering style of this Unified Land Development Code does not conform to the style of the other chapters of the Code of Ordinances, but has been kept to the style indicated in the original ordinance. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

(1) - Title. 
This document shall be entitled the "Unified Land Development Code, City of Douglas" and may be referred to as the Douglas Land Development Code or the Code. 
(2) - Authority. 
This Unified Land Development Code is enacted pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, §§ 36—70 et seq. 
(3) - Applicability. 
a.  General applicability. Except as provided below, the provisions of this Code shall apply to all development in the city. No development shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to the provisions in the Douglas Land Development Code. 
b.  Application of zoning regulations. 
1.  Height and density. No building or other structure shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, so as to: 
i.  Accommodate or house a greater number of persons or occupy a smaller lot area per person; or 
ii.  Occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or 
iii.  Have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces; unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
2.  Yard service to one building. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Code shall be included as a part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
3.  Only one principle building. Every building or structure hereafter in an R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I, or R-P zoning district shall be located on a lot or tract as defined herein; and in no case shall there be more than one principal building on one lot—plus its accessory structures. 
4.  Reduction of lot area. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, lot area per unit or other requirements of this Code are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is subsequently acquired for public purposes. 
5.  Street frontage. No building shall hereafter be erected on a lot which does not abut or have immediate frontage on a publicly dedicated, publicly approved, or publicly maintained street. 
6.  Traffic flow. Development permits for new commercial structures, new multifamily dwelling units, or existing commercial structures shall be reviewed for adverse traffic impact by the city's community development department. If it is determined upon review of a traffic study developed by a Georgia registered Engineer that there exists reasonable grounds to believe that specific improvements are needed to accommodate the perceived adverse traffic impacts of the development, such improvements shall be completed prior to and as a condition precedent to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to: roads, alleyways, sidewalks, curbing, drainage, directional signs, or any other device or construction for the benefit of the public. 
c.  Exceptions. 
1.  Previously issued development permits. The provisions of this Code and any amendments hereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective development permit, if: 
i.  A building permit was issued for the development prior to adoption date of this Code on February 28th, 2011; and 
ii.  The development activity continues without interruption until the development is complete. If the development permit expires, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
d.  Zoning in progress. 
1.  Purpose. The zoning in progress rule allows the city to make a text or map amendment to this Code, and apply that change to development applications submitted after the declaration has been made of a zoning in progress. 
2.  No permits issued and period of time. During the period of time that the city commission is considering either a text or map amendment to this Code, no permit(s), license(s), or other development order(s) of any kind shall be issued if issuance would result in the nonconforming or unlawful use of the subject property should the text or map amendment change be enacted by the city commission (rest period). The maximum freeze period allowed for a zoning in progress shall be three months, except that the city commission may extend the period of up to an additional three months for good cause, and if it makes a finding that it is in the public interest to do so. 
3.  Notice of declaration. The declaration of zoning in progress, and rest period on development orders, permit and licenses shall begin on the earlier of: 
i.  Publication of a notice of a public hearing before the city commission to consider a resolution declaring a zoning in progress; or 
ii.  Public notice given as required by law for the initial public hearing on a text or map amendment to this Code. 
4.  Applicability. 
i.  Upon adoption of a text or map amendment, all pending applications, permits, licenses, and other development orders shall conform to the new provisions. 
ii.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, no application for a text or map amendment to this Code, or permit or development order, shall be held up by this procedure for more than six months, including all time periods described herein. 
iii.  If it is determined by the city community development director that an application for a text or map amendment, or permit, license, or other development order would not violate the provisions of a pending zoning measure, such application, and any subsequent permits, licenses and other development orders shall be exempt from this section. 
(4) - Findings. 
a.  General public need. The city commission of the City of Douglas finds that controlling the location, design and construction of development within the City of Douglas is necessary to maintain and improve the quality of life. The city commission of the City of Douglas further finds: 
1.  A single set of administrative procedures for making all land use decisions promotes efficiency, predictability and citizen participation. 
2.  All development proposals excluding single family homes or the re-use of an existing building where the re-use does not create a greater impact, must undergo a development review process to assure compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
3.  All administrative decisions should be supported by a record with written findings to assure accountability and efficient appellate review. 
4.  A quick and efficient avenue of appeal should be available for all ministerial and administrative decisions. 
5.  Enforcement of development permits and the provisions of this Code should be through procedures that are efficient, effective and consistent with the code enforcement procedure established by state law. 
(5) - Purpose and intent. 
a.  General intent. The general intent of the Code is the implementation of the Coffee County/City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan as adopted. 
b.  Purposes. The city commission of the City of Douglas deems it necessary to adopt the Code to accomplish the following purposes: 
1.  Guiding and accomplishing coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development in accordance with the existing and future needs of the city. 
2.  Protecting, promoting, and improving the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare. 
3.  Conserving the value of land, buildings and resources, and protecting landowners from adverse impacts of adjoining developments. 
4.  Protecting the character and maintaining the stability of residential, agricultural, business, industrial, recreation, and public areas. 
5.  Promoting the orderly development of residential, agricultural, business, industrial, recreation and public areas. 
6.  Controlling and regulating the growth of the city, consistent with the future development map and character areas in the adopted comprehensive plan. 
7.  Directing and controlling, through the establishment of appropriate standards, the type, distribution and intensity of development. 
8.  Balancing the interest of the general public in the City of Douglas and that of the individual property owner. 
(6) - Incorporation by reference. 
a.  Maps. The boundaries of the zoning districts of the City of Douglas are shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map, City of Douglas, Georgia", date and certified by the city clerk. Said map is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Code by reference. 
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the "Zoning Map, City of Douglas, Georgia", which may from time to time be made or published, the zoning map of the City of Douglas, Georgia, in the office of the city clerk shall be the final authority for zoning districts in the city. 
b.  Other materials. These include, but are not limited to, the future development map, and the comprehensive plan. 
(7) - Rules of interpretation. 
a.  Generally. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. In the interpretation and application of this Code all provisions shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the City of Douglas and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state law. 
b.  Abrogation. It is not intended by this Code to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. 
c.  Stricter provisions apply. Where this Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings; or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of this Code shall control. 
d.  Interpretation. 
1.  Responsibility. In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, performance standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this Code, the city community development director shall be responsible for interpretation and shall look to the Coffee County/City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan for guidance. Responsibility for interpretation by the city community development director shall be limited to standards, regulations and requirements of this Code, but shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical code adopted by reference in this Code, nor be construed as overriding the responsibilities given to any commission, board or official named in other sections or articles of this Code. 
2.  Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the "Zoning Map, City of Douglas, Georgia", the following rules shall apply: 
i.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
ii.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
iii.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines of highway right-of-way, such district boundaries shall be construed to being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given such distance shall be determined by the use of the scale on said zoning map. 
iv.  Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of said railroad line. 
(8) - Delegation of authority. 
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize delegation to professional level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(9) - Relationship of specific to general provisions. 
More specific provisions of this Code shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions that may be more lenient than or in conflict with the more specific provision. 
(10) - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever this Code requires or imposes more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the requirements of this Code shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this Code, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(11) - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of this Code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Code as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(12) - Effective date. 
This Code shall be in full force and effective upon adoption by the city commission and shall apply to any development for which the first submittal of development plans is received after the effective date of this Code. 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 

(1) - Rules of interpretation. 
The director of community development or his/her designee shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions, or any other provisions of this ordinance, unless that authority is provided to another administrative official within a specific chapter. 
(2) - Interpretations. 
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be considered minimum requirements. Where the literal interpretation is clear, it shall be construed literally. Where the chapter, section or subsection has a statement of purpose and intent, such purpose and intent shall be considered in making the interpretation. 
(3) - Use of words and phrases. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
a.  The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
b.  Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural included the singular. 
c.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and are intended to be gender neutral. 
d.  The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
e.  The word "and" indicates that all of the conditions, requirements, and factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word "or" indicates that at least one condition, requirement or factor so connected must be met. 
f.  The term "such as" is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a requirement or point, and is intended to mean "including but not limited to the following,". 
g.  The word "day" shall mean a calendar day unless otherwise specified. 
h.  Where a term is defined in this chapter, it shall be construed to have that meaning and application throughout this ordinance. 
i.  Where a term is defined in any chapter other than this chapter, it is the intent that such definition only applies within the chapter it appears. 
j.  Except as specifically defined herein, all words use in this Code shall have their customary dictionary definitions. 
k.  Unless indicated otherwise, reference to zoning districts refer to the most recent copy of the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Douglas, Georgia". 
(4) - General definitions. 
When used in this Code, the following shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 

Abutting/contiguous. Having property lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
Accelerated erosion. Erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
Acceleration/deceleration lane. Paved exits and entrances off a major road onto private property for the purpose of enabling the free and safe flow of traffic. 
Access. A paved or unpaved area intended to provide ingress or egress of vehicular or pedestrian traffic from a public or private right-of-way or easement. 
Access, controlled. 
Accessory. A use or detached structure that: 
(1)  Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use; 
(2)  Is subordinate to an existing principal building or principal use; 
(3)  Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure or use; and 
(4)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupant, business, or industry in the principal structure or use. 
Addition. Any walled or roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction". 
Adult establishment/entertainment. Any commercial establishment that has as its primary purpose or business the rent, sale or presentation of any adult materials. Such establishments include, but are not limited to: Escort services, adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult dancing, adult massage parlor, adult motel/hotel, adult motion picture booth, adult motion picture theater or drive-in, or adult theatre. 
Adult materials. Shall mean any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, DVD's, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations that have as their primary or dominant theme the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities". 
Adverse impact. A condition that creates, imposes, aggravates, or leads to inadequate, impractical, unsafe, or unhealthy conditions on a site proposed for development or off-site. 
Agriculture. Raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock or poultry; growing plants, sod, and trees for sale; the production of horticultural, dairy, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products. 
Alley. A right-of-way privately or publicly owned, primarily for secondary access to the back or sides of property. 
Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, and girders, except such emergency change as may be required for safety purposes; and addition to a building; any change in use; or, any movement of a building from one location to another. 
Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers and are compatible with the scale and character of the surrounding natural setting and/or structures. 
Antenna. A transmitting and/or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in telecommunications personal wireless services that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signal, analog signals, and radio frequencies, directional antennas such as panel and microwave dish antennas, and omni-directional antennas such as whips, but excluding radar antennas, amateur radio antennas, and satellite earth stations. 
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms, with bathroom and culinary accommodations, used or designed for use as a residence, located in a building containing three or more independent, separated rooms or suites. 
Appeal. A request for a review of an administrative official's interpretation of any provision of this Unified Land Development Code, or a request for a review of an action taken by an administrative official in the application or enforcement of this Unified Land Development Code. 
Applicant. A person or entity making an application for a permit as provided for under this Code, including a stormwater management permit. The applicant may be the owner, developer, project manager or contractor. 
Awning/canopy. Any roof or other form that shelters from sunshine, rain, snow, or other forms of precipitation, open on at least one side. A canopy may be attached to a permanent building or it may be independent structure permitted in accordance with the International Building Code. 
As-built plans. Amended plans specifying the location, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of facilities and structures, including storm drainage facilities and structures, as they have been constructed. 
Block. A parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
Board of appeals. The City of Douglas Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Buffer. A strip of land located between a side or rear property line and a building, structure, or use, intended to separate and obstruct the view of the site on which the buffer is located from an abutting property. A buffer is usually intended to provide screening, as defined and as may be required by this Unified Land Development Code. 
Buildable area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the zoning district has been met. 
Building. A temporary or permanent building or structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. A modular home shall be considered a building for the purposes of this Code. A mobile or manufactured home shall not be considered a building for the purposes of this Code. 
Building height. The vertical distance measured to the highest point of the building roof from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
Building permit. Any permit for the erection, placement, or construction of any building, structure or related building system or building system component, or manufactured home, or portion thereof. 
Building, principle. The building in which is conducted the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Building setback line. A line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang up to 24 inches and the subsurface projection of footings; provided, however that such overhang and footings do not encroach upon the adjacent property, right-of-way, or an easement. 
Certificate of completion. A written release from the department that an uninhabited structure or system is complete and is released for use. These would include signs, fences, walls, and accessory buildings. 
Certificate of occupancy. A written release from the department certifying that all requirements for development or redevelopment of a property or structure have been met and authorizing occupancy of buildings and structures for residential or commercial purposes. For one- or two-family dwellings, the approval of all final inspections may serve as the certificate of occupancy. 
Channel. A natural or artificial water course with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
City. The City of Douglas, Georgia. 
City commission. The City of Douglas, Georgia, Board of Commissioners. 
City engineer. The director of public works, or the city's official responsible for implementing and enforcing the applicable engineering requirements of the city, or his/her designee. 
City manager. The city manager of the City of Douglas, Georgia, or his/her designee. 
Clearing. The removal of trees, other vegetation and/or above ground improvements including, but not limited to, buildings and structures, walls, fences, steps, walks, curbs, gutters, concrete slabs, pavements (including bases for pavements) and surfacing. 
Club, private. A noncommercial establishment organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests, or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and a constitution or by-laws. 
Commercial use. A use that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee. 
Comprehensive plan. The Coffee County and Cities Joint Comprehensive Plan adopted September 2007 or any updates thereafter. 
Community development director. The director of community development, or the city's official responsible for implementing and enforcing the applicable zoning and planning requirements of the city, or his/her designee. 
Concentrated animal feed lot operations (CAFO). Factory farms are also known as concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) confined animal feeding operations, or intensive livestock operations (ILOs). "A confined animal feeding operation means a lot or facility, together with any associated treatment works, where both of the following conditions are met: First, animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period. And secondly, crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained over any portion of the operation lot or facility." The definition is used as part of waste management and environmental protection laws to deal with the concentrated pollution from large quantities of animal waste. CAFOs and factory farms can be mostly indoor or mostly outdoor operations. The "confinement at high stocking density" aspect refers to lack of natural vegetation that the animals can eat and that can naturally process the resulting animal waste. High stocking density destroys the vegetation and produces unacceptable pollution from the animal waste in run-off and ground water unless it is handled appropriately, so laws have been enacted to deal with that; thus the legal definition for the term CAFO. 
Concept plan. The conceptual site plan submitted with an application for development under this Code, which requires the applicant to show the intended development and its conceptual design. Approval of the application request does not constitute approval of the concept plan; said plan must be adjusted according to the requirements listed for submittal of civil plans and reviewed by the appropriate departments for permitting. 
Conditional use. A use that is generally compatible with the use characteristics of a zoning district, but that requires individual review of its location, design, and potential effect on nearby properties to determine the appropriateness of the use on any particular site in the zoning district. 
Construction (erect, build, locate, relocate). The building, erection, location, relocation or substantial improvement to any structure or the clearing, filling or excavation of any land. It shall also mean any alterations in the size or use of any existing structure or the appearance of any land. When appropriate to the context, "construction" refers to the act of construction or the result of construction. 
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC). A large scale facility which has a primary purpose of providing housing and continuing care for older people, and which consists of Independent Living Units, Assisted Living Facilities, Skilled Care Nursing Facilities and related accessory uses, all as defined by this Code and as regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Health or other appropriate state agency. Continuing care means the provision of lodging, nursing, medical or other health related services at the same or another location to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of the individual or for a period greater than one year, including mutually terminable contracts, and in consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or without other periodic charges to an individual. 
Independent living unit. A dwelling unit within a CCRC containing living area(s), kitchen area and bathroom(s), including multifamily dwellings, single-family detached or attached dwellings, which house one or more older persons in a manner in which they may live independently while receiving one or more meals per day in a congregate care setting. 
Assisted living facility. A facility located within a CCRC that provides a residential living environment, assisted by congregate meals, housekeeping, and personal services for older persons, who have temporary or periodic difficulties with one or more essential activities of daily living, but do not require services in or of a Georgia Department of Community Health licensed long-term care facility or nursing facility. An ALF shall include dwelling units, dining rooms, bathing area(s), common area(s), offices and other spaces necessary to provide the above services, and shall be operated by a legal entity holding a license issued by the George Department of Community Health or other appropriate state agency permitting the operation of an ALF at the location of the facility. 
Skilled care nursing facility. A facility which provides board, shelter and 24-hour skilled nursing and medical care to chronic or convalescent patients. A Skilled Care Nursing Facility shall include nursing beds and/or individual rooms, dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas, offices, clinics, therapy areas, medical facilities and other space necessary to provide the above services and shall be operated by a legal entity holding a license issued by the Georgia Department of Community Health, or other appropriate state agency, permitting the operation of a nursing facility at the location of the facility. 
County. Coffee County, Georgia. 
Cul-de-sac (see street, dead end). A local street or road with one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
Curb cut. The opening along the curb line or edge of pavement of a public street at which point a driveway begins for vehicular ingress and egress from a property. 
Cut (excavation). A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavations; the depth of which is below the original ground surface. 
Day care center (child). An establishment, licensed by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, operated by a person, society, agency, corporation or institution, or any group, wherein are received with or without pay, seven or more children under 18 years of age for group care, for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of custody. 
Day care center (adult). An establishment, licensed by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision, and oversight during daytime hours only of six or fewer adults who are elderly, physically ill or infirm, physically handicapped, or mentally handicapped. 
Day care facility. Any place operated by any person with our without compensation, licensed by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, providing for the care, supervision, and protection of three but no more than six children who are under the age of 18 years for less than twenty-four hours per day, without transfer of custody. For the purpose of counting the number of children within the day care facility, all children who are related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship to the person or persons operating the facility shall be included. 
Day-night average sound level (Ldn). The average sound level over a 24-hour period. 
Dedication. The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
Demolition. The removal of any above ground improvements including, but not limited to, buildings and structures, walls, fences, steps, walks, curbs, gutters, concrete slabs, pavements (including bases for pavements) and surfacing. 
Density. The total number of square feet of a building or buildings, or the number of lots or dwelling units per acre of land. 
Density, gross. The total number of square feet of a building or buildings, or the number of lots or dwelling units per acre of land divided by the total acres of a parcel or tract of land. 
Density, net. The total number of square feet of a building or buildings, or the number of lots or dwelling units per acre of land divided by the number of acres of a parcel or tract of land less the area for streets, right-of-way, common open space, floodplain, wetland, and surface water. 
Design review board. The City of Douglas Design Review Board as it pertains to the review of design guidelines only as prescribed in specific zoning districts. 
Detention. The temporary storage of storm run-off in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
Detention facility. A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit undertaking any land development activities as defined in this Code, including, but not limited to the subdivision of land, the construction of buildings and/or other land disturbance activities. 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; any activity which alters the elevation of the land, removes or destroys plant life, or causes structures of any kind to be erected or removed other than for agricultural purposes. 
Development activities. See land disturbance activities. 
Development plans. The detailed and professional plans showing the layout and design, site work and construction activities proposed for a project (other than architectural/engineering building plans), including but not limited to: site plans, grading plans, erosion and sediment control plans, tree protection plans, landscape plans, street plans and profiles, water supply plans, sanitary and storm sewer plans and profiles, other site improvement plans. Such plans shall also include other appropriate sections, details, notes, schedules, legends and diagrams. 
Development permit. An official authorization issued by the director in accordance with this Code to proceed with land disturbance, construction and grading, as set forth in this Code. 
Drainage easement. The legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
Drainage improvements. Those facilities and structures intended to control and direct the passage of stormwaters and other surface water flows from and across property; including but not limited to: modified natural drainage ways, modified creeks, streams, channels, swales, ditches flumes, culverts, cross drains and other piping, catch basins, area drains, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, flared end sections, detention ponds and basins, rip rap, drainage way lining systems, and energy dissipation devices. 
Driveway. Any public or private ingress or egress allowing access between a public street and abutting property. 
Driveway, joint access. A driveway that provides vehicular access to two or more abutting properties from a public street. 
Dwelling. Any building or structure or portion thereof, which is arranged, designed or used for residential occupancy on a permanent or long-term basis, not including transient use such as hotels and motels, and which comply with the provisions of this Code and the International Building Code. 
Dwelling, accessory. A secondary dwelling established in conjunction with, and clearly subordinate to, a primary dwelling unit on the same lot, whether a part of the same structure as the primary dwelling unit or in a detached structure. 
Dwelling, duplex. A building containing two dwelling units, designed to be occupied by no more than two families living independently from each other, each as a separate housekeeping unit. 
Dwelling, live-work. An owner-occupied dwelling unit in which a significant portion of the ground floor space includes a nonresidential use which is operated by the property owners. Such dwellings shall not include Home Occupations. 
Dwelling, multifamily. A building containing three or more dwelling units, designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other, each as a separate housekeeping unit, i.e. apartments or condominiums. 
Dwelling, single-family, attached (zero lot line). A building subdivided by a joint property line and wall which separates the structure into two or more dwelling units, each occupying its own lot. An attached single-family structure must meet all front, rear and side yard setback requirements in the zoning district in which it is located, except for the joint property line and wall. Each unit must be separately metered for all utilities and the joint property wall must be fire-rated and extend from the foundation to the roof decking of the structure. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. An individual, detached dwelling unit that is designed to be occupied by no more than one family, living as a separate household unit, excluding mobile homes and double-wide mobile homes. 
Dwelling, townhouse. Two or more attached single-family dwellings which (1) may or may not have a common roof, (2) shall not have a common exterior wall; and (3) are separated from each other by fire resistant walls extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof. 
Dwelling, unit. A self-sufficient dwelling that is designed for or used as a residence by a single housekeeping unit with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit. Does not include rooms in a hotel, motel, boarding house, bed and breakfast, or extended stay hotel. 
Easement. A right given by an owner of land to another person or entity for specific limited uses of that land. 
Access easement. An easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian access across or to a property. 
Drainage easement. A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
Utility easement. A grant by a property owner for the use of real property for the specified purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities including but not limited to: sanitary sewers; water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, cable lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines. 
Engineer. A professional civil engineer who is registered in the State of Georgia, and who has extensive education or experience regarding structural/mechanical design. 
Erosion and sediment pollution control and plan. A plan and actions that are designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment run-off at a site during construction activities. 
Exterior architectural features. The architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure including but not limited to the kind of texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appertainments, architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the foregoing. 
FAA. Federal Aviation Administration. 
Façade. The exterior of a building facing the principal street entrance, and extending the entire width of the building elevation. 
FCC. Federal Communication Commission. 
Family. A group of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, living together, or not more than three persons not so related, living together in a dwelling unit as a single house keeping unit based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. 
Floor area. The sum of all square feet of each floor of a building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. The following areas are excluded from the measurement of the floor area: unfinished attics and basements, attached garages or spaces used for off-street parking or loading, breezeways, and enclosed or unenclosed decks and porches. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added and where the depth is above the original ground surface or excavation grade. 
Flea market. A temporary market held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of the community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floor. The lower horizontal finished surface of each story in a building that is intended to support the contents of the building and its occupants. 
Gasoline station with convenience store. A gasoline station that includes a retail store that sells a limited line of groceries and household items. 
Guest house or guest quarters. An attached or detached accessory building that provides living quarters for guests that does not include a full kitchen facility. 
Grading. Altering the shape or topography of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, grubbing, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Grade, natural. The elevation of the ground surfaces in its natural conditions, prior to any manmade alteration resulting in an increase or decrease in elevation relative to Mean Sea Level (MSL). 
Grade, finished. The elevation of the average finished surface level of the ground adjacent to the exterior wall(s) of a building or structure. 
Group care home. A facility or dwelling unit licensed by the Georgia Department of Human Services housing persons unrelated by blood, adoption or marriage and operating as a single housekeeping unit under a common house keeping management plan based on an internally structured relationship providing organization. 
Grubbing. The removal of vegetation from land by means of digging, raking, dragging or otherwise disturbing the roots of vegetation and the soil in which such roots are located. 
Halfway house/homeless shelter/drug treatment facility: A licensed, temporary, residential living arrangement for persons leaving an institutional setting or initially place in lieu of more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided from licensed support staff who are present whenever residents are present, in order to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. 
Hardship. A condition of significant practical difficulty in using a lot because of the physical problems relating solely to the size, shape or topography of the lot in question, which are not economic difficulties, and which are not self-imposed. 
Height. When referring to a communications tower or other communications structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
Historic resource or historic property. A building, site, district, object, or structure evaluated as historically significant by the City of Douglas. These are usually, but not necessarily, 50 years of age or older. 
Home occupation. A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted within a residential building for gain or support by a resident of the dwelling that is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the building and does not change the essential residential character of the use. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG). A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from soils with high permeability and little runoff production to D soils which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious. A material that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
Impervious area. The number of square feet of hard-surface areas which either prevent or retard the entry of water into the soil, as is entered under natural conditions as undeveloped property, and/or cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions as undeveloped property. 
Industrialized building. Any structure that is either wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in one or more factory built sections or panels in manufacturing facilities for assembly and installation on a building site. An industrialized building is manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage or destruction thereof, and which, when completed, meets or exceeds the requirements of and all development standards for conventionally constructed site built structures as specified by the Department of Community Affairs and current code requirements. Any industrialized home must be designed to be permanently connected to a site-built foundation. 
Industrialized home. Any residential structure that is either wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in one or more factory built sections or panels in manufacturing facilities for assembly and installation on a building site. An industrialized building is manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage or destruction thereof, and which, when completed, meets or exceeds the requirements of and all development standards for conventionally constructed site built structures as specified by the Department of Community Affairs and current code requirements. Any industrialized home must be designed to be permanently connected to a site-built foundation. 
Impervious cover or surface. Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall such as building roof tops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc. 
Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
Infiltration facility. Any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other used or disposition. 
Junked vehicle. Any wrecked or non-operable dismantled or abandoned automobile, truck, boat, motorcycle, or similar device. 
Junk yard. Any parcel and/or building which is wholly or partly utilized for the parking, storage or dissembling of junked vehicles, wrecked or inoperable automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap iron and other metals, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old household appliances, scrap tires and used building materials. These uses shall be considered junkyards, salvage operations or recyclable material wholesalers. 
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soul conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land disturbance activity. Any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse. 
Land owner. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
Loading space. A space within the principal building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
Lot (plot, parcel). A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use that includes or will include at least one structure together with any accessory structure, yard, open space, buffer area, or parking spaces as required by this Code. 
Lot area. The total area within the boundaries of a lot. 
Lot, conforming. A lot that meets all the requirements of this Code. 
Lot, corner. A lot located at the junction of two or more public rights-of-way. 
Lot coverage. The percentage of total area of a lot that is occupied by buildings. 
Lot, double frontage. A lot other than a corner lot that abuts two streets. 
Lot, flag. A lot not meeting minimum road frontage requirements and where access to the lot from a public road is achieved by a narrow strip of land (flag pole). 
Lot line. The boundary of a lot. 
Lot width. The width of a lot at the required front setback line measured parallel to the street right-of-way. 
Lot of record. Any contiguous parcel of land designed as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded, approved subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed as filed in the official records of the Clerk of Coffee County Superior Court prior to the date of the adoption of this Code. 
Lot split. The platting of real property into no more than two parcels, lots, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land. 
Maintenance agreement. A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
Manufactured home. A dwelling fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home and Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401—5445, and meeting each of the following standards: 
1.  The term "manufactured home" includes a structure, transportable in one or more sections; 
2.  Which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area; 
3.  Which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; and 
4.  Which is manufactured after June 15, 1976. 
Manufactured home park. A parcel of land (or contiguous parcels) divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For purposes of this Code, the term is synonymous with the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Mini-warehouse. A building or group of buildings that contain(s) individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, including accessory office, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing, outside storage, or any other commercial use. 
Mobile home. A dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length, and when erected on site, is 320 or more in square feet floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Modular home. See industrialized home. 
Mixed use. A single building containing more than one type of land use or a single development of more than one building and use, where the different types of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified whole, and functionally integrated. 
Native vegetation. Any indigenous tree, plant or shrub adapted to soil and climatic conditions on site. 
Nonconforming lot of record. A lot of record on the effective date of this Code that does not comply with the current requirements of this Code, but was lawfully established and authorized by the City of Douglas. 
Nonconforming structure. Any lawfully existing structure or building on the effective date of this Code that does not comply with all of the provisions of this Code. 
Nonconforming use. Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or structure on the effective date of this Code that does not comply with the provisions of this Code. 
Nonpoint source pollution. Pollution from any sources other than from any discernible, confined and discrete conveyances, and shall include but not limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonresidential property. Any property developed for commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional use including churches, hospitals, and other such institutions, but excluding undeveloped property and property used exclusively for agricultural purposes. 
Obstruction of flow. Any development that blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that the development alone, or together with any future development, will cause an increase in the base flood elevation. 
Off-site facility. A stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
On-site facility. A stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Operator. See developer. 
Open space. Any lot area not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking or loading space, refuse storage, or structure. 
Outdoor storage. The keeping in an outdoor area, if not fully screened from public view, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than seven consecutive days whether for storage, display, processing or sale. 
Overlay zone. A defined geographic area that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above those required by the underlying zoning district. An overlay zone can have the same boundaries as the existing zoning districts or contain only parts of one or more such districts. 
Parcel of land. Any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Parking space. An area designed for the temporary storage of a motor vehicle. 
Paving. An area covered by asphalt, concrete, brick or pavers meeting the specifications of the city. Pervious paving materials are subject to approval by the city manager. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity, land development activity, building construction, or other activity regulated by the City of Douglas that requires an official authorization as provided in this Code. 
Personal care home. Buildings in which is provided for the housing, meals, and 24 hour continuous watchful oversight for one or more ambulatory adults and which is licensed as a personal care home by the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources, including: 
1.  Personal care home, family: A personal care home which offers care to at least four, but no more than six persons. 
2.  Personal care home, group: A personal care home which offers care to at least seven, but no more than 15 persons. 
3.  Personal care home, congregate: A personal care home which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Pet. A domestic animal, not including bees, livestock or poultry, which is cared for by members of a household for companionship. 
Planning commission. Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission, as established by the city and county governments in accordance with Georgia General Act No 358, 1957, as amended. 
Plat. A map, plan or other graphic layout of a lot, lot tract, parcel or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of one or more properties along with improvements subject to this Code. 
Plat, final. A finished drawing or map of a subdivision or development site plan, meeting all of the requirements of this Code and approved by the City of Douglas and fully certified for recording. 
Plat, preliminary. A tentative plan of a proposed subdivision or development meeting the specified requirements of this Code and showing the layout in sufficient detail to allow an evaluation of the proposed project. 
Portable on demand storage units (PODS). Portable sheds (hereinafter referred to as "PODS") that are loaded with materials and placed on a residential or commercial property for the purpose of storing materials. 
Property line. The legal boundary that separates a lot or parcel of land from other lots or parcels or right-of-way as recorded by a graphic description on a subdivision plat of record or a survey. 
Public hearing. An official session of any elected or appointed board advertised according to law. 
Public improvements. Any improvement, facility, or service together with its associated public site or right-of-way. Public improvements differ from lot improvements because public improvements are constructed either on public property, or on the portion of a site undergoing development that is to be dedicated for public ownership and maintenance. Common examples of public improvements include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices, street lights, and utilities. 
Public uses. Buildings, structures and uses of land by a unit of government, including but not restricted to government administration, water treatment facilities, streets, libraries, public schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and fire stations. 
Recharge. The replenishment of underground water reserves. 
Recreational vehicle. A camper, trailer, motor home or similar vehicle that is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; and 
2.  Designed to be self-propelled or towable by a non-commercial vehicle; and 
3.  Designed primarily for use as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Recreational vehicle park. Any area that is occupied or intended for occupancy by transients using recreational vehicles, mobile trailers or tents as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes and is open to the public. 
Religious facility. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and that is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
Recyclable material wholesaler. See junk yard. 
Redevelopment. A land development project on a previously developed site. Excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Reserve strip. A strip or parcel of land along, around, or between properties, the sole purpose of which is to restrict access. 
Right-of-way (public). A strip of land dedicated to, designated, reserved or deeded to the city, county or state, on which facilities such as roads, railroads, canals, utilities, and other similar uses exist or may be constructed. 
Right-of-way line. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Right-of-way width. The distance between property lines measured at right angles to the centerline of the street. 
Road frontage. The length of the lot line of any one lot or parcel along a street on which it borders, including proposed streets within a subdivision of land approved by the City of Douglas. 
Salvage operation. See junk yard. 
Sanitary sewer. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Setback. The shortest distance between the right-of-way of a street or an adjacent lot line and the nearest part of a building as prescribed in this Code for specific districts. Primary and accessory buildings may not be placed within a required setback. 
Sewer, public. A common sewer controlled by a government agency or public utility. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or stormwater. 
Sidewalk. That portion of the right-of way which is parallel to the street or road which is intended for pedestrian traffic. 
Sight distance triangle. The area of property in the quadrant of an intersection located within a triangle formed by a diagonal line that connects two points at a certain distance away from the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two intersecting streets or the intersection of a street and a driveway. The dimensions of the triangle shall be determined using the Geometric Design of Highways and Streets published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
Sign, 
Abandoned sign. A sign, including a sign structure, is abandoned if it is located on a parcel that was previously occupied, but the use has been discontinued or all buildings on the parcel containing the sign have been vacated for a period of more than six months and no building permit or occupational permit has been issued for the parcel during that six-month period. 
Animated sign. A sign that depicts action or motion or that changes color; an animated sign differs from a flashing sign in that it uses movement to create a special effect or scene. 
Awning/canopy sign. Any sign that is suspended from, attached to, or forming a part of any canopy or awning, whether or not that canopy or awning is part of a permanent building or structure. 
Banner sign. Any sign having characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to cloth, paper, balloons, or fabric of any kind. The foundation of such signs shall consist only of cloth, paper, balloons, plastic or fabric. 
Business sign. 
Copy. The text or graphics on a sign surface either in permanent or removable form. 
Copy area. The area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure that describes the total area enclosed by the actual copy of a sign. For wall or canopy signs, the copy area limits refer to the message, not to the illuminated background. 
Construction sign. Any sign that is placed at a construction site that has received development plan approval. 
Dilapidated sign. Any sign that is structurally unsound or potentially dangerous or any sign face that is illegible due to damage or lack of maintenance that is not prepared to meet City Codes within 30 days after written notification by the community development department to the property owner or sign owner. 
Directional sign. A sign which is intended only to provide directions for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Other than a business logo, such signs shall contain no wording which does not provide directions. 
Double-faced sign ( = back to back sign). A sign with two faces which are parallel, or in the case of a V-shaped sign has an interior angle of less than 60 degrees. 
Entrance sign. A type of ground sign placed at the vehicular entrance or exit of an office park, institutional use, industrial park, residential development, shopping center or platted subdivision development where it accesses an external public roadway and is located within the platted portion of the development. 
Face. The portion of a sign on which the copy, message, or other visual image to be communicated is placed or is intended or designed to be placed. 
Flashing sign. Any sign utilizing a continually or intermittent or sequentially flashing light source. 
Freestanding sign. A sign not attached to any building or structure and is entirely supported by structures that are permanently placed on or in the ground. 
Ground sign. Any sign that is permanently affixed to the ground, both flush to the ground or on poles and not attached to an adjoining building. Ground signs include pole signs, monument signs, freestanding signs and detached signs. 
Illuminated sign. Any sign designed to emit artificial light or designed to reflect light from one or more sources of artificial light. 
Message sign. An electronically changeable sign upon which graphic displays, symbols, or words can be varied upon the face or faces of the sign to display time, temperature, public service, or other general information. 
Off-premise/billboard sign. A sign that advertises a use, establishment, product or service sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at a place other than on the real property on which said sign is located. Billboard signs are signs 300 square feet or larger in area. 
Political sign. A temporary sign advertising a candidate for public office, a political party, or a measure or issue scheduled for an election or referendum. 
Portable sign. Any sign supported by its own frame or trailer, with or without wheels, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. This does not include typical sandwich or A-frame signs. 
Project marketing sign. A temporary sign indicating that real property which is located within the common development site on which such sign is placed, is available for rent, sale, or lease. 
Real estate sign. A temporary sign indicating that the lot on which the sign is located, or any building or structure located thereon, is for sale, rent, or lease. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building. 
Snipe sign. A sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence, rock, or any other similar object located on public or private property. 
Special event sign. A sign that calls attention to a civic event or meeting, or other similar activity of a temporary nature. 
Temporary sign. A sign, that advertises for a limited period of time political candidates, parties, or issues; a building under construction real estate for sale, rent, or lease; business grand openings; or other special events. 
Wall sign. A sign erected parallel and attached to the outside wall façade of any building or fence, including flat, painted, individual letter, or cabinet signs, no more than 12 inches beyond the wall. 
Window sign. Any sign, excluding identification and incidental signs, placed inside or upon a window, and intended to be seen from the outside. The term does not include merchandise included inside the window. 
Special events. Events of a temporary nature including outdoor meetings, auctions, bake sales, car washes, yard sales from other than residential properties, carnivals, special outdoor entertainment and similar activities which are not part of the property's normal use and which are not otherwise permitted on the site. Outdoor displays or sales accessory to an established retail use are not considered special events. 
Stop work order. An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
Stormwater management. The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
Stormwater retrofit. A stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff. The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation, which reaches a drainage system. 
Stormwater treatment practices (STPs). Measures, either structural or nonstructural that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
Street or road. This term includes streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys, highways and other ways open to travel by the public including the roadbed, right-of-way, and all culverts, drains, sluices, ditches, water storage areas, waterways, embankments, slopes, retaining walls, bridges, tunnels, viaducts necessary for the maintenance of travel. This definition does not include any private street or way that is not constructed in conformance with the provision of this Code. 
Street or road classifications: 
Arterial (major/minor). A road providing service that is relatively continuous and of a relatively high traffic volume, long average trip length, and a high operating speed. In addition, every United States numbered highway is an arterial road. 
Connector/collector. A road providing service that is of relatively moderate traffic volume, moderate trip length and moderate operating speed. Such a road/street also collects and distributes traffic between local streets and arterial streets. 
Local road. A road providing service which is of low average traffic volume, short trip length or minimal through traffic and high access for abutting property. 
Street, controlled access. The right-of-way of a public street, road or highway where curb cuts are prohibited or limited because of potential interference with safe and efficient movement of vehicles. 
Street, dead end (cul-de-sac). A local street or road with one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement in compliance with Fire Marshal Safety Regulations. 
Street, grade. The percent change in vertical elevation of the street centerline measured along the finished surface of the street. 
Street, frontage. The width in linear feet of a lot or parcel where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Street, half. A street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
Street, jog. Where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. 
Street light. A pole or pedestal mounted luminary, 10—12 feet in height, with a metal halide or other full spectrum bulb. 
Street, private. Any privately owned and maintained right-of-way set aside to provide vehicular access, including safety and emergency equipment, which is not dedicated to the city and which is not maintained by the city. 
Street, public. Right-of-way dedicated to or owned by a public government agency for the purpose of providing principal access to abutting property. 
Street, shoulder. That portion of the street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface or back of curb to the inside edge of the ditch or gutter or original ground surface. 
Street, substandard. A street which does not meet the specifications of this Code. 
Structure. Anything constructed or installed, the use of which requires location on a parcel of land. It does not include a movable structure, even when it is located on land that can be used for housing, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes. "Structure" also includes fences, billboards, swimming pools, and signs. Structures shall meet International Building Code Requirements and be permanently affixed. 
Structure, pre-constructed. See modular home and industrialized building. 
Subdivision. The platting of real property into three or more parcels, lots, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial renovation. Renovation to a structure whereby the cost of renovating the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the renovation. 
Survey, as-built. Drawings specifying the dimensions, location, capacities and operational capabilities of structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Surveyor. A professional surveyor who is registered in the State of Georgia. 
Temporary use/building. Land uses/buildings established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue/remove such use within a designated time period. 
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes but is not limited to radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, communication towers, alternative tower structures. 
Utility. Public or private water, stormwater, or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater system, railroads, similar services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services for utilities licensed or authorized to serve the city. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the dimensional requirements of this Code which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Code where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. See chapter 10 of this Code. 
Vista termination. A lot, building or monument site generally located at an intersection, or an end, of streets or active pedestrian ways, which is prominently visible from one or more streets, or ways, approaching said site. 
Watercourse. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the property lines of the lot on which the building is located. A yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
Yard, front. A yard extending the full width of a lot, bounded by the side lot lines, front property line and the front of the principal building or any projections thereof. In all cases, the main building and any projections thereof must be behind the line of minimum lot width. 
Yard, rear. A yard extending the full width of the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and the rear property lines and being the minimum required distance between the rear property line and the rear of the principal building or any projections thereof. On all lots the rear yard shall be the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Yard, required. A yard situated between a lot line and the setback line established by the zoning district for the principal building or structure. 
Yard, side. A yard between the principal building and the side line of the lot, extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum required distance between a side property line and the side of the principal building or any projections thereof. 
Zoning district. One or more sections of the city as set forth in this Code and delineated and designated on the zoning maps, within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Zoning map. (Map, zoning map of City of Douglas, GA). 
( Ord. No. 05082017(3), 5-8-17 ) 
CHAPTER 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

(1) - General provisions. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to describe the specific uses and restrictions that apply to zoning districts in the City of Douglas. These regulations are intended to allow development and use of property in compliance with the goals and policies of the city as expressed in the Coffee County and Cities Joint Comprehensive Plan. 
(2) - Zoning districts. 
a.  Permitted uses. Principal permitted uses and structures for each zoning district are listed in table 3-1 "table of permitted uses". In some instances, additional requirements and limitations on principal uses and structures are contained in the individual sections addressing each zoning district in this chapter or are separately addressed under "supplemental standards". 
b.  Accessory structures. Accessory uses and structures may be permitted in each zoning district in accordance with table 3-1 "table of permitted uses" and as provided in the standards of chapter 5 and chapter 6 of this Code. 
c.  Development standards. Property may be developed in accordance with chapter 5, table 5-1, development standards, and chapter 6, supplemental standards. 
d.  Supplemental standards. Certain uses may be permitted in each zoning district as provided in the standards of chapter 7. 
e.  Zoning districts. The City of Douglas is hereby divided into 13 zoning districts. There is one agricultural zoning district (A-G), five residential districts (R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I, R-P), four commercial or mixed use districts (TC-G, G-W, G-C, C-N), one planned development district (P-D), and two industrial districts (M-1, M-2). 
A-G AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the A-G district is to provide and protect an environment suitable for productive commercial agriculture, together with such other uses as may be necessary to and compatible with productive agricultural surroundings. Residential densities are restricted to a maximum of one dwelling unit per two acres. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
R-15 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT (Formerly R-1) 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-15 district is to provide for single-family detached residential uses on lots with a minimum of 15,000 square feet. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
R-12 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT (Formerly R-2) 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-12 district is to provide for single-family detached residences on moderately sized lots with a minimum of 12,000 square feet. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
R-M RESIDENTIAL MIXED FAMILY DISTRICT (Formerly R-3 and R3-MH) 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-M district is to provide for a balanced mix of single-family detached, single-family attached, duplex and multifamily housing on moderately sized lots. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
R-I RESIDENTIAL INFILL DISTRICT (Gaskin Avenue Historic District) 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-I district is to encourage redevelopment, in-fill development, small business development, affordable housing, historic preservation and restoration, and to promote stability within areas such as the Gaskin Avenue community by providing standards and development incentives that are not otherwise available. This Code provides development incentives, allows for the replications of historic buildings and calls for historically relevant, durable construction, which is harmonious with the architectural heritage of the area. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a)  See chapter 3, table 3-1. 
b)  Telecommunication facilities may only be permitted as stealth telecommunication facilities which do not exceed 45 feet in height or which are constructed as part of an existing architectural feature or tower structure provided its total height does not exceed 120 percent of the height of the architectural feature or structure. 
3.  Additional development standards. 
a)  Procedures for application. 
i)  Pre-application meeting. Before beginning any new construction, substantial renovation, or demolition on private or public land, a pre-application meeting with the community development department shall be held to include the applicant and the community development director to determine the applicability of these standards. 
ii)  Preliminary development review. After the pre-application meeting, a preliminary design review may be requested by the community development director to include a conceptual site plan and floor plans and elevations. A nonbinding preliminary written response of the community development director may be requested by the applicant. 
iii)  Application. After the pre-application meeting and the preliminary design review, if any, an application for development shall be submitted to the community development department in accordance with the provisions below. Applications for development permits, excluding interior finishes, within the residential infill district shall meet the requirements of this Code. Completed applications shall include a general location map, legal description, map of existing vegetation/landscaping, proposed construction activities and design, building plans, front, rear, and side architectural elevations, floor elevations, documentation related to streets, parking, and loading; tree removal and protection, landscaping, signs, exterior color choices, and any other documentation as required by the community development director in order to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the residential infill district. 
iv)  Application review and approval. The application, in addition to the standard review and approval procedure for the specific type of development proposal, shall be reviewed and approved by the design review committee (DRC) prior to review and recommendation by the community development director and/or planning commission and/or city council. 
v)  Amendment of development plan. Any amendment to the development plan shall be reviewed and approved by the design review committee prior to final approval by city council. 
b)  Accessory buildings. 
i)  Accessory buildings may be one or two stories if combined with a garage and shall be located behind the rear façade of the building and shall be subject to a minimum five-foot side and rear yard setback from the property line. Two story accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear yard setback of no less than ten feet. On corner lots the side setback shall be ten feet. There shall not be less than five feet separation between an accessory building and the principal building. One story accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height, two story accessory buildings shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
ii)  An accessory building may be used for a single detached accessory dwelling unit providing the following requirements are met: 
1.  It is located on the same lot as a single-family detached home. 
2.  A detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed one story in height, but the unit may be located on a second story if the first story is utilized as a garage or storage facility. 
3.  The accessory dwelling unit shall contain one full bath and kitchen facilities. 
4.  The accessory unit shall use the same street address as the primary dwelling unit. 
iii)  Fences located in the front yard shall have a maximum height of four feet along the front and side property lines to the front façade of the principal building. Along the side property lines behind the front yard and along the rear property line a fence may be six feet in height. 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. 
a)  See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. 
a)  Except as otherwise provided below, required off-site parking shall comply with chapter 5, table 5-4. 

 
b)  On-street parking constructed to City Code may be used to off-set the required number of parking spaces. Such parking shall abut the proposed development, shall meet sound design standards, and shall be constructed at the cost of the applicant for development. 
c)  Historic buildings shall receive a parking credit for the existing use and shall provide at least 50 percent of the required parking on the site. 
d)  Modifications to the parking design standards. 
i)  Where alleyways are located along the side or rear property lines, said alleyways may be used as the required back-up dimension for parking spaces. 
ii)  For developments requiring eight or fewer parking spaces, parking areas may be constructed with mulch, gravel, turf blocks, paver blocks, or other alternative materials approved by the community development director or other appropriate department head. Additional maintenance requirements may be required of a developer utilizing such alternative materials such as daily sweeping of gravel, mulched areas maintained at a certain depth. 
iii)  Up to two required parking spaces may be provided as "stacked" spaces, where one parking space is located behind the other. 
iv)  Boats, campers, and recreational trailers shall be parked in rear yard setbacks only and shall not be parked in vistas. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
R-P RESIDENTIAL/PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT (New, includes Institutional) 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the R-P District is to provide for areas in which residential, professional, educational and institutional uses can be compatibly mixed while maintaining a safe and healthy living environment for the residents of that district. Limited accessory retail use is also permitted, but only as accessory uses within the same building. Primary retail uses are not permitted in the RP Zoning District. This district may serve as a transition between less intense residential and more intense commercial or industrial districts. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
N-C NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (Formerly Neighborhood Business District B-3) 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the C-N District is to provide and protect an environment suitable for limited retail trade and service activities covering a relatively small geographic area and that are intended to serve the population in surrounding neighborhoods. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
TC-C TOWN CENTER COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (Formerly Central Business District (B-1), Downtown Development Area, Town Center Overlay District, parts of U.S. 441 Corridor Overlay District) 
1.  Purpose. 
a)  The purpose of the TC-C District is to encourage redevelopment, historic restoration, and infill development, and generally to promote a sense of place within the downtown and surrounding area by providing standards and development incentives that are not otherwise available. This includes the promotion of traditional building types with arcades, balconies, railings, and porches and the enabling of social interaction on downtown streets. This mixed use downtown type district provides for building alignments to define coherent streets spaces, the possible location of outbuildings at the rear of lots for affordable housing, the visual protection of the streetscape from parking lots, as well as traditional durable construction which is harmonious with the architectural heritage of downtown Douglas. The TC-C district is distinguished from other zoning districts by the following criteria: 
•  Stores and work places are located in proximity to each other; 
•  Buildings are modestly sized, front on streets and are aligned with streets in an orderly fashion, uninterrupted by street front parking lots; 
•  Green spaces and parks dedicated to collective social activity, recreation and visual enjoyment are interspersed throughout the area; 
•  Civic buildings for assembly and other civic purposes are placed to act as landmarks and symbols of identity within the community; 
•  A recognizable, functionally diverse, visually unified commercial center is aligned with traditionally important crossroads. 
b)  The provisions in these standards shall apply to development within the Town Center Commercial District. The architectural standards and regulations below shall apply to new construction, to substantial renovation (which affects more than 50 percent of the façade of a building) and to building exterior refinishing. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a)  See chapter 3, table 3-1. 
b)  Telecommunication facilities may only be permitted as stealth telecommunication facilities which do not exceed 45 feet in height or which are constructed as part of an existing architectural feature or tower structure provided its total height does not exceed 120 percent of the height of the architectural feature or structure. 
c)  Residential uses. 
i)  Residences are allowed within the TC-C above the first story of a commercial structure. 
ii)  Residential accessory uses are allowed. 
d)  Changing of uses. 
i)  A residential use may change to another residential use of equal or less density. 
ii)  A commercial use may change to any other commercial use listed as permitted in Table 3-1, Permitted Uses in the TC-C District of equal or less intensity. 
iii)  A residential use may not convert to a residential use with more density and a commercial use may not convert to a commercial use of more intensity without review and approval from the community development director and/or planning commission and/or the city council. 
iv)  Public/semi public used or zoned lands may change to other uses only upon review and approval of the design review committee and city council. 
v)  Prohibited uses. 
1)  Prisons, detention centers or half-way houses. 
2)  Manufactured homes/mobile homes. 
3)  Outdoor storage. 
4)  Pet stores. 
5)  Storefront churches. 
6)  Modular or industrialized pre-fabricated buildings. 
7)  Adult entertainment oriented businesses. 
e)  Reserved. 
f)  Prohibited uses in front yard. 
1)  Clothes lines and other clothes drying apparatus. 
2)  Electrical meters. 
3)  Air conditioning equipment including window units on the building façade. 
4)  Antennas and satellite dishes. 
5)  Fences greater than four feet in height. 
6)  Stockade fences at any height. 
3.  Additional development standards. 
a)  Procedures for application. 
i)  Pre-application meeting. Before beginning any new construction, substantial renovation, or demolition on private or public land, a pre-application meeting with the community development department shall be held to include the applicant and the community development director to determine the applicability of these standards. 
ii)  Preliminary development review. After the pre-application meeting, a preliminary design review may be requested by the community development director to include a conceptual site plan and floor plans and elevations. A nonbinding preliminary written response of the community development director may be requested by the applicant. 
iii)  Application. After the pre-application meeting and the preliminary design review, if any, an application for development shall be submitted to the community development department in accordance with the provisions below. Applications for development permits, excluding interior tenant finishes, within the Town Center Commercial District, shall meet the requirements this Code. 
Completed applications shall include a general location map, legal description, map of existing vegetation, proposed development activities and design, building plans, front, rear, and side architectural elevations, floor elevations, documentation related to streets, parking, and loading; tree removal and protection, landscaping, signs, exterior color choices, and any other documentation as required by the Community Development Director in order to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the Town Center Commercial District. 
iv)  Application review and approval. The application, in addition to the standard review and approval procedure for the specific type of development proposal, shall be reviewed and approved by the design review committee prior to review and recommendation by planning commission and/or city council. A development application in the Town Center Commercial District shall be approved only upon a finding that the following standards have been met: 
1)  The proposed use is appropriate for the specific site; and 
2)  No factual evidence is presented to show that the proposed use will adversely affect the value of adjacent properties; and 
3)  The proposed use shall not create any undue nuisance or hazard, either to the community or to the pedestrian and vehicular flow. 
v)  amendment of development plan. Any amendment to the development plan shall be reviewed and approved by the design review committee prior to final approval by city council or the community development director. 
b)  Principal building placement. 
i)  The front building façade shall be constructed parallel to the street along the front property line. Similar building and use types of similar intensities are to locate either abutting each other or facing each other. 
ii)  Buildings shall continue and maintain the existing spacing pattern on the street. 
c)  Location of accessory buildings. 
a)  Accessory buildings shall be located behind the rear façade of the principal building or in the rear one-half of the property subject to a minimum five-foot side and rear yard setback from the property line. On corner lots the side setback shall be ten feet. There shall not be less than five feet separation between an accessory building and a principal building. 
d)  Setbacks. 
i)  The maximum front setback of new construction should be similar to the average setbacks of existing adjacent buildings. 
ii)  The front street façade of a building may be set back to form a public court yard. 
iii)  The front street façade of the principal building shall not be less than 80 percent of the lot width. A twelve foot driveway may be allowed if no alley access is available in the rear or side of the lot. 
iv)  The side setback may be zero feet. 
v)  The rear setback may be zero feet. 
e)  Principal building height. The maximum building height is three stories and 35 feet. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height except upon approval of the City of Douglas Fire Department and except those structures such as church steeples, belfries, cupolas, bell towers or flag poles. 
f)  Architectural requirements. All following architectural standards shall apply to new construction, to substantial renovation, and to building exterior refinishing: 
i)  Lot sizes. Lot sizes should be kept consistent with the surrounding pre-existing lot dimensions to provide for harmony in scale and help to retain the general development pattern of the community. 
ii)  Scale. A building's scale is the proportion of the structure relative to neighboring buildings, and to the general surroundings, including pedestrians. 
1.  Number of stories. The number of stories shall be an average of adjacent buildings. 
2.  Floor elevation. The first floor elevation and subsequent interior floor elevations of new construction shall average that of the adjacent building where possible. 
3.  Cornice line. The height of the cornice line of a new building shall be consistent with the cornice line of the adjacent buildings. 
iii)  Facades. Any new development, new construction, and substantial renovation shall be compatible with surrounding properties in terms of formal characteristics such as height, massing, roof shapes and window proportions. All developments shall incorporate a minimum of four of the following building design standards: 
1)  Overhangs. 
2)  Arcades. 
3)  Sculptured artwork and/or fountains. 
4)  Raised cornice parapets over doors. 
5)  Display windows. 
6)  Ornamental and structural architectural details, other than cornices, which are integrated into the building structure and overall design. 
7)  Clock or bell towers. 
8)  Peaked roof forms. 
9)  Decorative light fixtures. 
10)  Decorative landscape planters or planting areas, a minimum of five feet in width, and areas for shaded seating consisting of a minimum of 100 square feet. 
11)  Integration of specialty pavers, or stamped, colored concrete along the building's walkway to constitute a minimum of 60 percent of walkway area 
12)  Water elements, a minimum of 50 square feet in area. 
13)  Court yards along the front building façade. 
iv)  Roofs. 
1)  Materials. Roofs are of asphalt shingle, tin or built up. 
2)  Manner. 
a)  Roofs shall be of consistent style with those of other similar uses in the district. 
b)  Flat roofs shall be hidden from public view by a parapet or railing. 
c)  Intrusive modern conveniences such as solar panels, skylights, ventilation wind turbines, satellite dishes and antennas also shall be hidden from public view. 
d)  For buildings which are located not more than five feet from the front property line, gutters must be shielded and may not drain onto the surface of public sidewalks. Gutters may be enclosed within a column or other architectural feature. 
v)  Windows and doors. Any new construction, exterior refinishing and substantial renovation shall adhere to the historic nature of the windows and doors on existing adjacent buildings. 
1)  Materials. 
a)  Glass. 
1)  Clear, stained, leaded or beveled. 
2)  On the side and rear elevations, translucent glass may be used. 
3)  Tinted glass may be used; however, in no case shall a street side display window be of tinted glass other than to meet current energy efficiency codes. 
b)  Frames. 
1)  Painted and stained wood. 
2)  Aluminum. 
3)  Steel. 
c)  Flat skylights in sloped roofs. 
2)  Configurations. 
a)  Square and vertical rectangular. 
b)  Circular and semi circular. 
c)  Octagonal and diamond. 
3)  Operations. 
a)  Single and double hung. 
b)  Casement. 
c)  Fixed with frame. 
d)  Awning windows. 
e)  On side and rear elevations, sliders may be used. 
f)  Jalousie windows are prohibited, except as replacement windows to maintain historical character. 
4)  Options. 
a)  Screened windows and doors. 
b)  Operable wood shutters. 
c)  Fabric awnings. 
d)  Screened windows and doors. 
e)  Security grills of a pattern approved by the architectural design review board. 
vi)  Construction materials. The majority of the buildings within the TC-C District are made of brick or cast cement block. Any new construction, and substantial renovation within the district shall be of masonry. Texture shall be generally subtle and compatible with the adjacent buildings. 
vii)  Location of main entrances. The primary building entrances for establishments in the Town Center Commercial District shall open to the front of the sidewalk. 
viii)  Building illumination. 
1)  Lights attached to buildings shall be in keeping with the period of the individual building. 
2)  Lights shall be attached to the building via wall brackets. 
3)  Light fixtures should be made of brass, copper or painted steel with clear lenses. 
4)  Neon exposed lighting on any property is prohibited. 
ix)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings permitted within the Town Center Commercial District shall be constructed of the same materials used in the principal building. Accessory buildings may include fountains, barbecues, pavilions, arbors, detached garages and carports, greenhouses, pool and pool equipment structures, cabanas and detached garage apartments and "granny flats". Canvas structures are not permitted. 
Accessory buildings shall conform to the following requirements: 
1)  Only one accessory building per principle building is permitted. 
2)  Accessory buildings shall not exceed a maximum building foot print of 1,000 square feet and a maximum gross floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
3)  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 feet in height and may not exceed the height of the principal building on the same property. 
4)  Accessory buildings may be connected to the principal building by a covered walkway element, trellis, or other structural link, which shall not be enclosed so as to create occupiable space. 
x)  Sidewalks. When a permit for new construction or substantial renovation is issued, the owner shall be responsible for the installation of a minimum five-foot wide, continuous sidewalk along the entire length of the parcel that abuts a public street. 
xi)  Signs. All signage in the Town Center Commercial District shall comply with the sign standards in chapter 9 of this Code, with the following exceptions: 
1)  Backlit sign panels and internally illuminated cabinet signs shall be prohibited. 
2)  Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building and with other signs used on the building size. 
xii)  Building codes. All buildings and structures within the Town Center Commercial District shall comply with all applicable city, county, state and federal building and safety codes as may be adopted by the city or as may otherwise be in effect in the city. 
4.  Lot size and dimensional requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. 
a)  On-street parking is generally permitted along all streets. Where practical, head-in parking shall be required. 
b)  Off street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with chapter 5, except as follows: 

 
c)  On street parking, constructed to city code, may be used to off-set the required number of parking spaces. Such parking shall abut the proposed development so that it is geometrically possible, and the cost of the pavement modifications shall be borne by the private development. An approved permit from the city commission is required for such on-street parking. 
d)  Historic buildings shall receive a parking credit for the existing use and shall provide at least 50 percent of the required parking on the site. 
e)  Modifications to the parking design standards. 
1)  Where alleyways are located along the side or rear property lines, said alleyways may be used as the required back-up dimension for parking spaces. 
2)  For developments requiring eight or fewer parking spaces, parking areas may be constructed with mulch, gravel, turf blocks, paver blocks, or other alternative materials approved by the community development director or other appropriate department head. Additional maintenance requirements may be required of a developer utilizing such alternative materials such as daily sweeping of gravel, mulched areas maintained at a certain depth. 
3)  Up to two required parking spaces may be provided as "stacked" spaces, where one parking space is located behind the other. 
4)  Boats, campers, and recreational trailers shall be parked in rear yard setbacks only and shall not be parked in vistas. 
f)  Parking lots with ten or more spaces shall be planted with at least one tree per ten spaces, no smaller than three inches caliper DBH (trunk diameter four feet from the ground). Each tree shall be surrounded by no less than 16 square feet of permeable, unpaved area. Screening shall consist of a landscaped area at least six feet wide, densely planted with a mixture of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs, and shall create an effective visual barrier. 
g)  Bicycle parking. All uses other than single-family and two-family residential uses that are required to provide off-street parking shall provide bicycle parking facility at a ratio of at least one bicycle parking space for every 20 automobile parking spaces. No such development shall have fewer than three bicycle parking spaces nor be required to exceed a maximum of 25 bicycle parking spaces. Bicycle spaces shall be located with 50 feet of the principal building entrance. Each bicycle space shall include a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame using a user-supplied lock. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. 
a)  All development in the Town Center Commercial District shall comply with the landscaping requirements as described in chapter 5, with the following exceptions: 
1)  The width of landscape buffers shall be determined by the required side and rear setbacks and buffer screens shall be 25 percent of those setbacks. 
2)  The width of the landscaped strip of land located between parking areas and an abutting public right-of-way shall be the required setback for parking areas. 
3)  The width of the landscaped area located along the sides of a building, which abuts any parking area, shall be two and one-half feet. 
4)  The width of the landscaped area located along the sides of a multifamily building, which abuts any parking area, shall be five feet. 
5)  The street façade of a building shall contain potted plants or trees planted in the public right-of-way and shall be placed in a continuous sidewalk. The dimensions for such landscape materials shall comply with the landscaping section of this Code. 
6)  Terminal and interior islands within parking areas may be used for stormwater retention. 
b)  In the case of substantial renovation construction and where the location of required landscaping is precluded by existing buildings or permanent site improvements, the placement of landscaping may occur off-site, in planters, in openings within paved areas, or in other locations as determined by the community development director. 
G-C GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (Formerly General Business District B-2 and Roadside Business District B-4) 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the G-C District is to provide and protect an environment for a wide variety of commercial uses for the various types of community and regionally oriented commercial activities including retail and wholesale that serve a large sector of the population. G-C districts are intended to be located along major arterial streets and at locations that are appropriate for larger or more intense commercial businesses. 
2.  Permitted uses. See Table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
G-W GATEWAY DISTRICT (Formerly Gateway East and West Corridors and Part of U.S. 441 Gateway Corridor Overlay Districts) 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Gateway District is to provide and protect an environment for a wide variety of higher intensity commercial activities including retail and wholesale that serve a large sector of the population while still maintaining a pedestrian friendly environment. The gateway districts occur along both sides of the Hwy 32 and Hwy 441 corridors as they traverse the City of Douglas and serve as the entryways into the historic center of the City of Douglas. This district sets higher standards for the architectural appearance, but also allows for functionality, highway orientation, roadway capacity and safety. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. 
a.  Procedures for application. 
1)  Pre-application meeting. Before beginning any new construction, substantial renovation, or demolition on private or public land, a pre-application meeting with the community development department shall be held to include the applicant and the community development director to determine the applicability of these standards. 
2)  Preliminary development review. After the pre-application meeting, a preliminary design review may be requested by the community development director to include a conceptual site plan and floor plans and elevations. A nonbinding preliminary written response of the community development director may be requested by the applicant. 
3)  Application. After the pre-application meeting and the preliminary design review, if any, an application for development shall be submitted to the community development department in accordance with the provisions below. Applications for development permits, excluding interior tenant finishes, within the Gateway District, shall meet the requirements of this Code. Completed applications shall include a general location map, legal description, map of existing vegetation, proposed development activities and design, building plans, front, rear, and side architectural elevations, floor elevations, documentation related to streets, parking, and loading; tree removal and protection, landscaping, signs, exterior color choices, and any other documentation as required by the community development director in order to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the Gateway District. 
4)  Application review and approval. The application, in addition to the standard review and approval procedure for the specific type of development proposal, shall be reviewed and approved by the design review committee prior to review and recommendation by planning commission and/or city council. 
5)  Amendment of development plan. Any amendment to the development plan shall be reviewed and approved by the design review committee prior to final approval by city council. 
b.  Principal building placement. 
1)  Minimum height of facades shall be 18 feet. The maximum height is three stories and 35 feet. 
2)  Street orientation of buildings. The front building façade shall be constructed parallel to the street along the front property line. All buildings shall provide attractive, safe, and convenient pedestrian access from the sidewalk to the building entrance. 
3)  Trash receptacles, utility devices, mechanical equipment, outdoor storage, and loading docks shall only be located in rear yards and completely screened from view. 
c.  Accessory building placement. 
1)  Accessory buildings shall be located behind the rear façade of the principal building or in the rear one-half of the property subject to a minimum five-foot side and rear yard setback from the property line. On corner lots the side setback shall be ten feet. There shall not be less than five feet separation between an accessory building and the principal building. 
d.  Design standards. 
1)  Residential buildings. Single-family and two-family residential buildings shall be consistent with the architectural style typical of the residential character of the City of Douglas. All buildings shall have pitched roofs with a minimum 6:12 slope and shall use at least two of the following design features: 
i)  Dormers. 
ii)  Gables. 
iii)  Pillars. 
iv)  Posts. 
v)  Covered front porch. 
vi)  Bay windows. 
2)  Articulation. 
i)  No new building or group of attached buildings shall exceed a total building length of 300 feet without approval from the design review committee. 
ii)  The building façade and massing shall be subdivided into a pleasing composition of building forms that incorporate changes in building facades, massing, and direction, multiple roof planes, recessed entrances, towers, cupolas, dormers, and other features that provide visual interest. All architectural elevations shall be approved by the design review committee following a determination that the façade of the proposed development or buildings is compatible with the architectural character of surrounding properties. 
iii)  All construction shall be completed in accordance with the approved architectural elevation. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all exterior building facades are completed in accordance with the approved architectural elevations. 
3)  Building materials. 
i)  Building exteriors shall not be finished in metal siding, exposed concrete masonry units or exposed concrete where visible from the street or sidewalk in either front or side yards. Textured, split faced or ribbed concrete masonry units, drive-it (EIFIS) or stucco may be permitted with approval by the design review committee. 
ii)  Chain link fence, barbed wire and razor wire is prohibited. 
e.  Street connectivity. 
1)  New development shall incorporate a grid of inter-connected public streets. 
2)  Driveway location. 
i)  Along major collectors, driveways shall not be located closer than 75 feet from an intersecting street. 
ii)  Along side streets, driveways shall not be located closer than 35 feet from the intersection. 
iii)  Properties with less than 200 feet of frontage on the major roadway shall be permitted no more than one curb on the major roadway. 
iv)  Properties having more than 200 feet of frontage on the major roadway may have up to one additional curb cut on the major roadway, to be no closer than 100 feet from the first driveway. 
v)  Lots with more than one street frontage may have one curb cut on the principal frontage and one additional curb cut on each secondary street. Such corner lots are encouraged to provide additional access from secondary streets through an access road or easement placed parallel to the main highway and serving multiple properties from a single curb cut along the secondary street. Such parallel access road shall be placed in the rear yards of buildings facing the major thoroughfare. 
vi)  Inter-parcel access is required for all developments except single-family and two-family dwellings. Each new development except for single- and two-family residences shall provide appropriate cross-access driveways connecting to adjacent lots. 
vii)  Interior lots are encouraged to seek additional access from secondary streets through a secondary access road or alley placed parallel to the main highway and serving multiple properties from a single curb cut along the secondary street. 
viii)  Curb cuts and driveways for properties having less than 200 feet of frontage shall not be permitted when access may be provided from a new interior street, a side street or a rear street. 
ix)  The community development director may require a common or joint driveway for adjacent lots when such lots have common ownership. 
3)  Sidewalks. 
i)  Public sidewalks are required. 
ii)  Sidewalks at least five feet in width shall be located along both sides of a street or as recommended by GDOT and shall be constructed per ADA guidelines. 
iii)  Sidewalks shall be located at least five feet from the back of the curb, where curb and gutter exists, or at least ten feet behind the edge of paving, where drainage swales or ditches are provided adjacent to the roadway. 
iv)  Sidewalks shall be separated from the roadway by a planted strip no less than five feet in width. 
v)  New sidewalks shall be aligned with existing sidewalks and shall include appropriate transitions where necessary to make a continuous alignment between existing and new sidewalks. 
vi)  Sidewalks of variable width and alignment may be permitted by the community development director when necessary to preserve an existing tree or to align with an existing sidewalk. 
vii)  Each building or complex of buildings shall provide sidewalks or other marked pedestrian connections through parking lots to adjacent buildings. Such pedestrian access shall minimize conflicts with automobiles by such means as sidewalks, textured pavers, signage, bollards, and/or painted crosswalks. 
4)  Utilities. 
i)  All utilities shall be located underground except where the community development director and city engineer determine that underground utilities are infeasible because of unique geologic or hydrologic conditions on the site. 
f.  Signs. No sign on a parcel shall be higher than the roofline of the principal structure on the parcel. 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. 
a)  See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
b)  Bicycle parking. All uses other than single-family and two-family residential uses that are required to provide off-street parking shall provide bicycle parking facility at a ratio of at least one bicycle parking space for every 20 automobile parking spaces. No such development shall have fewer than three bicycle parking spaces nor be required to exceed a maximum of 25 bicycle parking spaces. Bicycle spaces shall be located with 50 feet of the principal building entrance. Each bicycle space shall include a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame using a user-supplied lock. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. 
a)  See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
b)  The strip of land between the front building façade and the front property line shall be landscaped with a combination of trees, hedges, shrubs, vines, grass and ground cover as described in chapter 5 of this Code. All newly planted trees shall be sprinklered until safely established and all trees that die within one year of planting shall be replaced. 
c)  Street trees shall not be planted closer than 25 feet from the curb line of intersecting streets or driveways and not closer than 10 feet from fire hydrants, street lights, traffic signs, or other existing trees. 
P-D PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Development District is to achieve development of superior quality through the encouragement of flexibility and creativity in design options that: 
a)  Permit creative, responsible and sustainable approaches to the development; 
b)  Allow for the efficient use of land, which can result in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lower development costs; 
c)  Allow design options that encourage an environment of stable character compatible with surrounding land uses; and 
d)  Permit the enhancement of neighborhoods through the preservation of natural and/or cultural features, and the provision of recreation areas and open space. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a)  Any combination of residential uses allowed in the present R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I zoning districts. 
b)  Any combination of residential uses and commercial uses allowed in the present R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I, R-P, N-C, G-C, G-W zoning districts providing the parcel abuts comparable zoning on at least two sides. The requirement that the parcel abut property with comparable zoning on at least two sides may be waived by the City Commission after a public hearing and due consideration by the Commission. The requirement shall not be waived unless the Commission makes specific findings that the proposed project is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter; that it promotes the welfare of the people of the City of Douglas, and that the project is otherwise of suitable character and compatible with its surroundings. 
c)  Residential uses not specifically set forth in any of the standard zoning districts, but which are compatible and of like nature and quality to those residential uses allowed in R-15, R-12, R-M, and R-I zoning districts. 
d)  Commercial uses not specifically set forth in any of the standard zoning districts, but which are compatible and of like nature and quality to those residential uses allowed in R-P, N-C, G-C, and G-W zoning districts. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. 
a)  See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
b)  The net density and intensity for a planned development (PD) shall not exceed those densities and intensities set forth in Table 5-1, unless a density bonus has been granted by the City Commission as part of a planned development approval. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
M-1 WHOLESALE/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the M-1 District is to provide and protect an environment that is suitable for light manufacturing, wholesale, and warehousing activities that do not impose undesirable noise, vibration, odor, dust or other offensive effects on the surrounding area, together with such other uses as may be necessary to and compatible with light industrial surroundings. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
M-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the M-2 District is to provide an environment suitable for heavy manufacturing and other activities that may impose undesirable noise, vibration, odor, dust, or other offensive effects on the surrounding area together with such other nonresidential uses as may be necessary to and compatible with heavy industrial surroundings. 
2.  Permitted uses. See table 3-1. 
3.  Additional development standards. See chapter 7 "supplemental standards". 
4.  Lot size requirements and dimensional standards. See chapter 5, table 5-1. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-4. 
6.  Landscaping requirements. See chapter 5, table 5-7. 
(3) - Table of permitted uses. 
1.  The uses listed in Table 3-1 shall be permitted only in the zoning district where the uses are listed, and only in the manner so listed. No use shall be permitted and no structure associated with such use shall be constructed, altered or enlarged unless the use is permitted as one of the following: 
"P": A permitted use in the zoning district. 
2.  Any use not listed with the letter P in a particular zoning district shall be prohibited in that zoning district, unless it is a nonconforming use lawfully established prior to the effective of the regulation that rendered it nonconforming. 
3.  Public utilities shall be allowed in all zoning districts within the city in order to serve the public health, safety, and welfare. Such use shall only be approved after a public hearing is held to the proposed public utility. Utility stations shall comply with applicable design standards in order to blend in with other adjacent land uses. 
4.  Public parks shall be allowed in all zoning districts within the city in order to serve the public health, safety and welfare. 
5.  Specific site design and development standards are contained in chapters 5 and 7. 
6.  Any use listed with a "yes" in the column headed by the words "Suppl. Reg?" shall satisfy the applicable supplemental use standards as shown in chapter 7, in addition to the development regulations of the district in which it is located as shown in chapter 5. 
Table 3-1 Table of Permitted Uses 
P—Permitted Use 
Y—Supplemental Standards 
Blank—Not allowed 

 
(Ord. No. 11102014, 11-10-14; Ord. No. 06062016A, 6-6-16 ; Ord. No. 05282017(3), 5-8-17 ) 
CHAPTER 4. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

(1) - Downtown Historic Overlay District. 
Areas of the City of Douglas designated as "Historic Overlay Districts", but not designated as "Local Historic Properties" or "Local Historic Districts" specifically by Local Historic Property or Local Historic District Designation Ordinances (and therefore under the jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission) fall under the jurisdiction of the design review board. 
An application for design review approved by the design review board shall be required before a building permit is issued on any improvement, grading, alteration of land or alteration of the exterior of any building commences, for all structures and uses in the Historic Overlay District (HOD). 
a)  A Historic Overlay District (HOD). A Historic Overlay District (HOD) may overlap other districts on the official zoning district map. Pursuant to the establishment of a Design Review Board and the City of Douglas City Commission's adoption of a Historic Overlay District Ordinance, the Design Review Board shall review all proposed new construction, development, exterior remodeling (other than ordinary maintenance), re-occupancy and/or demolition within the Historic Overlay District (HOD), and shall approve or deny all such construction, development, exterior remodeling, re-occupancy and/or demolition in accordance with the requirements as set forth in the this chapter. 
b)  Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of a Historic Overlay District Ordinance is to provide procedures and standards for review and approval of site, landscaping, and exterior architectural design plans for development within the Historic Overlay District (HOD) in order to ensure that such development complies with the provisions of this chapter and meets design, development and preservation policies adopted by the City of Douglas in order to: 
1)  Enhance and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the City of Douglas as an attractive and progressive community; 
2)  Protect and maintain the value of existing buildings and property; 
3)  Ensure architectural harmony between buildings and landscaping in order to promote and protect the aesthetic qualities of the City of Douglas; 
4)  Lessen traffic congestion and minimize traffic safety problems; 
5)  Minimize any adverse impacts of new development on existing uses through provisions of screening, buffering, landscaping and other techniques; 
6)  Protect public investment by mitigating impacts generated by new development on existing public facilities and utilities; and 
7)  Enhance economic opportunities by maintaining the City of Douglas as an attractive community for prospective developers, businesses and residents. 
c)  Application for design review. An application for design review approved by the Design Review Board shall be required before a building permit is issued on any improvement, grading, alteration of land or alteration of the exterior of any building commences, for all structures and uses in the Historic Overlay District (HOD). 
d)  Approval of application for design review duration and extension. Approval of applications for design review submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire or be extended subject to the same provisions for building permits. 
e)  Approval procedure—Pre-application meeting. Prior to the submittal of an application for design review, the applicant may meet with the building inspector and/or the Design Review Board. The purpose of this informal meeting is to ensure the developer's understanding of this chapter and to inform the applicant of community design policies and standards and to provide an opportunity for review of any preliminary drawings and site plans. 
f)  Application for design review requirements. The specific administration requirements for any pre-application and final application for design review shall be established by the City of Douglas; however, the application shall contain at least the following three elements, as applicable: 
1.  Site analysis. A site analysis, with appropriate topographic data, shall include information on significant manmade and natural features and features to be retained, moved or altered; 
2.  Site plan. A site plan at an appropriate scale with accompanying supporting information shall include information on proposed improvements including internal circulation and parking, landscaping, grading, lighting, drainage, and amenities; and 
3.  Architectural design. The architectural design element shall include scaled elevation drawings of proposed structures and information on building materials, colors, and items affecting exterior appearance, such as signs, air conditioning, grills, compressors and similar features. 
Applicants may use the Historic Preservation Design Guidelines created by the Douglas Historic Preservation Commission and the City of Douglas as an informal guide, however the Design Review Board may develop its own specific requirements in addition to those contained in this chapter. 
g)  Application review. An application for design review shall be submitted in triplicate to the building inspector for review to ensure compliance with provisions of this chapter and for transmission of two copies to the Design Review Board for review and final action. After the Application for Design Review is submitted and accepted, the chairman of the Design Review Board shall call a formal meeting within 15 days of the application acceptance. Within 72 hours after the date of formal review meeting, the Design Review Board shall take final action on the application for design review. If the Design Review Board shall fail to take final action upon the application, the application shall be deemed to be approved. The Design Review Board may extend this deadline if requested by the applicant. When circumstances necessitate, the Design Review Board may defer action on an application until its next regularly scheduled meeting, but under no circumstances shall a deferment exceed this provision. 
h)  Decision of the Design Review Board. The Design Review Board shall take final action by rendering one of the following decisions on the applications for design review: 
1.  Approval. The applicant shall be authorized to file for appropriate building permits in accordance with the application for design review. Upon approval of the application, the chairman of the Design Review Board shall notify the building inspector of the approval and transmit a copy of the approved application, with any conditions noted, to the building inspector; 
2.  Conditional approval. The applicant shall be authorized to file for appropriate building permits with approved conditions or modifications to the application. Conditions imposed by the Design Review Board shall be to achieve public purposes and shall still permit the developments as accorded high-quality similar developments within the City of Douglas; or 
3.  Denial. The applicant shall not be granted a building permit. The Design Review Board shall specify in writing to the applicant and City of Douglas City Commission the reasons for denial. The reasons for denial shall be negative impacts on the environment, property values, surrounding properties, or public health, safety and welfare. 
i)  Enforcement. All exterior architectural design and landscaping and other on-site improvements shall be completed in accordance with the approved application. The building inspector shall make periodic field inspections as required. If a violation is found to exist, the building inspector shall take immediate appropriate action to ensure compliance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all on-site improvements, landscaping, and exterior building facades are completed (or guaranteed through the posting of an acceptable performance bond) in accordance with the approved application. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued not to exceed 30 days wherein the on-site improvements can be completed within that time frame and such conditions present no safety hazard. 
j)  Waiver. The Design Review Board may waive administrative requirements of this chapter as needed to facilitate the review process, where such requirements are inappropriate or unnecessary. 
k)  General architectural requirements. The general architectural requirements listed in this chapter are minimum aesthetic standards for structures within the Historic Overlay District (HOD) regulated by the provisions of this chapter. These requirements shall be used by the Design Review Board in reviewing applications and architectural design plans and drawings, and may be supplemented by specific architectural design policies and standards, as established by the Design Review Board and approved by the City of Douglas City Commission. 
1.  It shall not be the intent of the architectural requirements of this chapter to prescribe a narrow range of exterior architectural design choices, but rather to encourage well designed structures compatible with existing high quality development in the immediate vicinity and in the surrounding area, and to prohibit poor-quality, garish, and/or incompatible design, which would have adverse effects on public and private investment; and 
2.  Each application for design review shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board, based upon, but not limited to, the following policies and standards: 
i.  Design shall be in harmony with the general character of developments of high quality in the immediate vicinity and the surrounding area, considering factors such as mass, building materials, placement, height, changing land use patterns, and consistency of exterior architectural treatment; 
ii.  Design components shall be planned in such a fashion that they are physically and aesthetically related and coordinated with other elements of the project and surrounding environment to insure visual continuity of design; 
iii.  Design shall protect scenic views, particularly those of open space, and utilize natural features of the site; 
iv.  Design shall protect adjacent properties from negative visual and functional impacts; and 
v.  All exterior forms, attached to buildings or detached, shall be in conformity to and secondary to the building. 
l)  General landscaping requirements. The landscaping requirements listed in this chapter are the minimum design standards for all development regulated under the provisions for the Historic Overlay District (HOD). These requirements shall be used by the design review board and the building inspector in reviewing applications and site plans, and may be supplemented by specific landscaping standards and specifications established by the design review board and approved by the City of Douglas City Commission. 
1.  Landscape design and planning shall be integrated with the overall design concept for the project; therefore, the design review board shall evaluate landscaping schemes as to their relationship to buildings and structures, as well as to the existing natural and developed landscapes, and to other adjacent landscaping on private property and public rights-of-way; 
2.  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved, whenever possible, or at the applicant's option, replaced with suitable vegetation; 
3.  Landscaping or privacy fences shall be used whenever possible to screen objectionable views or nuisances which are visible from the roadway, such as service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units, transformers, and similar features; 
4.  Grassed areas shall be of sod or seeded with a variety suitable to the area that produces complete, permanent coverage; 
5.  No artificial plants, trees, or other vegetation shall be installed; and 
6.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with a sprinkler system or readily available water supply. 
7.  All landscape design shall incorporate recommended Best Management Practices (BMPs) for water conservation. 
m)  Tree requirements. The following tree and planting and maintenance requirements shall be met within the Historic Overlay District (HOD): 
1.  Except as otherwise required by this chapter and to meet specific community design policies established by the City of Douglas, trees shall be planted and/or retained in areas of the site to enhance the overall project design and to provide such amenities as visual attractiveness, natural resources protection and energy conservation; 
2.  All retained or planted trees shall be protected or situated so as to prevent damage from environmental changes resulting from any building or other improvement; and 
3.  The design review board may vary the minimum landscaping and tree requirements of this chapter, if specific circumstances and/or site conditions warrant such actions. 
n)  Agreement and bonding. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer or owner may be required to post a performance bond or cash escrow guaranteeing all landscaping materials and work for a period of one year after approval or acceptance thereof by the city in a sum established by the design review board, if specific circumstances and/or conditions warrant such action (such as intentional failure on the part of the owner or developer to comply with these provisions on a prior occasion or occasions). Such bond shall be in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of replacing all landscaping required in the approved design plan. At the end of one year, the building inspector shall make an inspection and notify the owner or developer and the bond company of any replacements/corrections required to be made. 
o)  Maintenance. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and protection of all landscaping and other features of the design plan approved by the design review board. 
p)  Appeals. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the design review board shall be entitled to file an appeal with the governing body. 
1.  Said appeal must be addressed and submitted in writing to the Mayor and City of Douglas City Commission; 
2.  Said appeal shall set forth each and every basis upon which the application was approved or denied, and shall set forth each and every reason that the approval or denial should be overruled; 
3.  The governing body shall then set a time and date at the next regular meeting of the City of Douglas City Commission whereby the aggrieved party may come before it and submit proof to the City of Douglas City Commission that the approval or denial is improper; 
4.  The City of Douglas City Commission shall afford the applicant sufficient time in which the applicant may address each reason that said aggrieved party contends the design review board was in error. The City of Douglas City Commission shall then hear from a representative of the design review board as to why said application was originally approved or denied, and what positive or negative impact said structures would have on the city; 
5.  The City of Douglas City Commission may question the aggrieved party, the applicant and/or the design review board representative in order to clarify or expand upon the position taken by the aggrieved party, applicant and/or the design review board; and 
6.  Thereafter, the mayor and City of Douglas City Commission shall vote and decide whether to overrule the initial decision of the design review board or whether to permit the decision of the design review board to stand. 
(2) - Local historic properties/local historic districts. 
Areas of the City of Douglas designated as "Local Historic Properties" or "Local Historic Districts" specifically by local historic property or district designation ordinances fall under the jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
The process for recommendation and designation of local historic properties and local historic districts is contained in Douglas Code sections 52-41 through 52-44; Ordinance Number 08-11.01-97, section IV(A—D), 8-11-97. 
A certificate of appropriateness approved by the Historic Preservation Commission shall be required before a building permit is issued in these areas. 
a)  Purpose. In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Douglas, Georgia is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of Douglas, Georgia; and 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; and 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
Now, therefore, the Mayor and Board of Commissioners of the City of Douglas, Georgia hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited and this chapter, to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the Historic Preservation Ordinances(s) cited and this chapter. 
b)  Definitions. [For the purpose of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited and this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them, unless the context clearly indicated otherwise.] 
1.  Building. A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn; 
2.  Certificate of appropriateness. Means a document evidencing approval by the Historic Preservation Commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district; 
3.  Exterior architectural features. Means an architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing, as more fully described in the Historic Preservation Design Guidelines for the City of Douglas, a copy of which is identified as Appendix "A" (reserved) in the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited and hereby incorporated by reference; 
4.  Exterior environmental features. Means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property; 
5.  Historical (or historic) district. Means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historical district shall further mean an area designated by the City of Douglas City Commission as a Historic District pursuant to the criteria established in Section IV, B. of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited; 
6.  Historic property. Means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the City of Douglas City Commission as a Historic Property pursuant to the criteria established in Section IV, C. of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited; 
7.  Material change in appearance. Means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
i.  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or façade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
ii.  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
iii.  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
iv.  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
v.  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
8.  Object. Means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
9.  Site. A site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
10.  Structure. A structure is a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
c)  Application to the Historic Preservation Commission for a certificate of appropriateness. 
1.  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties: 
After the designation by ordinance of an historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a historic or non-historic building, structure, site or object within such a historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission; 
2.  Submission of plans to the Historic Preservation Commission: An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the Historic Preservation Commission as further set forth on the application for certificate of appropriateness attached thereto as Appendix "C" (reserved) of the Historic Preservation Ordinances(s) cited; 
3.  Additional submissions needed for demolition consideration: In addition to the normal application for certificate of appropriateness, if a demolition is requested, the additional items below are required: 
i)  A consultation with the Historic Preservation Commission prior to the submission of a demolition request is required to discuss viable alternatives to demolition; 
ii)  Documentation of economic hardship including a financial report detailing the cost of rehabilitation and evidence that the existing building is incapable of producing a reasonable economic return on the investment; 
iii)  If the request for demolition is based on structural instability or deterioration, a technical report prepared by a preservation architect or professional engineer with knowledge of historic building construction should be submitted which details the nature and extent of the specific problems and provides accurate costs estimates for their correction; and 
iv)  A complete plan for the new development proposed on the site should be submitted. 
1.  Such a plan should include a timetable, a budget for both the demolition and new construction, plans for the proposed treatment of the site and satisfactory evidence that adequate financing is available; and 
2.  In cases of demolition when a building has lost its integrity of design, and its removal would result in a positive effect on the district, plans for new construction should relate to the historic district rather than the existing building. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Timing: Applications for certificates of appropriateness must be submitted at least ten days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
5.  Interior alterations: In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
6.  Technical advice: The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
7.  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard: The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Historic Preservation Commission to all owners and occupants of the proposed property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. The Historic Preservation Commission shall give the property owners (including those property owners likely to be affected materially) and/or the applicant(s) an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
8.  Acceptable Historic Preservation Commission reaction for certificate of appropriateness: 
The Historic Preservation Commission may: 
i.  Approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed; 
ii.  Approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary; or 
iii.  Reject it. 
9.  Modifications and/or mitigation: The Historic Preservation Commission may approve a certificate of appropriateness based on modifications or mitigation that it sees fit including, but not limited to: 
i.  Requiring the applicant to adequately document the historic building in its original setting through photographs and/or measured drawings prior to demolition. In such cases, the Historic Preservation Commission will review all recorded materials to ensure thorough documentation prior to granting a certificate of appropriateness for demolition; 
ii.  Only allowing the limited removal of structurally unsound construction on a building, in the interest of public safety, instead of the demolition of structurally sound additions which are not original to the building, but are significant examples of an accepted academic style and have become historic in their own right (50 years of age or older). 
d)  Approval of certificates of appropriateness. The Historic Preservation Commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the Historic Preservation Commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
1.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation: The Historic Preservation Commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and landscaping, as further specified in the Historic Preservation Design Guidelines for the City of Douglas, a copy of which is attached as Appendix "A" [reserved] to the Historic Preservation Ordinances(s) cited and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards For Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings attached as Appendix "D" to the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited and hereby incorporated by reference. 
As appropriate, the Historic Preservation Commission may utilize the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Preservation, Standards for Restoration and/or Standards for Reconstruction. 
Also to include: 
i.  Conformity of setback of nearby buildings; 
ii.  Maintenance of existing relationship between buildings and open spaces; 
iii.  Unobtrusiveness of parked vehicles from the street; 
iv.  Signage (if any) complimentary to the style of the buildings and the district; 
v.  Maintenance of the existing pattern of landscape features; 
vi.  Fencing or screening (if any) compatible to the district; 
vii.  Entrance of building being oriented in the same direction as those of nearby buildings; 
viii.  Retention of original features; 
ix.  Prevention of false historic features being added to the building; 
x.  Retention of additions or changes over 50 years of age; 
xi.  Preservation of examples of historic craftsmanship; 
xii.  Repair, instead of replacement, of historic features if possible; 
xiii.  Avoidance of harsh cleaning methods; 
xiv.  The likelihood of the proposal helping the long term physical condition of the building, trees, landscape and/or other buildings; 
xv.  Conformance of the height and width to nearby buildings; 
xvi.  Compatibility of the proportion and size of features to that of existing buildings; 
xvii.  Similarity of window and door openings patterns to that of nearby buildings; 
xviii.  Materials proposed being of common type to the district; 
xix.  Features used typical of the district; 
xx.  Style complimentary of other buildings within the district; 
xxi.  Contribution of project to the overall existing character of the district; 
xxii.  Conformance (if appropriate) with Design Guidelines to Protect Residential Rehabilitation Components concerning signs, roofs, windows, doors, porches, mechanical equipment, walls, foundations, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, garage and accessory buildings, exterior lighting, yard features, walkways and driveways; 
xxiii.  Conformance (as appropriate) with Design Guidelines for Historic Building Materials such as wood, masonry, and architectural metals; 
xxiv.  Conformance (if appropriate) with Design Guidelines to Protect Commercial Rehabilitation concerning storefronts, awnings and canopies, walkways and driveways, signage, adaptive use, parking and landscaping; and 
xxv.  Conformance (as appropriate) with Design Guidelines for New Additions and Construction Additions concerning materials, size and scale, shapes, rhythm, additions, accessibility and safety considerations, mechanical systems and energy retrofit, site planning, orientation and placement, building mass, scale and form, details and ornamentation, and decks and patios. 
2.  Relocation: A decision by the Historic Preservation Commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
i.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting; 
ii.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
iii.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
iv.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
Cross reference— Douglas Code § 52-66; Ord. No. 08-11.01-97, § V(F), 8-11-97. 
3.  Demolition: A decision by the Historic Preservation Commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structure, sites or objects shall be guided by: 
i.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site or object; 
ii.  The importance of the building, structure, site or object to the ambiance of a district; 
iii.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
iv.  Whether the building, structure, site or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city; 
v.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
vi.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site or object from collapse; 
vii.  Whether the building, structure, site or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value; and 
viii.  Whether the building has lost its integrity of design; and/or 
ix.  Whether the building removal would result in a positive effect on the district. 
4.  Undue hardship: When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited would result in the exceptional, practical difficulty, or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the Historic Preservation Commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the Historic Preservation Commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions that will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
5.  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificates of appropriateness: Certificates of appropriateness must be decided upon by the Historic Preservation Commission within 45 days after the filing thereof. [However, please note that the cut-off date for the monthly application cycle is ten days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission in order to avoid unscheduled meetings.] 
i.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a Historic Property, or of a building, structure, site or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Historic Preservation Commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the Historic Preservation Commission; and 
ii.  Failure of the Historic Preservation Commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
e)  Necessary action to be taken by the Historic Preservation Commission upon rejection of an application for certificate of appropriateness. 
1.  In the event the Historic Preservation Commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The Historic Preservation Commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so; and 
2.  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the Historic Preservation Commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
f)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
1.  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the Historic Preservation Commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease; and 
2.  The Historic Preservation Commission or the City of Douglas City Commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of the historic preservation ordinance(s) cited and this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
g)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
h)  Recording applications for certificate of appropriateness. The Historic Preservation Commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the Historic Preservation Commission's proceedings in connection with said application(s). 
i)  Acquisition of property. The Historic Preservation Commission may, where such action is authorized by the City of Douglas City Commission and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
j)  Appeals. 
1.  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the Historic Preservation Commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the City of Douglas City Commission. 
i.  Any such appeal must be filed with the Historic Preservation Commission within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to Section V, H.1. of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited; or, 
ii.  In the case of a failure of the Historic Preservation Commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45 day period allowed for the Historic Preservation Commission action pursuant to Section V, H.2. of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited. 
2.  The City of Douglas City Commission may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the Historic Preservation Commission, if the governing body finds that the Historic Preservation Commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. 
3.  Appeals from decisions of the City of Douglas City Commission may be taken to the Superior Court of the City of Douglas (Coffee County) in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Douglas ordinance violations. 
k)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
l)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The Historic Preservation Commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
1.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Conditions which allow the elements and vermin to enter (such as broken windows, doors and openings) and the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair; 
2.  In the event the Historic Preservation Commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the Historic Preservation Commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of the property will have 30 days in which to do this; and 
3.  In the event that the condition is not remedied in the 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in Section VII of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited and, at the direction of the City of Douglas City Commission, the Historic Preservation Commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission(s). 
m)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited or this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
n)  Penalty provisions. Violations of any provision of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited and this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for in the punishment of violations of validly-enacted ordinances of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
CHAPTER 5. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

(1) - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide development design and improvement standards applicable to all development activity within the City of Douglas. 
(2) - Responsibility for improvements. 
All improvements required by this Code shall be designed, installed, and paid for by the developer. 
(3) - Principles of development design. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure functional and attractive development. All development shall be designed to avoid unnecessary impervious surface cover; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; to avoid adverse effects of shadow, glare, noise, odor, traffic drainage, and utilities on surrounding properties; and to increase public safety, health and welfare. 
(4) - Area, setback, and height requirements. 
Table 5-1—See table below. 
Table 5-1 Dimensional Requirements 

 
(a)  The minimum useable floor area excluding attics, unfinished basements and porches for any residential dwelling unit in R-15 shall not be less than 1,500 square feet. 
(b)  For enclosed small garden sheds, greenhouses, children playhouses and gazebos, this dimension may be reduced to five feet. 
(c)  Above 35 feet, with fire department approval only. 
(d)  With water and sewer service only. 
(e)  Any application for rezoning to the Downtown Development District shall have the front setback determined by the Architectural Review Committee in accordance with the harmony of adjacent properties, subject to approval from the City Council. 
(f)  Where fire proof walls are used, no side yard is required. 
(g)  Any lot line along a street (other than an alley) shall be a front lot line, any lot line along an alley shall be a rear lot line, any lot line between two lots and intersecting a front lot line shall be a side lot line, and any lot line intersecting two other lot lines which are not a front lot line shall be a rear lot line. 
(5) - Impervious surface coverage. 
a.  Maximum coverage. Impervious surface coverage on a development site shall not exceed the maximum coverage amounts provided in Table 5-1 above. 
b.  Calculation. Impervious surface coverage is determined by calculating the total impervious surface area as a percentage of the gross site area. Water bodies are impervious and shall be included as such in the calculation of impervious surface coverage. 
c.  Pervious concrete. If pervious concrete is proposed for a project, then 50 percent of the area covered with pervious concrete shall be considered as a pervious surface provided it is installed and maintained in accordance with manufacturer's guidelines. 
(6) - Building setback requirements. 
a.  General. No person shall construct or erect a building or other permanent structure with the exception of fences, sidewalks, pools, walls, terraces, decks, driveways, or accessory structures on any lot or tract for which a setback line has been established, between such a setback line and the property line. 
b.  Exceptions. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, gutters, fireplaces, flower boxes, bay windows, decorative molding and balconies, and front staircases designed complementary to the principal structure, which are part of or attached to the structure, may project no more than three feet into a required setback area. Equipment tanks, filters, stairwells, stairways attached post construction, and enclosed floor space are not considered architectural features and must meet principal structure setbacks. 
c.  Address and front door. The address of a house or location of the front door shall have no effect on the setback regulations outlined in Table 5-1. 
(7) - Building height. 
a.  Building height. The vertical distance measured to the highest point of the building roof from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
(8) - Cottage lots. 
a.  Purpose. 
1.  Provide a housing type that responds to changing household sizes and ages, for example to retirees, small families or single person households. 
2.  Provide opportunities for ownership of small, detached dwelling units within residential neighborhoods. 
3.  Provide guidelines to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. 
b.  Applicability. 
1.  New single-family residential construction. 
2.  Single-family residential redevelopment, including retrofitting/remodeling. 
3.  The cottage lot provisions shall be applicable in the Town Center Commercial District, the Residential Infill District and all other residential zoning districts. 
c.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Single-family residential structures. 
2.  Accessory structures incidental to the principal use. 
3.  Home occupations. 
d.  Future annexed area. All residentially zoned land annexed into the city that does not meet minimum standards for development, such as minimum lot area or minimum lot width, shall be eligible for development under the provisions of these cottage lot provisions. 
(9) - Planned development standards. 
a.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to provide an alternative means of residential, commercial, public service, industrial and mixed use land development and an alternative zoning/site plan review procedure that may be used to establish residential, commercial, public service, industrial and mixed use zoning districts at appropriate locations and in accordance with the planning and development objectives of the city. 
2.  A Planned Development (PD) established according to the provisions of this section may depart from the strict application of use, setback, minimum lot, parking, and other requirements of standard zoning districts. A PD shall be consistent with the overall planning and development goals of the city. it is the purpose of this section to offer flexibility for development while maintaining and protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the city's residents. 
3.  This section intends to establish a more holistic living and working environment by enabling the application of creative and imaginative approaches to development design and community planning. A PD should provide a variety of natural features and open spaces, efficient and economical land use, improved amenities, orderly development, and the protection of existing and future adjacent development and properties. Therefore, the PD alternative may allow uses and combination of uses which are not specifically allowed in standard zoning districts. 
b.  Prevailing code. To the extent that any provisions of this section conflict with other provisions of this Code, the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
c.  Definition. 
A Planned Development (PD) may be a residential PD, a commercial PD, a mixed-use PD, an industrial PD, or a public service PD. A PD shall consist of land under unified control which may be planned and developed as a whole as a single development or as an approved programmed series of developments by multiple developers. A typical PD will include principal and accessory uses and structures that are substantially related to the character of the development itself and to the surrounding area of which it is a part. 
Unified control, as used above, shall mean that all land to be included within a PD shall be owned or otherwise under the legal control of the person or legal entity which has applied for the PD zoning district. Such person or entity shall be legally capable of providing a commitment to the city that the PD development will comply with all PD documents, plans, standards, and conditions ultimately approved by the City of Douglas. 
A PD zoning district shall consist of the approved PD classification, the PD conceptual master plan and the PD final development plan, as well as any other plans, drawings, renderings, elevations, maps and documents specifically included as development documents in the approval of the PD by ordinance by the City Commission. The ordinance approving a PD shall be deemed a zoning ordinance. The provisions of the individual PD zoning ordinance shall replace all conflicting development regulations set forth in this Code which would otherwise apply to the development. The PD ordinance shall be recorded in the public records of Coffee County and the City of Douglas. 
The applicant may proceed with development or any land disturbing activities only after a plat, if required by the City Commission, is recorded and after certification by the Community Development Director that the building plans and other required documents and information substantially conform to all documents approved as part of the PD ordinance. The applicant must also provide evidence that would bind his successors in title to any commitments made for the approval of the PD. 
d.  Zoning map. The boundaries of land zoned PD by ordinance of the City Commission shall be indicated as such on the official zoning map of the city. 
e.  Location. A PD may be located anywhere in the city. 
f.  Minimum size. The minimum size of a PD is two acres. 
g.  General requirements. 
1.  PD standards for circulation, parking, utilities, drainage and other standards shall apply as described in this Code except as specifically modified by the City Commission as part of the PD ordinance. 
2.  Open space. Not less than 25 percent of the PD shall be open space. Required open space may include all common vegetation and landscape areas. 
3.  Maximum building area. Not more than 50 percent of the total development site shall be covered by buildings. 
(10) - Procedures for PD rezoning/land development approval. 
a)  Initial application. In addition to information required for an application for rezoning in general, an applicant for PD zoning/development approval shall submit the following materials and data to the Community Development Department: 
1.  Legal documents demonstrating unified control over the proposed PD. 
2.  A PD application, which includes 
i.  The title of the project (name); 
ii.  The names of the professional planners and engineers and the developers; 
iii.  A master development plan to include a boundary and topographic survey of the proposed PD site and an inclusive list of all uses proposed to be located within the PD and on each parcel thereof; 
iv.  Computation of the gross acreage of each use and the proposed PD overall; 
v.  Any other matter deemed relevant by the Community Development Director to the development and use of the property. 
b)  Fees. Each applicant for a rezoning/development approval to PD shall pay a fee to the city for examination of the proposed PD application and related materials and the inspection of all required improvements shown on such plans. Such fee shall be determined by the City Commission by resolution. 
c)  Procedure. Upon application for rezoning/development approval of land to a PD zoning district, submission of a master development plan and other documents deemed appropriate by the applicant or required by the Community Development Director, appropriate city staff, the Planning Commission and City Commission shall process and review the application as a rezoning of land as follows: 
1.  Pre-application meeting. The applicant and city staff shall jointly review the application, master development plan and all other documents associated with the application at a pre-application meeting. The purpose of this pre-application meeting is to discuss the application at an informal setting and identify all zoning and other regulations applicable to the property and to identify specifically those variations from the regulations which may be justified with this application. 
2.  Planning Commission. 
i)  Following the pre-application meeting, upon receipt of a complete application and completion of the review by the community development department, a rezoning/development approval review shall be conducted by the planning commission held as for other applications for rezoning. 
ii)  The planning commission will require, prior to its recommendation to the city commission, evidence of the PD impact on traffic, water and sewer facilities in the area. 
iii)  The Planning Commission shall either recommend to the City Commission that the PD district rezoning be granted and that the application, the master development plan, individually or in combination with a final PD development plan, and any other required plans, drawings, renderings, elevations, maps and documents specifically included as part of the application, be approved, with or without conditions, or that the application be denied. In making the recommendation, the Planning Commission shall find that the application and the master development plan, individually or in combination with a final PD development plan, and any other required plans, drawings, renderings, elevations, maps and documents specifically included as part of the application, does or does not meet the requirements of this Code and specifically this section. 
3.  Conditions. In approving a rezoning of land to a PD district classification, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Commission may approve a variation of the strict application of the development requirements of this Code and may instead impose appropriate conditions to otherwise attain the objectives of this Code. These conditions shall be binding upon the applicant and successors with interest in the PD. Deviations from approved plans except in a manner described in this Code or failure to comply with any conditions shall constitute a violation of the respective PD ordinance and of this Code. 
4.  City Commission. 
i)  Upon completion of the Planning Commission review of the PD rezoning application, the master development plan, individually or in combination with a final PD development plan, and any other required plans, drawings, renderings, elevations, maps and documents specifically included as part of the application, the City Commission shall schedule the application for public hearing. 
ii)  Notice of the public hearing shall be provided according to the law for rezonings generally. 
iii)  The City Commission shall either approve the application, the master development plan, individually or in combination with a final PD development plan, and any other required plans, drawings, renderings, elevations, maps and documents specifically included as part of the application, with or without conditions or shall deny the application. Approval of an application shall take the form of an ordinance rezoning the property to a PD district. The Code shall identify the property by legal description, the master development plan, individually or in combination with a final PD Development Plan, the development documents and all conditions of approval. The ordinance shall provide that no development permits or orders shall be issued by the city until a final PD development plan, if not included as part of the master development plan, has been approved as provided in this section. The ordinance shall also state the expiration date for the final PD development plan, if applicable. 
The City Commission may decide to deny the application. When an application is denied, the City Commission shall state the reasons for the denial and indicate what further modifications to the master development plan or other submitted documents must be made for approval. 
5.  Final development plan. 
i)  Following the approval of the rezoning application and the master development plan not inclusive of a final development plan by adoption of a PD ordinance by the City Commission, the applicant shall submit a final development plan to the City Commission for approval. The final development plan shall be deemed a development approval. The final development plan approval shall be submitted and approved by the city within two years of the effective date of the PD Zoning Ordinance unless a longer time is permitted by the City Commission. The final development plan shall implement the master plan with all the changes, additions and conditions required and approved by the City Commission. 
ii)  Except for any areas of the PD site set aside and designated for future development, the final development plan shall include: 
•  A designation of land uses; and 
•  The exact location and dimensions of all buildings, structures, infrastructure, utilities, and other improvements, including the number and location of all parking spaces and the location and dimension of landscape areas; and 
•  The location of areas to be set aside for open space and conservation areas; and 
•  Open space calculations and building pad areas, and calculations on attachments; and 
•  The location, dimensions and appearance of all signage, lighting, fencing and buildings and a description of all exterior building materials; and 
•  A statement of the covenants and restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of land, building and structures; and 
•  A proposed plan of maintenance shall be provided to assure the continuing operation and maintenance of such areas, functions, and facilities are not to be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense. Such statements shall be approved by the city attorney. 
iii)  Development permits. Upon approval of the final development plan, the City Commission shall adopt a development ordinance adopting the final development plan. The ordinance shall also state the expiration date for the final PD development plan, which shall expire two years from the effective date of the development ordinance if no development permits or orders have been issued to the development during that time. Two one-year extensions may be granted by the City Commission upon application by the applicant. 
d)  Change or modification. Any major changes or amendments to a PD master development plan, a PD final development plan shall be processed as an amendment to the PD district zoning district under the same process as a new zoning application. Major changes or amendments shall include: 
1.  A change of twenty percent or more in the area of any land use designations shown on the final development plan. 
2.  Any change in the list of proposed uses. 
3.  An increase in residential density of 20 percent or more. 
4.  An increase in nonresidential square footage of 20 percent or more. 
5.  A change in the boundary of the PD district. 
6.  A change in the final development plan or approval regarding any area(s) set aside and designated for future development. 
7.  Any other change determined by the Community Development Director to have a potentially significant impact on city services or the surrounding neighborhood. 
8.  An amendment of greater than 12 months to the originally approved time table of development. 
9.  Any change or amendment to a PD master development plan, a final development plan which is not a major amendment shall be a minor amendment. Minor amendments may be approved by the City Commission upon proper application for the amendment and after a public hearing. The City Commission may require that notice of the minor amendment and public hearing be given to the surrounding property owners by posting or publication in the local newspaper of general circulation. 
(11) - Subdivision standards. 
a.  Blocks. 
1.  The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
b.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
c.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street and pedestrian traffic. 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
2.  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less than 400 feet except where topography, property lines or other conditions peculiar to the site make such dimensions impracticable and are approved by the Community Development Director/City Commission. 
3.  In cases where block lengths are allowed to exceed 1,200 feet, easements, not less than 20 feet in width, shall be provided where needed for crosswalks and for the placement of utilities and they shall be deeded to the city for that purpose. In addition, the Community Development Director/City Commission may require the provision of crosswalks in special areas where they are deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and to other community services and facilities. 
4.  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or where prevented by topographical conditions or size of property, in which case the Community Development Director/City Commission may approve a single tier of lots when properly designed to meet at least the minimum requirements of this Code. This provision shall not prevent the inclusion within any subdivision of blocks of greater width or irregular outline, including super blocks, which blocks shall be indented by dead-end roads, looped access roads, or crosswalks, to provide access to the central areas thereof, and may contain at or near their centers, public or joint use areas such as parks and playgrounds when covered by agreements as to maintenance of such interior areas. 
5.  In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the city engineer shall determine the outline of the block. 
b.  Lots. 
1.  In no case shall the lot dimensions be less than the minimum requirements of Table 5-1 of this Code. Where the following subdivision standards require greater minimum dimensions than Table 5-1, the requirements of this section shall apply: 
a.  Residential lots served by a public sewerage system shall be not less than 7,200 square feet in area. 
b.  Residential lots served by a private sewerage system and a public water supply shall be not less than 80 feet in width and 15,000 square feet in area. 
c.  Residential lots served by a private sewerage system and a private water supply shall be not less than 100 feet in width and one-half acre in area. 
d.  In addition, any lot served by a private sewerage system shall conform to whatever greater area may be required by the Coffee County Health Department. 
2.  The depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate for the off-street loading and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. Furthermore, industrial lots shall be no less than 65 feet in width and one acre in area where served by public water and sanitary sewerage systems. Where either or both utilities are not provided by a public system, the minimum lot width and area shall be set by the Coffee County Health Department but in no case shall they be less than the above requirements. 
3.  Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from an orientation to both streets. 
4.  Each lot shall have direct access to a public street and in no case shall any lot have less than 30 feet of street frontage. 
5.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where desirable to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 20 feet, across which there shall be no right-of-way access, shall be provided along the rear property line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
6.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
7.  Property numbers may be assigned to each lot in accordance with a property numbering system set up by the city. 
c.  Conformance to utilities master plans. 
1.  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to any storm drainage and sanitary sewer master plans and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the City Commission. 
d.  Monuments. 
1.  Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as required by the city engineer. Monuments shall be of reinforced concrete with dimensions at least four inches by four inches by 24 inches with bronze center pins of ¼-inch diameter and four inches length and the top six inches below the finished grade. 
2.  Lot corners shall be marked with solid steel rods not less than 5/8 inch in diameter and 24 inches in length and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(12) - Streets and driveway standards. 
Whenever any persons shall construct a road or street or alley to be used by the public generally, he shall first comply with all provisions of this Code pertaining to the development of roads and streets and alleys, and shall construct same in accordance with the standards fixed by this Code. 
a.  Streets. 
1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to state and/or local requirements, respectively. 
2.  Where such is not shown in any street or highway plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
i.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas by extending to the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, or 
ii.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical; or 
iii.  Demonstrate that the plan set forth in the design of the subdivision offers the best solution to the problem of circulation, safety, convenience, topography and service to abutting properties for the site and adjacent areas. 
3.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial or connector street, the Community Development Director or City Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in the non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
4.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Community Development Director or City Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
5.  Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be substantially discouraged. 
6.  Private streets and reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed with the city under conditions approved by the Community Development Director or City Commission. Every lot in subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. 
7.  On intersecting streets with their centerlines offset, where it is impossible to obtain continuous pavement alignment (by offsetting the pavement within the right-of-way), the minimum centerline offset shall be 200 feet. 
8.  The road pattern shall conform reasonably closely to the natural contours of the land. In order to discourage through and high speed traffic and to increase the value and stability of the neighborhood, straight portions of residential roads of undue length shall be avoided in level or nearly level areas by the use of slight amounts of curvature. 
9.  When a deflection in the alignment of a street occurs, the street shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to meet the sight distance requirements. In no case shall an arterial street have a centerline radius of less than 500 feet or a minor street have a centerline radius less than 200 feet except upon written recommendation of the city engineer. 
10.  A tangent shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets and shall be designed by a civil engineer using the Geometric Design of Highway and Streets Manual as published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials or other approved sources. 
11.  The Community Development Director/City Commission shall have the right to reject any plan that provides for the intersection of more than two streets at any one location. A traffic circle or additional cutback of corners may be required to improve circulation and to avoid traffic hazards. Likewise, a leveling area shall be made at each intersection when the grade of the street exceeds seven percent. The leveling area should have a grade not over four percent and should be at least 100 feet long. 
12.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle less than 80 degrees or more than 100 degrees. 
13.  Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a curb radius of 20 feet. The planning commission may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in the place of rounded corners. 
14.  Minimum street right-of-way widths shall conform to the following: 
Table 5-2: Minimum street right-of-way widths 

 
(Note: Right-of-way in excess of 100 feet shall be acquired through normal right-of-way acquisition procedures.) 
15.  Half-width streets shall be prohibited except where recommended by the city engineer as being essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and where the Community Development Director/City Commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Such portion of the street shall be distinctly designated upon the map or plat as being a portion of a street and no improvement shall be made other than rough grading until the full width shall be designated for public purposes. Whenever a tract to be subdivided is bounded by a previously dedicated half street, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if needed to meet the above minimum street width requirements. The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street. Then the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing right-of-way shall be provided. 
Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall be no longer than 600 feet, including the diameter of the turnaround, shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street property line diameter of at least 100 feet. Where it is desirable, to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and the planning commission may require that a temporary, paved turnaround be provided, having a roadway diameter of at least 80 feet. 
No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the City Commission. Developer shall submit street names to 911 for approval prior to submission to Community Development Department. 
b.  Alleys. 
1.  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the Community Development Director/City Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
2.  The right-of-way width of an alley shall be not less than 20 feet. 
3.  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to provide an inside turning radius of at least 20 feet. 
Dead-end alleys are prohibited unless specifically approved by the city engineer and City Commission, in which case a turnaround of approved design shall be provided. 
c.  Easements. 
1.  Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the developer shall provide easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines for utilities and such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide. 
2.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. 
d.  Street and alley improvements. 
1.  All streets shall be properly graded to their full width so that pavement and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level plane. All street shall be provided with a minimum of six inches of compacted, approved sand clay or soil cement base, a single surface treatment and one-inch plant mix top, all in accordance with city standards. Pavement widths shall be as follows, not including curb and gutter: 

 
2.  Storm sewers, catch basins and manholes required. All streets shall be provided with the necessary storm drainage facilities including catch basins and manholes, built in accordance with city standards. No pipe sizes smaller than 18 inches in diameter shall be allowed. Culverts required to be placed under streets in the public right-of-way shall be provided and installed by the developer. 
3.  Alleys required. All alleys shall be graded to a full 20-foot width and provided with concrete aprons at all street intersections, in accordance with city standards. All alleys shall be properly drained. 
4.  No street or alley grading shall be done on any land which is to be dedicated for public use, or which would cause a connection to be made to a public street or alley, until: 
a.  Acceptable plans and profiles prepared by a Georgia Registered Professional Engineer have been submitted to the Community Development Department; and 
b.  A street construction permit has been issued by the Community Development Department. 
e.  Utilities. 
1.  Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly connected either with the City of Douglas water system or an approved source of water supply. The lines shall conform with accepted standards of good practice for municipal water systems and shall meet, as a minimum, the specifications of the City of Douglas and/or the Coffee County Health Department. All materials, except fire hydrants, labor, equipment and other matters related to the water distribution system shall be provided or arranged for by the developer. Fire hydrants that meet city specifications shall be supplied by the developer. The developer shall be responsible for installation of the fire hydrants and shall reimburse the city for the cost and handling of each hydrant. All water plans shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer and approved by GaEPD prior to construction. 
2.  When the subdivision is located within the service area of a public sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the public system. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewerage system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields and must be approved in writing by the Coffee County Health Department. 
For the purpose of this Code, it shall be considered economically feasible to connect a subdivision to a public sewerage system when the total cost per lot for sanitary sewers does not exceed the cost per lot for septic tanks by more than 100 percent. 
All materials, equipment, labor and other matters related to the sanitary sewerage system shall be provided by the developer. 
All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the Department of Public Health of the State of Georgia, the City of Douglas and the Coffee County Health Department. 
3.  After rough grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied to the street, all of the underground work-water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections-shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the road bed. Where the water mains are installed in the shoulder of the road at least five feet away from the edge of the pavement, the developer may elect to omit the installation of service connections providing that at such time as these service connections are needed, they may be bored across using an acceptable City of Douglas method jacked across without breaking or weakening the existing pavement. 
4.  In order to meet future development needs the city may require a water or sewer line with greater capacity than is necessary to serve a single development or the minimum size noted in this Code. The developer is required to provide only the capacity necessary to serve his development. The city will be responsible for the cost of the upgrades necessary to serve future development in excess of the development's needs. 
(13) - Parking and loading standards. 
a.  Applicability. Parking spaces shall be provided for each permitted use established in accordance with this Code. 
1.  The construction of a new building or new structure; 
2.  The construction of a new addition to an existing building or structure; or 
3.  Changes in use including changes in the intensity of an existing use. 
b.  Time of completion. Parking areas shall be completed, landscaped and ready for use prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. 
c.  Calculating parking requirements. 
1.  In the event the calculation of the number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space, the number of required spaces is the nearest whole number. 
2.  The number of required parking and loading spaces for a use not specifically listed in chapter 5 shall be determined by the Community Development Director based on a listed use most similar in parking and loading needs to the unlisted use. 
3.  For properties containing more than one use, the number of required parking spaces is the cumulative number of spaces for all uses, including approved shared parking. 
4.  Gross floor area shall be used for the calculation of required parking spaces relating to floor area. 
5.  The greatest number of employees, including owners and managers, present on premises at any one time during the largest shift shall be used for the calculation of required parking spaces relating to the number of employees. 
d.  Location of required parking spaces. 
1.  All required parking spaces shall be located on the same real property upon which the principal use is located. The term "same real property" means that the principal use site and the parking site are in the same ownership or in the same leasehold interest. 
2.  If the site of the principal use and the site of required parking are not contiguous, the nearest portion of the parking site shall be located within 400 feet of the front entrance to the principal use as measured by a safe and convenient pedestrian route. Contiguous for this purpose means a common boundary and does not include properties which are separated by a road, alley, or other public right-of-way. 
3.  The owner of the off-site parking site shall relinquish all development rights for said property until such a time that the required parking space is approved and provided elsewhere. 
4.  For a single-family dwelling, a driveway may be used to provide two parking spaces. 
e.  Shared parking and joint use of facilities. 
1.  The Community Development Director may permit the required parking spaces for one use to be shared as required parking spaces by another use upon a finding that: 
2.  The shared parking spaces are in close proximity and readily accessible to the uses served; and 
3.  The uses served by the shared parking spaces have different peak parking demands and operating hours; and 
4.  There will be a reduction in vehicle movements by the users of the shared parking spaces; and 
5.  The design of the parking area in terms of traffic circulation, vehicular and pedestrian access, stormwater management, landscaping, open space preservation and public safety will be improved. 
6.  It shall be the responsibility of an applicant for shared parking approval to provide a description of the uses, a site plan, parking study and other necessary information to permit a finding by the Community Development Director regarding the request for shared parking. 
f.  Off-street parking schedule. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum standards contained in the following table: 
Table 5-3 Off-Street Parking Schedule 

 
(14) - Design standards for parking spaces. 
a)  The minimum design of parking spaces and access ways as they relate to the angle of parking shall be as follows: 
Table 5-4 Design for Parking Spaces 

 
(15) - Paving of parking surfaces. 
a.  All required parking spaces, access ways and loading zones shall be paved and otherwise constructed in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city. As an alternative to paving, parking spaces and access ways may be provided on stabilized grassed areas for uses requiring only occasional parking or transitory vehicle storage as needed for recreational facilities, vehicle dealerships, churches, assembly halls and flea markets. Transitory vehicle storage shall occur only in the rear of such facility and shall only be used by the specified vehicle dealership for their own saleable vehicles. Paved parking shall be provided, however for all full-time employees of such uses. 
b.  All parking spaces access ways and loading zones shall be maintained in good condition and be free of pot holes, loose or cracked pavement, broken wheel stops, and any other conditions which might be otherwise detrimental to the health or safety of the residents of the city as determined by the city engineer. 
c.  Pervious parking surfaces are permitted when the following conditions are met: 
1.  Pervious paving materials and other soil stabilization techniques are used in a manner as to assure that parking will remain functional in heavy rains or drought. 
2.  Pervious paving materials are installed according to manufacturer's specifications, including sub-surface preparation, composition, and density of compaction. 
3.  Sub-surface soil testing must demonstrate that the manufacturer's specifications will be met to allow for percolation and other stormwater functions. A registered professional engineer shall also make inspections and tests as necessary to certify that construction of the pavement is consistent with the approved plans as well as industry and manufacturer's standards. 
4.  Pervious parking areas shall allow stormwater to percolate into the ground as designed as part of an overall stormwater management system and in accordance with the approved site plan. 
5.  Such areas shall be provided with drainage facilities adequate to properly dispose of all surface water run-off. 
6.  Regular maintenance of pervious parking areas is necessary to ensure long-term integrity of function. Sweeping or other recommended maintenance procedures as per manufacturer's specifications must be implemented. If such areas cease to function in providing adequate parking, drainage or cause sedimentation within the drainage system, then paving to normal design standards will be required. In such an event, any credit given towards pervious surface area for the pervious parking will be revoked and pervious areas shall be installed which are comparable to the area credited. 
(16) - Off-street loading requirements. 
In addition to the parking required for nonresidential uses, loading spaces shall also be required. All loading spaces shall be located and screened to avoid nuisance impacts to adjacent areas with special consideration for noise. A sufficient number of loading spaces shall be provided to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be loaded or unloaded at any one time. Wheel stops or curbs shall be provided to prevent any vehicle using a loading space from encroaching upon unpaved areas or adjacent property. 
a)  Small commercial uses. Commercial establishments of a type that do not deal in large quantities of goods, including but not limited to offices, restaurants, auditoriums, and hotels and motels, shall be required to provide off-street loading as follows: 
Table 5-5 Required Number of Loading Spaces Commercial 

 
Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width and 25 feet in length. 
b)  Industrial and large commercial uses. Uses of a type that deal in large quantities of goods, including but not limited to industrial, wholesale, storage warehouses, hospitals and retail establishments shall be required to provide off-street loading spaces as follows: 
Table 5-6 Required Number of Loading Spaces Industrial 

 
Each loading space shall not be less than 12 feet in width and 50 feet in length. 
(17) - Landscaping and screening standards. 
a.  Applicability. 
1.  The City of Douglas Landscaping requirements shall apply to all new development and to substantial renovation for which a building permit has been issued after February 28, 2011. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any portion or phase of a new development or substantial renovation to which this landscape code applies until all required landscaping has been installed pursuant to the requirements of this landscape code. 
2.  The City of Douglas Landscape Code applies to all development to which the City of Douglas Parking Code is applicable beginning February 28, 2011. 
3.  The City of Douglas Landscape Code applies to all landscaping installed on public or private residential or nonresidential property after February 28, 2011. 
4.  All landscaping required by this Landscape Code shall be installed and maintained as required by this Code. The failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this Landscape Code subject to code enforcement procedures and regulations. 
b.  General provisions. 
1.  Plant materials. 
i.  At least 50 percent of all required landscaping in the form of trees, shrubs, ground cover, and grass shall collectively consist of vegetation native to the Region. 
ii.  Tree species identified by the Community Development Director as likely to cause damage to public roadways, public facilities or building foundations shall not be planted closer than 12 feet unless the tree root system is completely contained within a container or barrier five feet square and five feet deep. 
iii.  Trees of species whose canopy could be damaged by or could cause damage to overhead power lines shall not be planted closer than a horizontal distance from overhead power lines of 30 feet for large-sized trees (20 or more inches DBH) and 20 feet for medium-sized trees (ten to 20 inches DBH). Small trees (six to ten inches DBH) can be planted adjacent to power lines. Plantings near pad mounted transformers shall not restrict access to or maintenance of the transformer and a five-foot clearance is recommended. For additional information, contact the local power company before planting. 
iv.  Vines, excluding invasive such as Kudzu, shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height at planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet physical barrier requirements. No vines shall be planted within utility easements or within five feet of any existing or proposed utility pole, guy wire or pad-mounted transformer. 
v.  Ground cover used in lieu of grass shall be planted so as to present a finished appearance and reasonable complete coverage within three months of installation. All landscaped areas shall be sodded or otherwise covered with ground cover. 
vi.  Grass areas shall be planted in species locally grown as permanent lawns. 
2.  Installation. 
i.  All required landscaping installed pursuant to this landscape code shall be installed according to accepted good planting practices. 
ii.  Landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by car stops, curbs, or other appropriate manes. 
iii.  For a major development as defined in chapter 11, a registered landscape architect or Georgia registered professional engineer shall inspect and certify that all required landscaping has been installed in accordance with the landscape plan and the requirements of this code. No certificate of occupancy or similar authorization will be issued until the required landscaping has been certified. 
3.  Irrigation. 
i.  Landscaped areas shall be provided with an irrigation system of sufficient capacity to maintain the landscaping in a healthy growing condition. All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as not to be a nuisance to adjacent properties, adjacent uses and to the general public. 
ii.  All irrigation systems shall include a "rain switch" to monitor rain levels and irrigation needs. 
iii.  All areas with native vegetation or xeriscape areas must have a readily available water supply to provide temporary irrigation until plantings are established. 
iv.  Natural areas and native vegetation left undisturbed by development may be excluded from the irrigation system. 
v.  All landscaping and irrigation plans shall consider current Best Management Practices (BMPs) for water conservation. 
4.  Existing native vegetation. 
i.  All native vegetation, which is not located in areas requiring their removal as part of the development plan, shall be retained in an undisturbed state. 
ii.  Existing healthy trees which have a caliper of 4.5 inch DBH, or larger, may be credited toward meeting the minimum number of required trees. Areas within a development may be designated as natural vegetation areas where the natural grade and existing native vegetation will remain undisturbed. 
5.  Landscape design. 
i.  For all developments requiring the submittal of a major site development plan, a landscape plan shall be submitted and approved as part of the approval process and prior to the issuance of a building permit. All landscape plans must show the location of existing or proposed utility lines that could be impacted by the vegetation being planted. All other developments shall incorporate landscaping consistent with the requirements of this Code, but are not required to submit a separate landscape plan. 
ii.  Landscape standards. 
1.  Not less than 20 percent of the total gross area of a development site shall be landscaped. The landscaped areas shall be located on the site in such a manner as to maximize preservation of existing specimen trees. 
2.  Impervious surfaces shall not be placed within five feet of the base of an existing tree. 
3.  Where possible, dumpsters, lift stations and back flow presenters shall be sited as to not be visible from public right-of-way. The location of all dumpsters and other trash receptacles, lift stations and back flow preventers shall be totally screened with an opaque, masonry wall, decorative or wood fence of appropriate height to conceal it from view from any public right-of-way or adjacent private residential or nonresidential property or use. A hedge shall be installed around the perimeter of this screen and may in itself constitute the opaque screen subject to written approval of the Community Development Director. When practicable, all enclosed equipment shall be painted either black or dark green. Metal or wooden gates shall be used to screen trash receptacles from view. 
4.  A landscaped area not less than five feet wide, consisting primarily of shrubbery, shall be provided along all sides of a building which abut a parking area. A landscaped area not less than two feet in width shall be provided along the sides and rear of a building. The landscaping shall include a hedge, one tree for every 30 linear feet and ground cover. The landscaping may be clustered to allow for creativity and flexibility in design with the approval of the Community Development Director. 
6.  Maintenance. 
i.  The owner and the lawful occupant of the real property are each responsible for the maintenance of all required landscaping in a healthy, growing condition in accordance with this Code. 
ii.  The city shall periodically inspect all areas of required landscaping for proper maintenance. Regular maintenance includes irrigation, fertilization and routine pruning of all trees and shrubs. The owner or lawful occupant of the real property shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies reported by the inspection within a reasonable time frame. Failure to comply will result in code enforcement action. 
iii.  Landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance and kept free from refuse and debris. All walls and fences shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from graffiti. 
iv.  Trees shall be pruned only as necessary to promote healthy growth, to avoid power lines, or to provide proper sight distances for roadways or intersections. Trees shall not be severely pruned or "hat racked" in order to permanently maintain growth at a reduced height. 
c.  Landscape buffers for multifamily, commercial and other nonresidential uses. 
1.  In order to reduce visual, light and noise impacts, a required landscape buffer shall be located along the length of the adjacent private property. 
2.  Buffers shall be provided for all developments seeking site plan approval as required by this Code. 
d.  Buffer width requirements. 
a)  Except as modified below, buffer width requirements for one-story developments, including parking lots, shall be: 
Table 5-7 Buffer Width Requirements 

 
b)  For multi-story developments, the buffer width is an additional ten feet for each upper story. 
e.  Buffer landscaping. 
1.  A buffer shall consist of landscaping to include a dense landscape screen. 
2.  The buffer screen shall be at least 25 percent of the width of the required buffer. The screen shall include a six-foot high wall or fence with five-foot wide landscape area located along the property line. Where a proposed nonresidential development will abut a residential development or zone, the five-foot wide landscape area shall be located outside the six-foot high wall or fence. A taller wall or fence may be required by the Community Development Director to adequately screen the proposed development site. 
3.  The fence or wall included in the buffer screen shall be constructed with the side of the fence or wall with the finished appearance facing the use of lesser intensity. 
4.  An opening through a buffer area may be provided to facilitate pedestrian or vehicular traffic between developments subject to the approval of the Community Development Director, however, no parking spaces shall be located within the buffer. 
5.  Excluding the buffer screen area, a dry retention area may be located in a buffer. Existing plant material within a dry retention area shall not be credited towards meeting the landscape requirements of this Code. 
f.  Parking area landscaping for multifamily and all nonresidential developments. 
1.  Parking area landscaping adjacent to streets. On the site of a multifamily or a nonresidential development which includes a parking area, landscaping shall be installed as follows. 
2.  A landscaped strip of land not less than ten feet in width shall be between the parking area and the abutting street or right-of-way. 
3.  The landscaping within that strip shall include: 
i.  One tree for every 30 linear feet of required landscape strip planted singly or in clusters, but not more than 50 feet apart, located between the common lot line and the parking area with no less than 50 percent of the trees being canopy trees; and 
ii.  Other landscaping such as shrubs or vines, planted five feet on-center of the strip towards the street side; and 
iii.  Grass, ground cover or other landscape treatment. 
g.  Parking area landscaping adjacent to private property. 
a)  A landscaped strip of land not less than five feet in width shall be located between the parking area and the abutting private property. 
b)  The landscaping within that strip shall include: 
i.  One tree for every 30 linear feet of required landscape strip planted singly or in clusters, but not more than 50 feet apart, located between the common lot line and the parking area; and 
ii.  Other landscaping such as shrubs or vines, planted five feet on-center of the strip towards the street side; and 
iii.  Grass, ground cover or other landscape treatment. 
h.  Parking area interior landscaping. Interior landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving. Parcels requiring more than ten off-street parking spaces shall contain landscaping and planting as follows: 
1.  Interior landscaped islands shall be provided between every ten parking spaces. Each interior island shall be not less than eight feet in width. Each interior island shall contain not less than one canopy tree and a combination of shrubs ground cover and grass. Any hedge materials located within an interior landscaped island shall be maintained at a height of not more than 24 inches. 
2.  Terminal landscaped islands shall be provided at the end of each parking row. Full terminal landscaped islands shall not be less than ten feet in width. Each terminal island shall contain not less than two canopy trees and a combination of shrubs, groundcover and grass. 
3.  Interior landscaped medians shall be provided between each row of opposing spaces not separated by a circulation aisle. Such landscaped area shall not be less than eight feet in width and shall be landscaped with one tree for every 30 linear feet of required landscape strip planted singly or in clusters, but not more than 50 feet apart, and a combination of shrubs, ground cover, grass and mulch. 
4.  Interior and terminal landscaped islands shall not be utilized for surface water storage and shall be filled or crowned. Such islands shall also be irrigated. 
i.  Development landscaping requirements. 
1.  Single-family and two-family developments. Newly constructed single-family and two-family development projects shall include the following minimum landscaping: 
i.  Grass, bark and gravel landscaped complete front, complete side and partial rear (within 20 feet of the residence) yards. 
ii.  One and one-half inch caliper (diameter) tree in the front yard and at least one tree in the rear yard of each new lot. 
iii.  Five shrubs with a minimum 18 inch spread. No trees or shrubs shall be installed within five feet of the building foundation wall. 
2.  Multifamily residential development. 
i.  Multifamily residential development shall provide a landscaped strip of land of not less than ten feet in width between the building walls and the parking areas, planted as follows. 
ii.  Not less than one tree for every 20 linear feet of required landscape area, with no less than 50 percent being canopy trees, located between the building walls and parking areas. 
iii.  A hedge or other durable landscape barrier not less than three feet in height at installation placed in a continuous manner along the building walls. 
iv.  Multifamily residential development shall provide not less than one tree for each 1,500 square feet or fraction thereof, of development site. 
v.  Not less than 20 percent of the development site shall be landscaped. 
j.  Commercial and other nonresidential development landscaping. A commercial or other nonresidential development shall include one existing or planted tree for every 2,500 square feet, or fraction thereof, of the development site. Not less than 20 percent of the developed site shall be landscaped. 
(18) - Tree preservation. 
a.  Protected tree species and criteria. Protected trees are those trees which warrant special consideration and encouragement for preservation. These trees may be designated for preservation because of rarity, aesthetic value, historical value, botanical importance, and importance to overall community planning and size. The size or condition of trees will be evaluated by the Community Development Director to determine if they qualify as specimen trees. 
a.  Protected tree species. 
1.  Any tree native to the area which has reached a DBH of not less than six inches. 
2.  Historic trees, which are those that have achieved 50 percent or more of the typical DBH for that species. 
b.  Permit required. 
1.  No protected tree shall be removed without a tree removal permit pursuant to chapter 12 of this Code. 
2.  The tree protection requirements of this section shall apply to all multifamily, nonresidential, manufactured home park and subdivision developments. Building permits for the construction of new detached single family residences including manufactured homes not located in a manufactured home park are not subject to the requirements of this section. Bona-fide agricultural uses and operations are also exempt from the provisions of this section. 
c.  Tree protection requirements for protected trees. 
1.  Trees that meet the requirements under [subsection] a. and that are located within a development or redevelopment site or lot shall be protected to the maximum extent possible. 
2.  All practical measures shall be taken to leave protected trees in place and preserved within development sites. 
3.  Protected trees within parking areas shall be preserved with tree wells or other appropriate measures, if practical. 
4.  Any parking space requirement that would require the removal of a protected tree may be waived by the Community Development Director if no fewer than 90 percent of the required parking spaces will be provided. Otherwise, protected trees shall be relocated within the project site. 
d.  Tree replacement requirements for protected trees. 
1.  Relocation. Protected trees within building envelopes or for which there is no practical alternative for preservation shall: 
i.  Be relocated within the project site; or 
ii.  Be relocated to a site designated by the Community Development Director. 
2.  Replacement. Protected trees, for which relocation is not possible or is not expected to be successful, shall be replaced with like species or species having the potential for comparable size, quality, and longevity. 
i.  Physical. Protected trees shall be replaced at a ratio of 1:1 with respect to the DBH, for example a six-inch DBH Protected Tree shall be replaced either with another six-inch DBH tree or two 4.5-inch DBH trees. The minimum size for replacement trees is 4.5 inches DBH in order to ensure successful planting. 
ii.  Monetary. As determined by the Community Development Director, monies may be contributed as a portion of the tree replacement requirements in place of the physical replacement of trees. This tree replacement payment into the "City Tree Replacement Fund", shall only be applicable for a maximum 50 percent mitigation of the required number of trees to be replaced. The remaining 50 percent mitigation shall consist of 50 percent of the required trees planted. 
3.  Relocated trees that do not survive at least two years shall, in turn, be replaced. A mechanism for financial assurance that relocated and replacement trees will meet survival criteria shall be provided. 
4.  A site plan shall indicate the preservation of all protected trees in all areas of a development site or lot, including parking areas and open space. The site plan shall show protective actions to ensure the preservation and survival of all protected trees. Tree protection shall consist of chain link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post/or rail fencing or other equivalent material. All devices shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing, or grading. The Community Development Director shall inspect and approve the installation of protection control devices before a land disturbance permit is issued. 
e.  Protection during development and construction. To assure the health and survival of protected trees that are not to be removed, the developer shall avoid the following kinds of tree injuries during all development activities: 
1.  Prior to any land preparation or other development activities a protective barrier easily visible to equipment operators shall be placed around all protected trees so as to encompass the entire tree protection area. 
2.  No attachment, wires, signs or permits may be fastened to any protected tree. 
3.  No equipment, construction materials or debris of any kind shall be placed within the protective barrier. 
4.  Required protective barriers and perimeter lines shall remain in place until all construction activity, except landscaping within the protected area, is terminated. 
5.  No fuel, paint, solvent, oil, thinner, asphalt, cement, grout or any other construction chemical or other material or tools of any kind shall be stored, or allowed in any manner to enter, within a required protective barrier or perimeter line. 
6.  No equipment shall be cleaned within a required protective barrier or perimeter line. 
7.  Injuries by grade changes. 
8.  Water, sewer, and other utility lines should be routed around the tree protection zones of protected trees. If a line cannot reasonably be routed around the tree protection zone, the line shall be tunneled beneath the area within the zone. The tunnel shall be off-set to one side of the trunk to prevent damage to the main tap roots. 
9.  Injuries by paving. 
f.  Emergencies/safety. In the case of emergencies such as hurricanes, windstorms, floods, freezes or other disasters or hazards, the requirements of this section may be waived by the city manager or his/her designee upon a finding that such waiver is necessary so that public or private work to restored order in the community will not be impeded or that the safety of a residence or other building is not compromised. 
g.  Public right-of-way. No trees shall be removed from the public right-of-way except under the direction of the Community Development Director and the city engineer, excluding trees removed by city personnel or authorized agents for the city for maintenance or public safety purposes. No tree shall be planted in the public right-of-way without authorization from the city. 
h.  Clearance of vegetation over streets and sidewalks. Trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed by the city and/or authorized agencies so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet over sidewalks and ten feet over all streets within the city. 
i.  City Tree Replacement Fund. 
1.  Establishment of the City Tree Replacement Fund. The city tree replacement fund is created in association with the city finance department for the purpose of accepting and disbursing payments made to the city as part of tree replacement mitigation and other monies deposited from penalties for tree removal, illegal grading, or illegal clearing. These monies shall be placed in an account and shall be used for the sole purpose of funding tree planting and replacement on public property within the city. 
2.  Term of existence. The City Tree Replacement Fund account shall be self-perpetuating from year to year unless specifically terminated by the City Commission. 
3.  Purpose. Funds received shall be utilized for acquiring and planting trees for public purposes within the city. Acquired trees shall be suitable to site conditions and listed within the city tree list. Public lands selected for plantings shall be publicly owned or managed lands in public right-of-way. 
4.  Source of funds. Fund monies may consist of the following: 
1.  All monies collected pursuant to the penalties outlined this chapter. 
2.  All monies collected as part of tree replacement mitigation allowances. 
5.  Fund administration. 
i.  Funds shall be expended, utilized and disbursed only for the purposes designated herein. 
ii.  The fund shall be a separate set of self-balancing accounts established and maintained by the City of Douglas. 
iii.  Funds shall be managed in accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances as they relate to financial matters. 
iv.  Monies obtained pursuant to this section may be accepted on behalf of the City of Douglas by the Community Development Director, and upon receipt shall be delivered to the City of Douglas Finance Department, which shall cause the same to be credited to the account. 
j.  Violations and penalties. 
1.  Violations shall constitute offenses punishable by the city. 
2.  It shall be unlawful to remove or destroy a tree without first obtaining a permit where applicable. 
3.  It shall be unlawful to begin construction or development without a land disturbing permit, and/or tree removal permit, where applicable. 
4.  It shall be unlawful to fail to protect and preserve trees designated for preservation during development. 
5.  It shall be unlawful to fail to replace any dead plants or trees after 60 days written notice. 
k.  Notification of violations. 
1.  Where it is determined that a violation of this section has occurred, the Community Development Director shall give a written notice to the occupant or owner of the violation and a statement advising that upon failure to fulfill the requirements of the notice, enforcement procedures may be required. 
2.  All remedial actions must occur no more than 60 days from the date of the written notice. 
l.  Enforcement procedures. 
1.  Routine inspections: The following inspections shall be conducted in conjunction with all development activities under this section. 
2.  Initial inspections: Any inspection by the Community Development Director or their designee shall be conducted prior to approval of any permit application. 
3.  Tree protection inspection: An inspection by the Community Development Director will be performed to ensure proper installation of tree protection devices before site disturbance. 
4.  Final inspection, notice of completion: This inspection reveals that all work has been installed in accordance with the approved permit and tree protection or removal activity has been carried out according to the approved permit and plan. 
m.  Stop work order. 
1.  When development is being implemented without approved permits. 
2.  When noncomplying work is not stopped upon receipt of a written notice of violation. 
CHAPTER 6. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

(1) - Purpose. 
Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; this stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, and; stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. 
Therefore, the City of Douglas establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This ordinance seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
a.  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels; 
b.  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
c.  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime; 
d.  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
e.  To provide a guideline of minimum stormwater requirements for developers and property owners; 
f.  To assist in maintaining eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(2) - Applicability. 
This ordinance shall be applicable to all projects causing an increase in stormwater runoff quantity by the addition of impervious surfaces, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a variance by the City of Douglas under the specifications of this Code. This Code also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the City of Douglas has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development and redevelopment sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing 1.0 acres or more and to construction activity disturbing less than 1.0 acres that increases the amount of impervious area by 10 percent. 
The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria: 
a.  Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the State of Georgia or other applicable regulatory authority, as applicable; 
b.  Single-family structures if the lot is not part of a common development; additions or modifications to existing single-family structures; 
c.  Developments that do not disturb more than 1.0 acres of land and do not increase the amount of impervious surface area by at least ten percent, provided the developments are not part of a larger common development plan. Documentation must be provided by the developer or his qualified representative as determined by the City of Douglas; 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by and/or approved by the City of Douglas. 
When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in Section 2 of this Code, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by this section. These stormwater requirements are dependent on the amount of increase in stormwater runoff created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by Code Enforcement—Community Development Department, in no case shall the stormwater runoff be increased by more than 1.0 cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm event, without providing adequate stormwater management. 
(3) - Compatibility with other permit and code requirements. 
This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other section of the Code, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other section of this Code, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(4) - Permit required. 
No landowner or operator shall receive any of the permits required without first meeting the requirements of this Code prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(5) - Application requirements. 
Unless specifically excluded by this Code, any landowner or operator desiring a stormwater management permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the City of Douglas a permit application on the form provided for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise accepted by this Code, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application can be considered: 
a.  A stormwater management concept plan, and 
b.  A maintenance agreement, and 
c.  A nonrefundable permit review fee. 
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of this Code, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Code, and fees shall be those established by the City Commission by Ordinance. 
(6) - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land contained within the entire tract of land on which the new development or redevelopment is to be constructed. 
(7) - Application procedure. 
The Community Development Department is designated responsible for the administration of this Code. The Community Development Department or its authorized representative in cooperation with the city engineer shall be responsible for reviewing and approving/denying the development plans, on-site inspections of construction and maintenance, and initiation of enforcement actions when violations occur. The following procedures and/or requirements shall be followed: 
a.  Application submittal: The owner-developer or design engineer shall submit three copies of plans and three sets of computations to the Community Development Department. 
b.  Application fees: A fee shall be charged for review of each application, according to the following schedule: 
Table 6-1 Fee Schedule for Stormwater Management Review 

 
c.  Review: The Community Development Department will review plans and computations for compliance with this ordinance. A decision will be made within 45 days from time of submittal. 
d.  Disapproval: Plans not meeting all requirements will be disapproved. Disapproved plans will be returned along with a statement as to reasons for disapproval. After plans are revised they shall be resubmitted to the Community Development Department for review. There is no fee for review of resubmitted plans if resubmittal is within 30 calendar days of initial submittal. 
e.  Approval: After approval, one approved copy of the plans and one copy of the computations will be returned to the design engineer or owner/developer. One copy of the approved plan and computations shall remain on file in the office of the Community Development Department. 
(8) - Inspection. 
The Community Development Department or their authorized representative or any other authorized City of Douglas representative shall make inspections as necessary to determine if construction and maintenance conforms to the plans, studies and other related ordinances. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized City of Douglas representative who requests entry for purposes of making inspections, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out their official duties. 
(9) - Violation. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that construction or maintenance does not comply with the plans or the developer has not complied with other requirements of this Code, a written notice to comply shall be served upon the developer. The notice shall set forth the deficiencies and actions necessary to comply with the plans or other requirements of this ordinance, and shall state the time, not to exceed 30 days, within which such actions must be completed. 
If the developer fails to comply within the stated time, he will be deemed in violation of this ordinance. 
(10) - Enforcement. 
The Community Development Department, or its designee, may upon any owner/developer being deemed in violation, cause enforcement and penalty provisions to be enacted as described in this Code. 
(11) - Appeal procedure. 
In the event the owner/developer and the Community Development Department cannot reach a satisfactory resolution to disputed points within the drainage plans, the plans shall be deemed disapproved by the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department shall immediately notify the owner/developer in writing of such disapproval. The owner/developer shall have ten days from the Community Development Department's notice of disapproval to file an appeal to be submitted to the city manager. If such action is not taken within a ten-day period, the owner/developer shall forfeit the right to appeal as provided in the ordinance and the plans will be deemed disapproved until plans have been revised and resubmitted to the Community Development Department for a review. 
Step 1: Appeals submitted to the city manager shall be written for presentation which supports the owner/developers position as to why certain regulations should be waived or modified, or other reason why the owner/developer disagrees with the decision of the Community Development Department disapproving said plans and/or computations. 
Upon receipt of the appeal, the city manager will review and meet with both the Community Development Department and the owner/developer and hear both sides. Following the presentation, the city manager will render a decision within 15 days. 
Step 2: Following receipt of the city managers decision, the owner/developer has 15 days to appeal the city managers decision to the Douglas City Commission. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. 
The appeal to the Douglas City Commission shall be on the evidentiary record as developed before the appeal to the City Commission. The City Commission shall not hear or allow additional evidence. The owner/developer and the city manager may submit a written argument or brief and may request oral argument. The decision to grant or deny oral argument shall be at the discretion of the City Commission. 
The City Commission shall review the record and evidence at either a special called meeting or a regularly scheduled meeting within 30 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The City Commission shall render a decision within a reasonable period of time thereafter. The decision of the City Commission shall be the final decision of the City of Douglas. 
Judicial review: Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the City of Douglas, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Coffee County. 
(12) - Waivers for providing stormwater management. 
The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria: 
a.  Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the State of Georgia or other applicable regulatory authority, as applicable; 
b.  Single-family structures if the lot is not part of a common development. Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures; 
c.  Developments that do not disturb more than 1.0 acres of land and do not increase the amount of impervious surface area by at least ten percent, provided the developments are not part of a larger common development plan. Documentation must be provided by the developer or his qualified representative as determined by the City of Douglas; 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by and/or approved by the City of Douglas. 
(13) - General performance criteria for stormwater management. 
Unless judged by the City of Douglas to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
a.  All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
b.  All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not impact a jurisdictional wetland or local water body. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers (ACE). 
c.  The proposed improvements shall, if possible, promote infiltration through the use of structural and nonstructural methods. The proposed improvements shall, if possible, mimic the post development site annual groundwater recharge rates to the pre-development site annual groundwater recharge rate. 
(14) - Basic stormwater management design criteria. 
a.  Minimum control requirements. Unless the City of Douglas grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from the requirements, this ordinance shall control the release of stormwater runoff. All new developments or redevelopments shall provide controlled release of stormwater runoff generated by the two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year, 50-year and 100-year 24-hour frequency storm events. The peak release rate of stormwater runoff from a new development or redevelopment shall not exceed the peak stormwater runoff rate of the pre-developed site for all storm intensities listed above. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Douglas reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, time and rate of runoff. 
b.  Site design feasibility. Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered: 
1.  Topography. 
2.  Maximum drainage area. 
3.  Depth to water table. 
4.  Soils. 
5.  Slopes. 
6.  Terrain. 
7.  Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas. 
c.  Conveyance issues. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Maximizing flow paths from inflow points to outflow points; 
2.  Protection of inlet and outfall structures; 
3.  Elimination of erosive flow velocities; 
4.  Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable. 
d.  Maintenance agreements. All stormwater treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any stormwater management permits. 
e.  Nonstructural stormwater practices. The use of nonstructural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. 
(15) - Engineering requirements—Design standards. 
Two hydrological methods for computing surface runoff are hereby adopted: 
a.  The rational method (shall not be used on sites greater than 25 acres). 
b.  U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55(TR-55), An Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds. 
Alternative computer models may be utilized if such models are approved in advance of application submittal to the City of Douglas. 
The runoff coefficient for a development site in its natural undeveloped state (having no impervious areas) shall be assigned a runoff coefficient for woodlands land use for the natural slope and soil present on the property, but in no case shall the coefficient exceed 0.30. 
The rainfall intensity for the various storm frequencies is defined by the rainfall intensity duration curves for the City of Thomasville as published in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, latest edition, or other locally developed, approved and accepted intensity curves. 
(16) - Requirements of engineering drawings. 
a.  Scale. The site plan shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals 50 feet (maximum). Other scales may be acceptable if pre-approved by the Community Development Department. North arrow shall be provided. 
b.  Contours. The site plan shall illustrate both existing and proposed contours on a one foot increment. 
c.  Elevation datum. Mean sea level. 
d.  Spot elevations. Grate, throat and invert elevations shall be provided for all storm drainage structures. 
e.  Drainage basins. 
1.  Earthen slopes shall not exceed three to one. 
2.  Wet detention basins shall have a permanent pool depth of not less than four feet to reduce bottom vegetation growth. 
3.  Dry basins must be designed with access to allow for efficient maintenance of the basin bottom and side slopes. 
4.  An overall map of the drainage area of study with total acreage. 
5.  The calculations shall clearly show how the times of concentrations were determined. 
6.  V-notched Weir, rectangular Weir or Orifice outlets are recommended to achieve detention storage. 
7.  Design data for storage volume and detention outlet requirements shall be submitted and approved. 
8.  The principal outlet must convey the 100-year storm flow without emergency overflow. However, design peak flow can be exceeded and because outlet structures can become partially blocked, an emergency overflow must be provided. The emergency overflow should direct flows to minimize property damage and avoid risk to people. 
9.  Where discharge velocities exceed five feet per second, rip rap shall be provided. Where rip rap is not desirable, energy dissipation devices of concrete may be utilized. 
f.  Details. The engineering drawings shall contain construction details of the drop inlets, catch basins, junction boxes, headwalls, spillways, outlet control structures, basin dam, etc. 
g.  Fencing. Permanent chain link fencing of at least six feet in height shall be installed around all detention facilities having a maximum water depth greater than 4.0 feet in depth. Fencing shall include a lockable gate of adequate width to allow access for maintenance equipment and labor. 
h.  Flood plain. The site plan shall exhibit the limits and flood elevation (if published by FEMA) of the 100-year flood plain. 
i.  Engineers seal. All required plans, computations, studies, etc. shall have the seal and signature of the design engineer, who shall be a professional engineer registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
(17) - Stormwater management plan required for all developments. 
No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be prepared by an individual approved by the City of Douglas and must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the general location and type of practices. The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements. No other permits shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, has undergone a review and been approved by the City of Douglas after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(18) - Stormwater management concept plan requirements. 
A stormwater management concept plan shall be required with the permit application and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan: 
a.  Maps. A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; a written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
b.  Engineering analysis. Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
c.  Inventory of natural resources. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
d.  Maintenance. A written description of the required maintenance burden for any proposed stormwater management facility. 
e.  Concept plan. The City of Douglas may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential. 
For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this ordinance to the maximum extent practicable. 
(19) - Final stormwater management plan requirements. 
After review of the stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to the plan as deemed necessary by the Community Development Department, a final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information required in the final stormwater management plan. This includes: 
a.  Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected. 
b.  Topographic base map. A one inch equals 200 feet topographic base map of the site which extends a distance as determined by the design engineer beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all existing structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements; and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown which may have an impact or be impacted by the proposed project. 
c.  Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this ordinance. Such calculations shall include: 
(i)  Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration, 
(ii)  Time of concentration, 
(iii)  Soil Curve Numbers or runoff coefficients, 
(iv)  Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area, 
(v)  Infiltration rates, where applicable, 
(vi)  Culvert capacities, 
(vii)  Flow velocities, 
(viii)  Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms, and 
(ix)  Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
d.  Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil boring or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
e.  Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
f.  Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
g.  Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. 
h.  Maintenance agreement. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management measure in accordance with the specifications of this ordinance. 
i.  Erosion and sediment control plans for construction of stormwater management measures. The applicant must prepare an erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with the City of Douglas Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
j.  Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan. 
(20) - Performance bond/security. 
The City of Douglas may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this ordinance. The City of Douglas will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this ordinance. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development states can be done at the discretion of the City of Douglas. 
(21) - Notice of construction commencement. 
The applicant must notify the Community Development Department in advance before the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the City of Douglas or their designee who has been approved by the City of Douglas. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; 
d.  Any violations that exist. 
If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No additional work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the City of Douglas. 
(22) - As-built plans. 
All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. A final inspection by the City of Douglas is required before the release of any performance securities can occur and before a certificate of occupancy is issued by the City of Douglas. 
(23) - Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities. 
a.  Maintenance easement. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City of Douglas, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this ordinance. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the developer at no expense to the City of Douglas. 
b.  Maintenance covenants. Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the City of Douglas and recorded prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
c.  Requirements of maintenance covenants. All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner at the expense of the owner, as determined by the City of Douglas, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
(24) - Inspection of stormwater facilities. 
Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(25) - Right of entry for inspection. 
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, the property owner shall grant to the City of Douglas the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this ordinance. 
(26) - Records of installation and maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least three years. These records shall be made available to the City of Douglas during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(27) - Failure to maintain practices. 
If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the City of Douglas, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Douglas shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have ten days to correct, repair and/or repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the City of Douglas may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county. 
(28) - Violations. 
Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this Code may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(29) - Notice of violation. 
When the City of Douglas determines than an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Code, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation. 
(30) - Stop work orders. 
Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This stop work order will be in effect until the City of Douglas confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this Code. 
(31) - Civil penalties. 
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed five days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues. 
(32) - Restoration of lands. 
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the City of Douglas may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(33) - Holds on occupation certificates. 
Occupation certificates will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the City of Douglas. 
(34) - Criminal penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this Code, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalties not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this Code shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(35) - Stormwater management permit design check list. 
Disclaimer: 
This check list is to serve as a guide to the design professional to aid in plan submittal. Additional information not shown on this list may be required. 
Submittal check list: 
º  Stormwater management permit application filled out completely and signed. 
º  Plan review fee submitted. 
º  Maintenance agreement—If applicable. 
º  Three sets of plans—Three sets of calculations submitted. 
º  Pre and post development stormwater calculations provided. 
º  If post development runoff exceeds pre-development run-off, then stormwater detention is required. 
Plan review check list: 
º  Project name, owner/developers name, address, telephone number, location map and 24-hour erosion control contact name and telephone number shown on cover sheet. 
º  North arrows and scales shown on all applicable plan sheets. 
º  Total site acreage and disturb acreage clearly shown on the plans. 
º  Existing and proposed contours shown at one-foot interval. 
º  All existing and proposed features clearly shown. 
º  Areas for all types of existing and proposed ground covers and runoff coefficient used for each. 
º  Grate, throat, and invert elevations of existing and proposed drainage structures. 
º  Maximum water elevation and footprint for the 100-year storm event. 
º  Construction details for drainage structures and outlet control structures. 
º  Fencing around detention pond where applicable. 
º  Identify the project receiving waters and describe adjacent areas such as streams, lakes, residential area, etc., which might be affected. 
º  Show certification number, signature and seal of qualified plan designer and provide Level II Introduction to Design certification (House Bill 285) after December 31, 2006. 
Calculations review check list: 
º  Project name, owner/developers name, address, telephone number and 24[-hour] erosion control contact name and telephone number shown on cover sheet. 
º  Statement of existing conditions including ground covers, buildings, paved areas, drainage patterns, soil types, etc. 
º  Statement of proposed improvements including ground covers, buildings, paved areas, drainage patterns, soil types, etc. 
º  Statement of method utilized to determine surface runoff including intensities used for each storm, runoff coefficients used for various ground covers, time of concentrations, and stage-storage relationship. 
º  Summary of pre-developed and post-developed runoff rates for the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year storm events. 
º  Pipe sizing calculations. 
º  Show certification number, signature and seal of qualified plan designer. 
CHAPTER 7. - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS 
The uses in this section are listed in alphabetical order. The purpose of these supplemental use standards is to provide more specific standards for certain uses for which site development and design standards are necessary to ensure that they will be compatible with surrounding uses, have minimal impact on the environment, and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the city. 
These standards shall apply to specific uses in all zoning districts and shall be enforced by the community development department. 
Any use that is regulated by this section, and is authorized in a zoning district shall be developed in conformance with the applicable supplemental use standards. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(2)  Adult entertainment uses. 
(3)  Amateur radio antenna. 
(4)  Amusement arcade, amusement theme park, commercial recreation. 
(5)  Animal shelter and kennels—See veterinary services. 
(6)  Automobile, boat, RV sales. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast lodging. 
(8)  Car washes. 
(9)  Cemeteries, human and pet. 
(10)  Clubs, lodges and similar noncommercial associations. 
(11)  Communication tower/facilities. 
(12)  Concentrated animal feedlot operations (CAFO). 
(13)  Continuing care retirement community or aggregate congregate care living facility. 
(14)  Day care/child care centers. 
(15)  Distance requirements for alcoholic beverages. 
(16)  Drive-through facilities. 
(17)  Dwelling, live-work. 
(18)  Dwelling, loft. 
(19)  Dwelling, two-family (duplex) in R-12 Zoning District. 
(20)  Fences, walls and hedges. 
(21)  Flea market. 
(22)  Gasoline service station with or without convenience store. 
(23)  Golf courses and country clubs. 
(23.5)  Halfway house/homeless shelter/drug treatment facility. 
(24)  Home occupation. 
(25)  Ice vending machines. 
(26)  Indoor gun range. 
(27)  Outdoor gun range (municipal). 
(28)  Industrialized buildings (modular homes), residential. 
(29)  Industrialized buildings, nonresidential. 
(30)  Internet café and similar uses relating to online gambling. 
(31)  Kennel, pet boarding—See veterinary services. 
(32)  Landfill, inert waste. 
(33)  Landfill, solid waste. 
(34)  Livestock in residential districts. 
(35)  Manufactured homes. 
(36)  Manufactured home parks. 
(37)  Mobile food vendors and services. 
(38)  Outdoor storage in residential and commercial districts. 
(39)  Parking garages. 
(40)  Portable on demand storage units (PODs). 
(41)  Recreational vehicle park and campground. 
(42)  Religious facilities and accessory uses. 
(43)  Riding stables. 
(44)  Salvage yard, junk yards. 
(45)  Satellite dish antennas. 
(46)  School K—12, private. 
(47)  Scrap, waste and yard debris recycling operations. 
(48)  Store front religious facilities. 
(49)  Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
(50)  Temporary uses (such as special or seasonal events). 
(51)  Trash and refuse areas. 
(52)  Utility substation. 
(53)  Veterinary services/animal hospitals in residential districts, pet boarding. 

(1) - Accessory uses and structures. 
a.  No accessory uses and structures shall be constructed unless there exists a permitted principal use on the parcel, located in full compliance with all standards and requirements of this Code. 
b.  The principal permitted use on the property shall be owner occupied. 
c.  Accessory uses and structures shall not be located in any required front yard and shall only be permitted in side and rear yards, subject to minimum five feet side and rear setbacks from the property line. On corner lots the side setback shall be ten feet. 
d.  There shall not be less than five feet separation between an accessory structure and the principal building, but has to be in compliance with minimum fire code. 
e.  An accessory dwelling unit may be in the same building or separate building from the primary dwelling unit. 
f.  In a residential district the height of an accessory use and structure shall not exceed the height of the principal structure and the footprint of an accessory use and structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the footprint of the principal structure and 35 percent of the maximum permitted building area of the entire lot. 
g.  The architectural design and materials shall be consistent with the principal structure, neighborhood and use conventional/historical residential windows and doors. 
h.  Accessory uses and structures and detached accessory dwelling units shall be included in all calculations of impervious surface and stormwater run-off. 
i.  An accessory dwelling unit shall have at least one parking space in addition to the required parking space(s) for the primary dwelling unit. 
(2) - Adult entertainment uses. 
a.  Adult business premise regulations. 
1.  All adult materials shall be located and the activities of employees which include the exposure of specified anatomical areas shall take place within the adult business premises. 
2.  No adult materials or activities of employees which include the exposure of specified anatomical areas shall be visible from the exterior of the adult business premises in any way including but not limited to exterior apertures such as opened doors and unobscured windows. 
3.  No merchandise, advertising or depictions of the activities of an adult business shall be displayed on the exterior of the adult business premises or in any location where they are visible from public right-of-way. 
4.  No adult business shall display a sign: 
i.  Advertising the presentation of any activity prohibited by Georgia Statute law or any applicable city ordinance. 
ii.  Capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that the establishment engages in an activity prohibited by Georgia Statutes law or any applicable city ordinance. 
5.  Additional landscaping shall be provided adjacent to public right-of-way and adjacent to private property: 
i.  A landscaped strip at least five feet wide shall be provided along the boundary of adjacent public right-of-way between the right-of-way and all on-site parking areas and other vehicular use areas to consist of one tree every 50 feet or portion thereof and a fence, wall or hedge not less than four feet in height at planting; and 
ii.  An opaque fence, wall or hedge shall be provided along the boundary of adjacent private property of a height of not less than four feet and more than eight feet at planting. 
b.  Distance requirements. 
1.  No adult business shall commence operation within 1,000 feet of the R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I and RP residential zoning districts. 
2.  No adult business shall commence operation within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment establishment. 
3.  No adult business shall commence operation within 1,000 feet of any church or school. 
4.  No adult business shall commence operation within 250 feet from the nearest right-of-way line of US 441, Peterson Avenue, Madison Avenue, Ward Street and Ashley Street. 
c.  Prohibited activities. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for an employee of an adult business to engage in specified sexual activities within the adult business premises in the presence of a patron or spectator of the business or for any form of compensation. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for an employee of an adult business to physically touch a patron or spectator of an adult business while simultaneously revealing specified anatomical areas. 
d.  Amortization of nonconforming adult businesses. 
1.  An adult business in violation of the location or distancing requirements of this ordinance at the time of its enactment on February 28, 2011 shall be deemed a nonconforming use which may remain in operation until February 28, 2014. No such nonconforming uses shall continue to operate as an adult business after February 28, 2014, except in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
2.  If any nonconforming adult business ceases to do business for a continuous period of six months, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall not thereafter re-open except in conformance with these regulations. 
(3) - Amateur radio antenna. 
a.  No such antenna structure, including any support upon which it may be constructed, shall exceed a combined height of 50 feet. 
b.  Amateur radio service antenna structures exceeding 50 feet in height shall be permitted only by the zoning board of appeals subject to all variance requirements of this Code. 
c.  Amateur radio service antenna shall be located a distance of at least one-half the height of the tower (antenna) from all property lines. 
(4) - Amusement arcade; amusement theme park, commercial recreation. 
a.  An outdoor recreation facility consisting of amusement rides, games, water slides, amusement vehicles, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, batting cages, water slides or any similar commercial outdoor recreation shall be limited as follows: 
1.  The minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
2.  The maximum lot size shall be 15 acres. 
3.  All such facilities must be enclosed within an eight feet high fence with unpierced gates that are to be locked except when the facility is open to the public. 
4.  Outdoor activities are limited to the hours from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
5.  A site plan shall be required in accordance with chapter… to indicated entrances and exits, type location and height of recreation facilities, buildings and other structures and lights, parking areas, landscaping, buffers and drainage. The site plan shall also illustrate surrounding property uses and the location of the nearest residence. 
6.  Lighting must be designed to direct light downward and away from adjacent properties. 
7.  An environmental acoustical study shall be submitted to the community development director as part of the site plan approval. It shall identify and analyzes all sources of noise emanating from the site including outdoor speakers, sound effects or sound systems as well as rides, vehicles, and mechanical equipment. Noise levels shall not exceed 65 decibels, dbA measured at the property lines. 
8.  A 100 feet buffer shall be maintained adjacent to all abutting residentially zoned property. 
(5) - Animal shelter and kennels. 
Any outside kennel or kennels with access to the outside shall be at least 200 feet from any residential district. 
(6) - Automobile, boat, RV sales (new and pre-owned). 
a.  A ten-foot wide landscape buffer shall be required abutting public right-of-way. All landscaping shall be in conformance with the requirements of chapter 5, landscaping. 
b.  A 15-foot wide landscape buffer shall be required abutting all side and rear property lines. All landscaping shall be in conformance with the requirements of chapter 5, landscaping. 
c.  All vehicles shall be parked on paved surfaces or approved pervious paving materials. 
d.  All outdoor display areas shall be at least 50 feet from the right-of-way line and no closer than 100 feet from the nearest residence. 
e.  Maintenance, repair, painting and body work must take place within an enclosed building. 
f.  The property shall contain a sales building with a minimum of 2,500 square feet of heated floor area. 
(7) - Bed and breakfast lodging. 
a.  The bed and breakfast must be secondary to the use of the premises for a dwelling. All operators of a bed and breakfast residence must own and occupy the building where said use will occur as their principal residence. 
b.  Only one sign, for the purposes of identification, no advertisement, shall be permitted. The identification sign shall have a maximum of four square feet in sign area and shall not be illuminated. 
c.  The maximum number of guest rooms made available for rent shall be five. 
d.  One off-street parking space shall be provided per guest room and shall meet the requirements of this Code. 
e.  No food preparation or cooking shall be conducted within any bedroom nor other individual rented rooms. Meals shall only be provided to overnight guests and employees of the inn. 
f.  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character. 
g.  A tourist accommodation permit is required from the Coffee County Health Department. 
(8) - Car washes. 
a.  A car wash operation is considered to be a drive through facility and is subject to site plan submission requirements. 
b.  The property on which the car wash is to be located shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet in size. 
c.  The car wash, and all related activity areas shall be screened from all adjoining side and rear properties with a 15-foot landscape buffer with one tree for every 30 linear feet and a continuous hedge along the entire length of the property. All landscaping shall be in accordance with this Code. 
d.  No more than seven car wash bays and seven vacuum stations shall be allowed in any self-serve car wash facility. 
e.  All car wash bays shall be enclosed on two sides and covered by a permanent roof. Exterior walls shall be brick construction. 
f.  All on-site lighting fixtures shall be directed so that adjacent properties are not illuminated. 
g.  Mobile car washes shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  No mobile car wash shall wash a car on a public street or within a public right-of-way. 
2.  A mobile car wash operating on private property shall have the written permission of the property owner. 
3.  The mobile car/vehicle wash business must catch all water coming off the vehicle if such vehicle is washed on an impervious surface and dispose of this water at an approved facility. 
4.  A maximum of five vehicles may be washed on a non-paved or pervious surface, provided there is a good stand of live ground cover such as grass and the grass is able to absorb the run-off into the ground without any water run-off from the site. 
5.  All mobile car washes shall be permitted as a home occupation and shall not operate without a permit issued by the community development director. 
(9) - Cemeteries, human and pet. 
a.  Cemeteries are permitted in any zoning district provided they front on an arterial or connector street. 
b.  A cemetery may include one or more of the following: a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments and a columbarium. 
c.  A cemetery may include a chapel when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of the cemetery. 
d.  Registered cemeteries per state law must have a minimum size of ten acres; other cemeteries must have a minimum land area of two acres. 
e.  The minimum setbacks for any structures to the front property line must be 40 feet, to the side and rear property lines must be 20 feet and adjacent to any residentially zoned property must be 50 feet. 
f.  Must have a 25-foot planted buffer strip around their entire perimeter except for ingress and egress points. 
(10) - Clubs, lodges and similar noncommercial associations. 
a.  The serving of food is limited to club members on a nonprofit basis; 
b.  Ingress and egress are situated so that the added traffic, lights, noise, etc. are not objectionable to the surrounding residences; 
c.  No structures are within 50 feet of an adjacent residential structure; and 
d.  A planted buffer strip is provided and maintained to screen off-street parking areas, trash, service entrance, and other potential offensive features from adjacent residential properties. 
(11) - Communication tower/facility. 
a.  The purpose and intent is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development and installation of communication towers, antenna support structures, antennas and related facilities. These standards are designed to protect and promote public health, safety and community welfare and the aesthetic quality of the city, while at the same time not unduly restricting development of needed telecommunication facilities nor denying wireless communications suppliers' access to the public switched telephone network. These standards encourage managed development of telecommunication infrastructure. 
b.  All applications shall include a statement of need or necessity, showing that the service cannot be provided through other means, i.e. co-location. 
c.  All applications shall include the intended service area and existing coverage by service providers. 
d.  Telecommunication towers shall comply with applicable Federal Aviation Administration and Federal Communications Commission regulations. Evidence of compliance must be submitted prior to issuance of building permits for construction. The Douglas Municipal Airport Manager shall be notified by the applicant of all applications no less than ten days prior to filing. 
e.  All certifications required for the construction of telecommunication facilities shall be sealed by a Georgia registered engineer. 
f.  All telecommunication towers, and accessory and support structures including guy anchors shall comply with the applicable zoning district setbacks. For guyed towers, applicants should submit certified break-apart calculations in order for the property boundary setbacks of the tower to be determined. If the applicant does not submit break-apart calculations, the minimum setback from all property lines or the nearest inhabited building shall be 150 percent of the height of the tower, but not less than 200 feet. 
g.  A wall or fence no less than ten feet in height from finished grade shall be constructed around each telecommunication tower and ground related support or guy anchors. Access to the tower shall be controlled. 
h.  The city may require, as a condition of approval, the dedication of space on a tower for communications equipment required for public safety. The need for such public use shall be indicated to the applicant prior to formal approval of an application. In the case of co-use with the city, the applicant shall certify that none of the proposed or future users of the tower shall interfere with its use by the city for public safety. 
i.  In addition to the landscaping requirements per chapter 5 of this Code, landscape buffers shall be required around the perimeter fencing of the telecommunication tower and any accessory uses, including guy anchors. Landscape buffers shall be located outside and within ten feet of the required fence and shall include not less than one tree and suitable ground cover for every 20 linear feet of fence. In addition, a hedge shall be installed around the exterior perimeter of the fence. 
j.  A 12-foot wide stabilized access driveway is acceptable to a telecommunication tower, unless the community development director determines, based on public safety concerns, that circumstances require paved access. The turn-around area shall be approved by the city engineer, police chief and fire chief. 
k.  A minimum of one on-site parking space shall be provided. The parking area shall be paved if the access road is paved. 
l.  Telecommunications towers and accessory structures shall be unoccupied. 
m.  A tower may constitute an accessory use on a lot containing a separate principal use. If the tower constitutes a principal use, then it must be located on a property which meets the minimum lot size requirements of the district in which the tower is located and is large enough to accommodate the tower, accessory structures, landscaping, parking and other required improvements. 
n.  The use of any portion of a tower for signs or advertising is prohibited. 
o.  The following distances shall be measured by a straight line measurement without regard to intervening buildings from the nearest point of the building or unit within a building in which the proposed telecommunications tower is to be located to the nearest point of the lot, use, right-of-way line or district from which the proposed telecommunications tower is to be separated. 
1.  No telecommunications tower shall be constructed within 500 feet of the R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I zoning district within the city or within 500 feet of a residential area outside of the city. 
2.  No telecommunications tower shall be constructed within 500 feet of a school. 
p.  An unused tower shall be removed within three months of cessation of all telecommunications uses. 
q.  Existing nonconforming towers may be replaced one time by a tower of equal or lesser height. 
r.  Temporary facilities known as "cells on wheels" shall be allowed for periods up to 30 days during documented states of emergency as declared by the city manager, and for special events subject to review and approval of the airport manager and the community development director. 
(12) - Concentrated animal feedlot operations. 
Concentrated animal feedlot operations (CAFO) are prohibited within the City of Douglas. 
(13) - Continuing care retirement community or adult congregate care living facilities. 
a.  The provisions of this section only apply to facilities which provide housing for more than ten persons or which are more than one acre in size. Any adult congregate care facility which may house four or fewer unrelated persons in a single-family detached dwelling shall be a use by right in all residential zones. Licensed CCRCs or ACLFs shall be a use allowed within planned development districts. 
b.  Standards. 
1.  For facilities within a planned development district, the provisions of that district shall apply. 
2.  For facilities not within a planned development districts, a site plan drawn to scale, in accordance with chapter 5 of this Code shall be provided. 
3.  The permitted density shall be that of the underlying zoning district. For facilities within the planned development district, the maximum density shall be 20 units per acre. 
4.  Off-street parking shall be provided on a minimum basis of one space per every four occupants and one space for every two employees as determined by the maximum working shift. The city commission may require the provision of additional parking in the reasonable exercise of its discretion. 
5.  For all facilities, each unit in the facility to be occupied by one person shall be a minimum of 250 square feet; each unit in the facility to be occupied by two persons shall be a minimum of 450 square feet. Additionally, at least 100 square feet of interior common area shall be provided for each unit. 
6.  All facilities shall provide facilities sufficient, as determined by the city commission, in size to serve meals to the residents and shall provide at least two meals a day to its residents which shall be included in the monthly fee. 
7.  All facilities shall also provide the following amenities or services for its residents: 
i.  An office or examination room for the purpose of housing a qualified and properly licensed nurse or nursing staff. 
ii.  T.V. and game room, library, arts and crafts center or other similar facility to provide leisure activities for facility residents. 
iii.  Laundry facilities for the residents. 
8.  All facilities shall be subject to a 45-foot height maximum. 
9.  All facilities shall be subject to the regulations in the residential zoning districts which pertain to lot coverage and setbacks. 
10.  At least 20 percent of each facility shall be maintained as open space to be either a lawn or landscaped area which can be used for recreation and other leisure activities. Facilities intended for planned development districts shall be subject to a 30 percent open space requirement. 
11.  All signs in conjunction with the facility shall meet the applicable requirements pertaining to the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
12.  Accessory uses shall be limited to those normal and incidental to residential dwelling units, including a small convenience store to provide personal items such as toiletries, magazines, a small selection of groceries, prescriptions. Said facility shall be self-contained within the structure and open only to the residents of the facility. 
13.  Each facility and its units shall be served by one master meter for water, sewer, gas and electric utilities. 
14.  Any plan for a facility must not only establish compliance with the above requirements, but also that such use will be reasonably compatible with the surrounding neighborhood on the basis of the following considerations: 
i.  Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures on the property with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other emergency. 
ii.  Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the noise, glare, or odor effects, or property value effects of the proposed facility on adjoining properties and properties in the neighborhood. 
iii.  Refuse and service areas. 
iv.  Utilities with reference to location, availability and compatibility. 
v.  Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and character. 
vi.  Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, compatibility and harmony with the neighborhood and adjacent properties. 
(14) - Day care/child care center. 
a.  In the M-1 and M-2 Districts, a day care center shall be allowed as an accessory to the business for use by employees of that business only. 
b.  In the R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I and RP Districts, the use shall maintain a residential appearance compatible with the neighborhood and not be detrimental to adjacent properties as a result of traffic, noise, light, refuse, parking or other activities. 
c.  The principal and accessory buildings shall meet all yard setback and height requirements of this district. 
d.  The use shall comply with all state day care requirements for standards, licensing and inspections. 
e.  The use must provide at least 200 square feet of outdoor recreation per child. 
f.  The outdoor play area must be enclosed with a six-foot high fence. 
g.  The use shall provide paved driveways with drop-off areas and turn-arounds to be reviewed by the community development department, so that traffic associated with the use does not impede flow of traffic on adjacent streets. 
h.  A City of Douglas Occupational Tax Certificate shall be required for this business. 
(15) - Distance requirements for alcoholic beverage sales. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted or issued to any applicant for such license nor shall any person knowingly and intentionally sell or offer to sell, give or distribute: 
a.  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building; 
b.  Any distilled spirits within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus; 
c.  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus; 
d.  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the State of Georgia or any county or municipal government therein. 
1.  As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and which are public schools or private schools. 
e.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. 
1.  As used in this subsection, the term "housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Title 8, the "Housing Authorities Law." 
f.  This section shall not be applicable to sales or transfers by any license holder whose use of his premises for such sale existed before the establishment of the use of the religious facility, school, or public playground, or when the religious facility is located in a storefront in a commercial zoning district as a temporary use. 
Those distance measurement prohibitions stated above shall be measured in the following manner. 
g.  Churches, library/branch: In a straight line from the premises of the site for which an alcoholic beverage license is applied for to the premises (property line) of any church, library/branch premises thereof. 
h.  College campus, school grounds: In the nearest traveled pedestrian way from the front door of the structure on the premises for which an alcoholic beverage license is applied for, to the nearest right-of-way line or a sidewalk or street or public way and proceeding to the premises (property line) of the college campus and/or school grounds along such nearest public right-of-way. 
i.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the section above to the contrary, "restaurants" which offers alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, are exempt from the requirements contained above provided that the serving of such beverages is incidental to the principal business conducted. 
(16) - Drive-through facilities. 
a.  Drive-through facilities shall not be permitted in residential zoning districts (R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I, R-P) or C-N. 
b.  Each stacking space shall be a minimum of 26 feet in length and ten feet in width along the straight portions of the stacking lane. Stacking spaces and stacking lanes shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width along curved segments. 
c.  Stacking lanes shall be delineated from traffic lanes, other stacking lanes and parking areas with striping, curbing, landscaping and the use of alternative paving materials or raised medians. If curbing or a raised median is used, an emergency by-pass or exit shall be provided. 
d.  Entrances to the stacking lane(s) shall be clearly marked and a minimum of 60 feet distance from the side property line. 
e.  Stacking lanes shall be designed to prevent circulation congestion, both on site and on adjacent public streets. The circulation shall separate the drive-through traffic from the circulation on site, not impede or restrict access into or out of parking spaces, and minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular traffic with physical and visual separation of the two. 
f.  Stacking lanes shall not interfere with required loading and trash storage areas and loading or trash operations shall also not interfere with on-site vehicle movement. 
g.  Any outdoor service facility, including menu boards, speakers, etc., shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any residentially zoned district or residentially used property. 
h.  Menu boards shall be a maximum of 24 feet square feet, with a maximum of seven feet in height and shall be screened from the view of any public street or residential properties. 
i.  Standards for drive through facilities. 
1.  A drive-through or walk-through facility shall be designed, constructed and used so as not to interfere with the public use of public ways, streets, alleys or other public areas. The community development director shall specifically approve such facility. In making such determination, the type of business, the existing and projected traffic flow of nearby public areas and the nearness of other like facilities shall be considered. 
j.  The minimum number of queuing or stacking spaces required shall be as follows: 
Variations from these minimums may be allowed by the community development director on the basis of a traffic study as provided by the applicant. 
Table 7-1 Required Stacking Spaces 

 
* An additional four vehicle queue from the pick-up window to the order box shall be provided. 
k.  Each queue space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 26 feet. Queuing lane dimensions shall be measured from the point indicated in the queue space schedule to the end of the queuing lane. Dimensions of queuing lanes shall be shown on the site plan. 
l.  Each queue lane shall be clearly defined and designed so as to not conflict or interfere with other traffic using the site. A bypass lane with a minimum width of 12 feet shall be provided if a one-way traffic flow is used in the parking lot. The bypass lane shall be clearly designated and distinct from the queuing area. 
(17) - Dwelling, live-work. 
The following standards shall apply to all live-work dwelling units: 
a.  The dwelling unit must be owner occupied. 
b.  Only one business may be operated in each dwelling. 
c.  The business owner shall be the owner of the dwelling unit in which the business is located. 
d.  The business shall be located on the ground floor only and shall have direct entry from the sidewalk along the street frontage. 
e.  No more than 40 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for conducting the business. 
(18) - Dwelling, loft. 
a.  Loft dwellings shall be located in mixed use buildings. 
b.  No loft dwelling shall be located on the ground floor. 
c.  Residential portions of a building shall have at least one entrance/exit to the ground floor that is separate from the entrance/exit used by the occupants of the nonresidential portion of the building. 
d.  Each loft dwelling shall have at least 800 square feet of heated/ac living area. 
(19) - Dwelling, two-family (duplex) in R-12 zoning district. 
a.  The following standards are intended to provide for areas of two-family development that are consistent in design and in development patterns with typical single-family detached development. 
b.  The two units of a duplex shall share a common roof and a common wall for at least 50 percent of the maximum depth of the building, as measured from the front to the rear of the lot and prohibit the separation of the two units by a breezeway, carport, or other open building element; instead of a shared common wall, the two units can share a common floor and ceiling. 
c.  Each dwelling unit shall contain a two-car garage in addition to required parking spaces. The garage space shall not be eliminated by enclosing the garage with a stationary wall. If the lot is alley served, garages shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the rear property lines. 
d.  Each dwelling unit shall have access to the street with a concrete driveway or any other alternative material consistent with this Code. 
(20) - Fences, walls and hedges. 
a.  The requirements in this section shall be in addition to and shall supersede in the event of a conflict those contained in the building code, relating to type of construction and materials of walls and fences. 
b.  Any fence or wall, except a chain link fence, in height over six feet must be designed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or architect. 
c.  Fences and walls shall be constructed of concrete, cement blocks, brick, chain link, wood, ornamental wrought iron, stone, or any alternate material as approved by the community development director. Concrete or cement block walls shall be stucco or provided with a textured finish. 
d.  Metal fences shall be of noncorrodible metal or galvanized wire fabric, having a minimum of 11 gauge, mounted on steel posts. 
e.  Fences or walls should be generally in harmony and compatible with their surroundings. 
f.  All fences shall be maintained in good repair on both sides in order to remain structurally sound. 
g.  All fences and walls on the same property shall be continuous in alignment and of uniform construction and appearance. 
h.  No fence shall be constructed of materials which easily corrode, decay or rust, unless specifically treated to inhibit such corrosion, decay or rust. 
i.  The height of fences and walls shall be measured from existing natural elevation of a lot, prior to any construction or alteration. 
j.  Any entryway arbor or trellis, constructed in conjunction with a fence or wall, shall not exceed a maximum height of nine feet, measured from existing grade. 
k.  The height of all fences, walls, hedges, signs or any other objects located within the sight distance triangle for intersections shall meet the sight distance requirements as defined in the Geometric Design of Highway and Streets as published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
l.  Plans for fences or walls shall be included as a part of the site and/or building plans and shall be erected during or immediately after the erection of the principal building, and in any event prior to the certificate of occupancy of the principal building is issued. 
[m]n.  Electrically charged fences are prohibited, except in prisons, jails or to contain livestock in agricultural areas. 
[n]m.  Barbed wire or razor wire fences are prohibited, except in prisons or jails. 
[o]n.  In no case shall a fence or wall restrict the natural sheet flow of water or impede movement of drainage water from swales, drainage ditches, etc. 
[p]o.  All major development projects shall be allowed to install a construction fence with a temporary six-foot chain link fence with obscure fabric that may include graphics depicting the development project, or other visual barrier material around the site prior to the initiation of the construction phase. 
In residential districts (R-15, R-12, R-M, R-I and R-P): 
[q]p.  Fences, walls and hedges may be located in any required yard. 
[r]q.  The maximum height of fences and walls shall be four feet in any required front yard and six feet in any required side or rear yard. Hedges of any height may be located within any required front, side or rear yard, provided it complies with #11. 
[s]r.  For a multifamily development or unit, fences and walls shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any abutting street right-of-way for the purpose of landscape beautification. Landscaping materials shall consist of a hedge and groundcover or other grounded landscape treatment. 
[t]s.  Where a residential lot abuts a nonresidential zoned lot, fence height in side or rear yards may be increased to eight feet. 
In commercial or industrial districts: 
[u]t.  Fences or walls erected in commercial districts shall be no higher than eight feet. Fences shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any abutting street right-of-way for the purpose of landscape beautification. Landscaping materials shall consist of a hedge and groundcover or other grounded landscape treatment. 
[v]u.  Fences or walls erected in an industrial (M1 and M-2) zoning district shall be no higher than ten feet. Fences shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any abutting street right-of-way for the purpose of landscape beautification. 
[w]v.  Where an industrial zoned use abuts any other nonindustrial zoning district, there shall be a masonry buffer wall erected, with a minimum of six feet, but no higher than ten feet, along the full length of the property line adjoining such other district in addition to a six-foot landscape buffer on the outside of the wall. 
(21) - Flea market. 
a.  The market must provide adequate off-street parking for its employees, vendors and customers; 
b.  The market must provide adequate restroom facilities located within a structure or building on the grounds; and 
c.  A building permit shall be required for structural interior spaces. 
(22) - Gasoline service station with or without convenience store. 
a.  Gasoline and other motor fuel stations, excluding principal use signs, but including storage tanks and gas pumps, must be placed not less than 50 feet from any side or rear property lines, except when the side or rear property lines abut a street, in which case the setback shall be that required for such streets. 
b.  All structures, including gas pumps and buildings comply with the set back requirements from the abutting streets, but shall be at a minimum 25 feet from the property line. 
c.  All points of ingress and egress shall be arranged so as to minimize interference with normal street traffic flow. 
d.  No building or structure shall be placed within 100 feet of a residential property line. 
e.  All repair and maintenance, if permitted, shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
f.  No outdoor storage is permitted. 
g.  All drives, parking, storage and service areas shall be paved and curbed. 
h.  Outside above ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil and other flammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited. 
i.  Overnight accommodations, showers or parking are prohibited. 
j.  The use shall not be combined with any other use or facility to create a truck stop. 
(23) - Golf courses and country clubs. 
a.  If in a residential district or abutting a residential district, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
2.  Outdoor recreation activities shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
3.  Not outdoor loudspeakers or sound amplification systems shall be permitted. 
4.  No outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
5.  No building, swimming pool, tennis court, ball field or other form of outdoor recreation shall be closer than 50 feet from abutting property zoned for residential use. 
6.  Outdoor lights shall be no more than ten feet in height and not closer than 25 feet from a property line. Outdoor light fixtures shall be cut-off luminaries designed to cast light downward and away from adjacent property. 
7.  Property lines abutting properties used for residential dwellings shall provide a minimum 25 feet continuous vegetative buffer, except where penetrated by a driveway or utility lines. 
b.  When the use is accessory to a residential subdivision, the following standards shall apply in addition to [subsection] a.: 
1.  The facility shall be owned by the subdivision's property owner or homeowner association. 
2.  To limit impacts from traffic, membership shall be limited to residents of the subdivision. 
c.  When the use is a primary use, the following standards shall apply in addition to [subsection] a.: 
1.  The use shall have direct access to a roadway designated as a collector or higher category roadway system. 
(23.5) - Halfway house/homeless shelter/drug treatment facility. 
a.  No more than 15 residents, not including attendants and employees of the operator. 
b.  The operator must be licensed for treatment of drug and alcohol dependency. 
c.  Parking must be provided in an enclosed garage or in the rear or side yard. 
d.  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front yard, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
e.  Services shall not be provided on an "out-patient basis" to persons who are not regular residents of the facility, as described in sub-paragraph a. of this paragraph. 
f.  At least 1,000 feet shall separate the halfway house from another halfway house, transitional housing facility, rooming and boarding house, or personal care home. 
g.  City commission shall have final approval of the rezoning or permit application and shall have the authority to place additional conditions for approval on the application. 
h.  If a rezoning, conditional use/special exception or other primary permit application is made for location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of any dependency, public hearing requirements shall conform to O.C.G.A. 36-66-4(f). 
i.  Facility shall provide security on a 24-hour basis. 
(24) - Home occupation. 
a.  No person shall be employed other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises plus one additional employee. 
b.  The use of the dwelling unit or an accessory building on the property for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the dwellings and the property. 
c.  There shall be no outside display or storage of materials or supplies in residential districts. Outside parking of one trade vehicle is permitted. No business vehicles larger than a van, panel truck or one ton pick-up truck are permitted to park overnight on the property. 
d.  No signage of any kind shall be displayed other than what is permitted in chapter 9 of this Code. 
e.  The home occupation shall not constitute a fire hazard to neighboring residences, or adversely affect neighboring property values, or constitute a nuisance or otherwise be detrimental to the neighbors because of excessive traffic, noise or odors. 
f.  A home occupation shall produce no noise, obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes or electrical interference detectable to normal observation outside the dwelling or building. 
g.  No traffic shall be generated by such home businesses in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the home occupation shall be met off-street and not in the front yard. 
h.  The use can qualify for all local, state and federal licenses, certificates and permits. 
i.  Any violation of these regulations may result in the revocation of any home occupation license, in addition to any other remedy for such violation. 
j.  The issuance of a license to engage in a home occupation in accordance with this ordinance shall not be deemed to be a change in zoning nor an official expression of opinion as to the proper zoning for the particular property. 
(25) - Ice vending machines. 
a.  Ice vending machines are permitted in the CG, GW, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
b.  The lot shall include a 15-foot landscape buffer around the ice vending machine excluding ingress and egress. 
c.  The ice vending machine shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
d.  Two parking spaces shall be provided, plus one additional ADA accessible parking space. 
(26) - Indoor gun range. 
a.  Indoor gun ranges are allowed in AG, CG, GW, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
b.  The facility must be located along arterial and collector roads. 
c.  A gun range shall not be located within a quarter-mile of residential or government structures. 
d.  All operations shall be entirely within an enclosed building which shall be constructed according to the National Rifle Association Sourcebook and must comply with all applicable building codes. 
e.  Sound absorbing material must be used inside the facility to suppress the sounds from the firearms. 
f.  Lead from the range must be recycled and the brass and debris shall be cleaned up daily using special vacuum equipment. 
g.  Parking requirements shall follow the standards for warehousing as outlined in chapter 5 of this Code. 
h.  A noise study shall be submitted demonstrating that gun sounds will not be audible outside of the property range. 
i.  An indoor gun range shall only be used when the proprietor or designee of the site is present. 
j.  Such a site would be inspected on at least a semiannual basis on the order of the police chief. 
(27) - Outdoor gun range (municipal). 
a.  Municipal outdoor gun ranges are allowed in M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. Municipal gun ranges for police and fire training purposes are essential services areas for the community. 
b.  The discharge of firearms shall be conducted only within the range and/or bays specifically designated for such use on an approved site plan. 
c.  Firing positions shall be separated a minimum of 200 feet from the boundary of the subject property with any adjacent parcel in separate ownership and in addition, firing positions shall be separated a minimum of 500 feet from any permitted residence existing at the time of site plan approval for the proposed shooting range. 
d.  An impenetrable backstop, a minimum of 20 feet in height, shall be constructed down range of any authorized range or bay, and side berms a minimum of eight feet in height shall be provided along the sidelines. 
e.  The perimeter of the shooting range, including the firearm discharge area and surrounding berms, shall be enclosed by a fence or wall, a minimum of six feet in height to prevent unauthorized access. Warning signs of at least one square foot each shall be attached to the perimeter fence at the rate of once at every corner and at least one for every 100 lineal feet plus one at each entry gate. 
f.  The applicant's range complex design shall be consistent with the NRA Source Book, latest edition, for the construction of outdoor shooting ranges. To assure the protection of groundwater from lead and other contaminants associated with the discharge of firearms the range shall comply with USEPA's Best Management Practices (http://www.epa.gov/region2/waste/leadshot/). 
g.  The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable state and local regulations and how safety and noise factors have been addressed through the site plan and other special features of the proposed development. 
h.  A shooting range sites are a community asset that once sited and in operation, needs to be protected. To that end is a requirement that properties to be sold within two miles of the range, once the site has been approved, that the seller must disclose of the existence of said shooting range to the prospective buyer. 
(28) - Industrialized buildings (modular homes) (residential). 
All industrialized homes must comply with the following regulations for dwelling units: 
a.  The building permit application must be accompanied by the following: 
1.  The serial number of the home as provided by the manufacturer. 
2.  Proof of the identity of the manufacturer. 
3.  Proof of inspection of the home at the date of manufacture, including DCA seal. 
b.  No industrialized home shall be in a state of disrepair at the time of its installation at the intended location within the city. 
c.  All industrialized homes shall receive all applicable inspections necessary to ensure the following: 
a)  External connections to gas, plumbing, electric and any other utility systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner that meets all city building codes. 
b)  Each industrialized home site shall include an approved potable water source and an approved sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the Coffee County Health Department. 
c)  Steps, landings, porches shall meet the requirement of the International Building Code. 
d.  All industrialized homes shall meet all requirements of the zoning district in which the home is located. 
e.  No industrialized home may be attached to another industrialized home by means of a breezeway, corridor or hallway. Industrialized homes designed to be part of a multifamily structure are prohibited. 
(29) - Industrialized buildings (nonresidential). 
a.  All industrialized buildings located in the M-1 and M-2 districts shall meet the following design requirements: 
1.  Permitted exterior building materials. 
i.  Brick. 
ii.  Glass, including glass storefront construction. 
iii.  Stone. 
iv.  Split-face block/concrete masonry units (CMU) limited to 33 percent of the surface area of the façade. 
v.  Exposed pre-cast concrete limited to 15 percent of exterior wall surface. 
vi.  High grade stucco limited to 50 percent of the surface area of the façade. 
vii.  Natural wood and/or cement based siding are allowed only for residential buildings in M-1 and M-2 (security residences). 
2.  Prohibited exterior building material. 
i.  Tilt-up concrete and precast "T's". 
ii.  Exposed concrete block and tile. 
iii.  Metal siding. 
(30) - Internet cafes or similar use relating to online gambling. 
a.  No internet café or similar use shall be permitted except as noted below, within 1,600 feet, measured by a straight line between the nearest corners of the facilities, of a religious facility, school, or public playground. No application for an internet café or similar use shall be approved which does not include or have attached thereto a current certificate from a registered surveyor of this state, showing a scale drawing of the premises, and the location at which applicant desires to operate, as well as the straight line distance in lineal feet from the nearest church, public park, school ground, college campus, public library and private dwelling lot of such proposed premises. 
b.  Any person whose location or place of business does not meet the distance requirements above, and who is proposing to operate an internet café may have this distance waived in the following manner: 
1.  A request for a waiver may be initiated by filing an application in writing with the community development director. 
2.  The community development director will schedule a public hearing before the city commission if the application for a waiver meets the following criteria: 
3.  Service is available only to persons patronizing the establishment for the main purpose of ordering and consuming food. 
4.  Have permanent kitchen facilities located within the premises in which meals are regularly prepared for service of patrons of the establishment. 
c.  A waiver of distance requirements under this section shall be granted only in the event it does not adversely affect community health, safety or general welfare and in connection with that shall be considered the following: 
1.  The actual location and distance of the proposed establishment with respect to other internet cafés, as well as churches, schools, or public playgrounds. 
2.  The type and size of the establishment, including bar floor space and seating capacity, capable of seating not fewer than 32 persons simultaneously for the purpose of consuming food, and whether, in view of such type or size, the proposed establishment is likely to create a public nuisance or traffic impediment by drawing crowds or persons milling about outside the building. 
3.  Whether adequate parking and landscaping for the facility is provided so as to meet the applicable requirements of this Code. 
4.  Whether the facility is physically or sufficiently well buffered from all adjacent residentially zoned areas, schools, churches, and public playgrounds. 
(31) - Kennel, pet boarding. 
a.  The lot size shall not be less than two acres. 
b.  Any building or enclosed structures for the housing of animals shall have minimum side and rear setbacks of at least 100 feet from the property lines. 
c.  All areas maintaining animals outside shall be completely enclosed by wall or fences at least six feet in height and shall be located no closer than 200 feet from property lines or street right-of-way. 
(32) - Landfill, inert waste. 
a.  The minimum acreage of the site shall be 25 acres. 
b.  No facility shall be permitted within 500 feet of a residential dwelling, private or public well or school. 
c.  A minimum 100 feet wide buffer, meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained on all property lines including property lines abutting a public street. 
d.  All facilities shall be enclosed with an opaque security fence at least six feet in height with openings of not more than those in two-inch mesh wire of some other similar fencing materials. This fence shall be located inside the buffer. A minimum six feet high solid wall or fence is required inside the buffers adjacent to property zoned or used for residential purposes. A sight line study shall be submitted to the community development director for approval. 
e.  Access to inert waste landfills shall be limited to authorized entrances that shall be closed when the site is not in operation. Access shall not be through any residential subdivision or development. Routes and entrances shall be approved by the community development director to ensure that access is derived from paved streets and that such streets will withstand maximum load limits established by the city. 
f.  Materials placed in inert waste landfills shall be spread in layers and compacted to the least practical volume. 
g.  A uniform compacted layer of clean earth no less than one foot in depth shall be placed over all exposed inert waste material at least monthly. 
h.  The inert waste landfill site shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff onto the landfill surface, to prevent erosion and to drain water from the surface of the landfill. 
i.  The property owner shall obtain a land disturbing permit for any inert waste landfill. 
j.  No hazardous wastes, industrial wastes, demolition wastes, biomedical wastes, asbestos, or liquid waste shall be allowed in an inert waste landfill. 
k.  Suitable means, such as stockpiled soil, shall be provided to prevent and control fires. 
l.  A uniform compacted layer of final cover not less than two feet in depth and a vegetative cover shall be placed over the final lift not less than one month following the final placement of inert waste within the lift. 
m.  Notice of final closure must be provided to the Department of Public Works within 30 days of receiving the final load of waste. Any site not receiving waste in excess of 180 days shall be deemed abandoned and in violation of this section unless properly closed. Notice of closure must include the date of final waste receipt and an accurate legal description of the boundaries of the landfill. 
(33) - Landfills, solid waste. 
a.  The minimum size of a solid waste landfill shall be 100 acres. 
b.  No facility shall be permitted within 500 feet of a residential dwelling, private or public well, or school. 
c.  A minimum 200 feet wide buffer, meeting the requirements of this section, shall be maintained against all property lines including property lines abutting a public street. 
d.  All facilities shall be enclosed with an opaque security fence at least six feet high with openings of not more than those in two-inch wire mesh or some other similar fencing materials. The fence shall be placed inside the buffer. A minimum six feet high wall or solid fence is required inside the buffers adjacent to property zoned or used for residential purposes. A sight line study shall be submitted to the community development director for review. 
e.  A gate or other barrier shall be maintained at potential vehicular access points to block unauthorized access to the site when an attendant is not on duty. Access to the site shall not go through any residential area or uses. Routes and entrances shall be approved by the city engineer to ensure that the access to the site is on paved streets and that such streets are designed to carry the maximum load limits as established by the city. 
f.  The property owner shall obtain all applicable local, state and federal permits. 
g.  The site must be designed with adequate soil buffers or artificial liners and leachate collection and treatment systems to prevent the contamination of drinking water supplies. 
h.  All surface runoff from disturbed areas must be controlled and contained on site by the use of appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures or devises. Sediment basins must be designed to handle both the hydraulic loading for the 25-year 24-hour storm event and the sediment loading from the drainage basin for the life of the site. 
i.  The site plan for the facility must call for revegetation of any disturbed area that will remain exposed for more than three months. Revegetation of final cover must take place within two weeks after final cover placement. 
j.  The site plan must also define a sequence of filling the entire site that minimizes any problems with drainage or provides for all-weather access roads to the working area. 
k.  The composition of daily cover shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Must be capable of preventing disease vectors, odors, blowing litter and other nuisances. 
2.  Must be capable of covering solid waste after it is placed without change in its properties and without regard to the weather. 
3.  Must be capable of allowing loaded vehicles to successfully maneuver over it after placement. 
4.  Must be noncombustible. 
5.  Forty percent by weight of fragments in the daily cover shall pass through a two millimeter, No. 10 sieve. 
6.  Must not include rock fragments that are greater than six inches in diameter. 
l.  The composition of intermediate or monthly cover shall meet the same criteria for daily cover and be capable of supporting the germination and propagation of vegetative cover. 
m.  The composition of final cover shall meet the same criteria as for monthly cover and must compact well and preclude the excessive infiltration of surface water. 
n.  The grade of final slopes shall be designed, installed and maintained to: 
1.  Ensure permanent slope stability. 
2.  Control erosion due to rapid water velocity and other factors. 
3.  Allow compaction, seeding and revegetation of cover material placed on slopes. 
4.  Ensure minimal percolation of precipitation into and surface runoff onto the disposal area. 
5.  The grade of the final surface of the facility may not be less than three percent or greater than 33 percent. 
o.  Fire protection, groundwater monitoring, methane gas control, liners and leachate collection, closure, post-closure care and financial responsibility shall be in conformance with Chapter 391-3-4, as amended, Solid Waste Management Rules of the Environmental Protection Division of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
p.  Any operator of any solid waste landfill shall comply with the performance requirements of Chapter 391-3-4, as amended, Solid Waste Management Rules of the Environmental Protection Division of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
q.  No regulated quantities of hazardous waste may be accepted. The operation must have a plan for excluding regulated quantities of hazardous waste. 
r.  No person in responsible charge of a solid waste landfill which has a leachate collection system shall perform the duties of a solid waste landfill operator without being duly certified by the state. 
s.  No solid waste landfill which has a leachate collection system shall be operated in the state unless the person in charge is duly certified by the state. 
(34) - Livestock in residential districts. 
a.  Except as provided below, no animals shall be kept in any residential district except those animals generally recognized as household domestic pets, such as dogs, cats, caged birds etc. In any residential district, no more than a total of three dogs and/or cats four months or older shall be allowed for each dwelling unit. 
b.  Animals as described below, other than household domestic pets, may be kept provided they are not housed within 100 feet of any property line. 
c.  The property must be at least two acres. 
d.  Hens may be permitted, roosters shall not be allowed in residential districts. 
e.  The horses are for the private and personal use of the resident and his/her family. 
f.  Manure must be disposed of or composted in a way that does not produce offensive odor. 
g.  Noise complaints will be addressed using barking dog's guidelines. 
Table 7-2 Animal Schedule 

 
(35) - Manufactured homes. 
Definitions. The following words, terms, or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
a.  Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the City of Douglas. 
b.  Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections, or the city building official, or his or her designee, including the community development director. 
c.  Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this ordinance, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
d.  Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of section 3 of this ordinance reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
e.  Install means to construct a foundation system to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured homes and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
f.  Jurisdiction means the incorporated areas of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
g.  Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the travelling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Sections 5401, et seq. 
h.  Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
Conditions. All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying that it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (MHCSS) Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Sections 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code), and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. 
Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
a.  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the community development director: 
1.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by the MHCSS Act and this ordinance. 
2.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that the home meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 4 of this ordinance. 
3.  A $250.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $250.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
4.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d) of this section. 
b.  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
c.  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall only be issued to the applicant after such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this ordinance have been met. 
d.  Fee. A permit and inspection fee of $25.00 shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow up inspection. The applicant shall be charged $25.00 for each additional follow up inspection that is necessary. 
e.  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city within 90 days from the date of the inspection. 
Minimum health and safety standards. All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
a.  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code), and shall not be altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
b.  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
c.  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
d.  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least on bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
e.  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
f.  Electrical systems. (Switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
g.  Hot water supply. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
h.  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
i.  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
j.  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
Enforcement. 
a.  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction. 
c.  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
Penalties. Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00. Each day any violation under this ordinance continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(36) - Manufactured home park. 
a.  Size of park. A manufactured home park shall be no less than five acres in size and is divided in two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale and shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet along a paved public road. 
b.  Density of park. A manufactured home park shall not exceed a density of more than five units per acre. Twenty percent of the site shall be provided in common open space. 
c.  Water supply. Each manufactured home park shall be provided with an adequate supply of water of safe, sanitary quality and shall be connected to the city water system. 
d.  Waste and sewage disposal. Each manufactured home park shall be provided with safe and adequate means for the collection of waste and garbage, and shall be connected to the city sewer system. 
e.  Size, condition of manufactured home site. 
1.  Each site reserved for the accommodation of any manufactured home shall not be less than 3,200 square feet. 
2.  The minimum width of the site shall not be less than 70 feet. 
3.  The site shall be level, free from rocks and weeds, and well drained. 
4.  The site shall be landscaped in accordance with section 5.7, landscaping. 
f.  Distance between manufactured homes and setbacks of manufactured homes. 
1.  No manufactured home shall be located on any site where there is less than 20 feet between the manufactured home and another structure or another manufactured home. 
2.  No manufactured home shall be placed or erected within less than ten feet from the side lot line. 
3.  No manufactured home or other structure in the manufactured home park may be placed or erected within 35 feet from any public right-of-way. 
g.  Buffering. In order to reduce visual, light and noise impacts, a required landscape buffer of no less than 15 feet shall be located along the length of the adjacent private or public property. The landscaped buffer shall meet the requirements of section 5.6, but shall at a minimum, after five years of planting, be six feet in height and obscure objects behind the landscape buffer at a distance of 50 feet. 
h.  Roadways, entrances and exits. 
1.  All internal circulation systems for roads and sidewalks shall meet the city's standards for road and street construction. 
2.  The minimum right-of-way for all internal roadways shall be 50 feet. 
3.  Each manufactured home site shall be accessible by a paved driveway with a minimum width of 20 feet. 
4.  All internal circulation systems for roads and sidewalks shall be lighted to provide safe and convenient access to all parts of the manufactured home park during evening hours. 
i.  Parking. All parking and loading shall be in accordance with chapter 5, off-street parking and loading. 
j.  The manufactured home park shall be in accordance with section 5.7, the city's stormwater regulations. 
k.  Utilities. 
1.  All internal power lines shall be at a minimum 15 feet above each manufactured home. 
2.  All utilities will require a public utility easement. 
l.  Accessory uses shall be limited to those normal and incidental to residential dwelling units, including a small convenience store to provide personal items such as toiletries, magazines, a small selection of groceries, prescriptions. Said facility shall be self-contained within the structure and open only to the residents of the facility. 
m.  No manufactured home shall be in a state of disrepair at the time of its installation at the intended location within the city. Proof of an approved U.S. HUD insignia may be accepted as evidence of a new manufactured home's compliance with this subsection. The state of repair of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be determined based on the home's compliance with the following provisions: 
1.  Every manufactured home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, a lavatory sink, a tub or shower, and a toilet, all in working condition upon proper connection to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks and obstructions. 
2.  Every manufactured home shall have water heating facilities in safe working condition. 
3.  Every manufactured home shall have heating facilities in safe working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each manufactured home shall be provided with facilities where heating appliances may be connected. 
4.  Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited in bedrooms. 
5.  Every manufactured home shall have a smoke detector approved by the state and which is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
6.  Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens and hallways shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. All window panes shall be intact and free of cracks or other structural flaws. 
7.  Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other device that will ventilate the room. 
8.  Electrical distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all the unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible. 
9.  The electrical system, including but not limited to switches, receptacles, and fixtures, shall be properly installed and wired and in safe working condition. The manufactured home may be subjected to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
10.  The exterior of the manufactured home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other condition that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the manufactured home. 
11.  The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
12.  Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
n.  For a manufactured home that is to be located in the city from a site outside the city, an inspection for compliance with each of the applicable requirements set forth in subsection (10)a.l. shall be conducted prior to the home being brought into the city. Noncompliance with any of the provisions of this subsection shall cause a pre-owned manufactured home to be found in a state of disrepair for purposes of this section. The installation of such home shall not be permitted in the city absent correction of the defect(s) by the applicant and approval by the community development director. 
o.  On any manufactured home to be located within the city, inspections staff shall conduct any inspections that are necessary to ensure the following: 
1.  External connections to gas, plumbing, electric and any other utility systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner that meets all city building codes and regulations. 
2.  An approved potable water source and an approved sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the Coffee County Health Department. 
3.  All manufactured homes hall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-160 through 8-2-168. All manufactured homes with the exception of those located in existing manufactured home parks shall be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or piers on poured concrete footings, in accordance with the manufacturer's permanent installation instructions. If the manufacturer's instructions are no longer available, the rules and regulations of the Safety Division of the State Department of Insurance (Chapter 120-3-7, as amended) shall be followed regarding installation. 
p.  No manufactured home may be attached to another manufactured home by means of a breezeway, corridor or hallway. 
(37) - Mobile vendors. 
a.  Mobile vendors, including mobile food vendors, (a mobile food dispensing vehicle that sells prepared food products) and mobile units that sell agricultural produce may be permitted, subject to the approval of a mobile vendor permit by the community development director and the presentation of written permission from the property owner on whose property the mobile vendor is to be located. All mobile vending businesses shall be subject to the following criteria: 
1.  A mobile vending business shall be treated and permitted as a home occupation and subject to the regulations of a home occupation. 
2.  All business activities associated with the operation of the mobile vending business are to be conducted away from the home. 
b.  A minimum of six parking spaces shall be required for the use of the mobile vendor. 
c.  No mobile vendor shall operate in the following areas: 
1.  Within ten feet from the right-of-way of any public street or roadway. 
2.  Within a required landscape buffer or improvement setback. 
3.  Within ten feet of any street intersection or cross walk. 
4.  Within ten feet of any driveway or other curb cut access, loading zone or bus stop. 
5.  In any area within 15 feet of a building entrance. 
6.  On the median strip of a divided roadway. 
7.  In front of display windows of a fixed location business. 
8.  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant or fire escape. 
9.  Within ten feet of any parking space or access ramp designated for persons with disabilities. 
d.  No vending cart or stand, or any other item related to the operation of a mobile vendor use shall be located on any city sidewalk or other public way during nonvending hours. Nor shall any vehicle be parked, stored or left overnight other than in a lawful parking space. 
e.  Vendors shall keep the sidewalks, roadways and other spaces adjacent to their vending sites or locations clean and free of paper, peelings, and refuse of any kind generated from their business. All trash or debris accumulating within 25 feet of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in a trash container provided by the vendor. The trash container shall be emptied regularly and marked as being for litter. 
f.  Mobile vendors may not do any of the following: 
1.  Obstruct pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic flow. 
2.  Obstruct traffic signals or regulatory signs. 
3.  Obstruct adequate access to emergency and sanitation vehicles. 
4.  Interfere with access to abutting properties. 
5.  Sound any device that produces a loud noise or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device to attract public attention. 
(38) - Outdoor storage in residential and commercial districts. 
a.  In all commercial zoning districts, and except as noted below, all business activities shall be in a completely enclosed structure. 
b.  Exceptions to the regulation shall be for the display of motor vehicles, marine craft, aircraft, recreational vehicles, manufactured homes, farm and construction equipment and vehicles, farm and garden supplies, stone products, and any other product designed for outdoor use. 
c.  An outdoor storage area may not be located in any required off-street parking area, required off-street loading area, required landscape area, designated environmental protection area, or any adjacent public right-of-way. 
d.  An outdoor storage area may be located adjacent to a structure but shall not be located in the front yard setback area. 
e.  An outdoor storage area shall be kept neat and orderly and shall not be permitted to take on the characteristics of a junk yard. 
f.  An outdoor storage area shall be visually screened from adjacent uses by a fence, or a masonry wall or a chain-link fence with green or black slats. In the discretion of the community development director, an opaque landscape buffer may be used instead of a wall or fence provided the area is visually screened from adjacent property as effectively as though a fence or wall were used. 
g.  The screening used shall not be less than six feet in height. Access through the fence or wall shall be limited through opaque gates that shall be closed when not in use. 
h.  Outdoor eating areas are permitted as an accessory to any permitted eating establishment in any commercial district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The outdoor eating area does not occupy an area greater than 50 percent of the building area of the business to which the eating area is accessory; 
2.  The outdoor eating area is not located in any required parking area, service area, landscape area, and drainage area or public right-of-way; 
3.  If the outdoor eating area is located along, or astride a sidewalk or other pedestrian accessway, a minimum of five feet unobstructed passage shall be maintained through the outdoor eating area. 
4.  All outdoor eating areas shall be designed and located in such a manner as to prevent them from becoming a nuisance to any adjacent property or use. All outdoor eating areas shall be located so that there is no adverse noise, lighting, trash or other negative impacts onto any adjacent property or use. 
5.  All outdoor eating areas shall be treated for parking computations as if they were fully enclosed. 
(39) - Parking garages. 
a.  Parking structures shall be designed so that the only openings at street level are those to accommodate vehicle entrances and pedestrian access to the structure. Any openings for ventilation, service or emergency access located on the first floor level in the building façade must be decorative and must be an integral part of the overall building design or screened from view with landscaping that is at least ten feet in height. 
b.  The balance of the street frontage of a parking structure shall be occupied by retail/office space or designed with exterior materials, structural elements, and external openings having proportions similar to those of upper floors of occupied buildings. External openings shall be screened with decorative elements such as grillwork, brick or louvers. 
c.  Parking structures which have a total length of 250 feet or more shall provide and lighted and signed ten feet wide pedestrian arcade/walkway passing completely through the parking structure near the midpoint of the longest side. This arcade/walkway shall connect with other adjacent sidewalks and to the surrounding public streets. 
(40) - Portable on demand storage units (PODs). 
a.  Before placing a PODS unit on his or her property, a person must submit an application and receive a permit from the city. An insurance certificate providing liability insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 provided by the company supplying the POD must accompany the application. 
b.  There is a fee of $25.00 for a 30-day permit. Applications can be required from the community development director. 
c.  Permits will be granted for a period of 30 days. At the expiration of the thirty-day period, applicants may seek to extend their permits one time for an additional 30 days by seeking an extension for cause from the community development director. Extension of a permit will cost $25.00 for the additional 30 days granted. 
d.  PODS units are prohibited from being placed in the road right-of-way streets or the front yard of a property. 
e.  All locations must be paved off-street surfaces. Portable storage units shall only be placed in the property owner's driveway or a parking area or, if access exists at the side or rear of the site, the side or rear yard. The required parking space(s) shall at all times be maintained if temporary storage units are placed in parking areas. 
f.  The portable storage unit is no larger than eight feet in height by ten feet in width by 20 feet in length. 
g.  No more than two portable storage units are approved for any address at any one time. 
h.  The applicant, as well as the supplier, shall be responsible for ensuring that the portable storage unit is maintained in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks, at all times. 
i.  No portable storage unit shall be used to store solid waste, construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, business inventory, commercial goods, goods for property other than at the residential property where the portable storage unit is located (i.e. used for retail sales) or any other illegal or hazardous material. 
j.  No portable storage unit shall be occupied as a dwelling or office/business location. 
(41) - Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds. 
a.  No new recreational vehicle park and campground may be located in any zoning district other than G-C. 
b.  A recreational vehicle park shall be permitted only on tracts of land consisting of a minimum of four acres and having a minimum frontage of at least 60 feet on a paved public road. 
c.  The maximum number of recreational vehicle lots shall not exceed 14 lots per gross acre. 
d.  The minimum dimensions for any lot in any recreational vehicle park developed after February 28, 2011, or any additions to any existing recreational vehicle park made after February 28, 2011 shall be 40 feet wide by 70 feet long. 
e.  The minimum building setbacks for any lot in any recreational vehicle park developed after February 28, 2011, or any additions to any existing recreational vehicle park made after February 28, 2011 shall be as follows: 

 
f.  The coverage by accessory buildings in the recreational vehicle park shall be no greater than 20 percent of the total acreage of the park. 
g.  Each lot shall provide a stabilized vehicular parking pad, measuring no less than 10 x 20 feet; the pad shall be composed of shell, marl, paving or stone screenings. Exposed ground surfaces in every space not protected by the vehicular parking pad shall be protected with vegetative growth such as ground cover or shrubbery that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the creation of dust. 
h.  At least 20 percent of the gross site area shall be set aside and developed as open space, recreation space and buffering between recreational vehicle spaces. Such areas may provide recreation opportunities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, picnic areas, playgrounds, playing fields. Open space shall not include streets, parking lots, lease or rental lots, buildings, right-of-way or sites for water and sewer treatment. Up to 50 percent of the required open space may be used for stormwater retention areas. 
i.  There shall be a landscape buffer around all recreational vehicle parks of at least 25 feet in width. Landscaping in this area shall conform to the requirements of this Code. 
j.  All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, paved vehicular access from a paved road to each lot. 
k.  All streets internal to the park shall have a minimum right-of-way of 30 feet, and shall be paved to city specifications. 
l.  Park entrance paving shall be at least 36 feet wide. 
m.  No entrance or exit from a park shall be permitted through a residential district. 
n.  In addition to those generally permitted accessory uses, a recreational vehicle park may also provide for the following: 
1.  One permanent residence, intended for occupation by the manager of the park; and 
2.  In parks with 100 or more lots, a retail and personal service establishment, intended exclusively for the use of the occupants of the on-site recreational vehicles and travel trailers. 
o.  All recreational vehicle parks shall undergo major site plan review. 
p.  All recreational vehicle parks shall be required to be served by centralized water and sewer services. 
(42) - Religious facilities and related uses. 
When located in a residential district, the following standards shall be met: 
a.  The property shall contain at least two acres and be located on an arterial or connector street. 
b.  A 50 feet vegetative landscape buffer to adjacent residential zoning or residential uses is required. 
c.  Driveways and parking areas must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from side property lines. 
d.  The scale, intensity and operation of the use shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic, congestion or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties. 
e.  Any buildings or structures shall be harmonious with the surrounding character of the residential neighborhood. 
f.  Permitted related uses in addition to customary accessory uses include a chapel, library, administrative offices including storage areas, educational facilities, fellowship hall, related kitchen and dining area, ornamental garden, and outdoor recreational facilities occupying less than 10,000 square feet. 
g.  No signage shall be permitted for accessory uses or facilities. 
h.  Outdoor activities shall be limited to the hours from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
i.  Retail and commercial sales uses shall be prohibited as accessory uses to a religious facility that is located in a residential zoning district. 
j.  Schools, K—12, in addition shall meet the standards as listed in this section under schools, K—12, private. 
(43) - Riding stables. 
a.  The keeping of horses and use of stables shall be limited to property within the AG and R-15 and R-12 zoning districts on lots having a minimum lot area of two acres. 
b.  The entire parcel shall be fenced. 
c.  The maximum number of adult horses shall be two per acre. 
d.  Any structure or building to house the horses must be located a minimum of 100 feet from the property line. 
(44) - Salvage yard, junk yard. 
a.  The yard must be a minimum of five acres but no more than 15 acres, with a maximum slope of five percent. 
b.  The yard shall be located no closer than 300 feet to a residential or commercial district boundary line. 
c.  The property on which the collection activity is taking place shall be surrounded by a fence, wall or vegetative screening eight feet in height. Such fence or wall shall be of similar composition, construction, and color throughout and shall be constructed without openings except for one entrance and one exit. The entrance and exit shall be equipped with unpierced gates which shall be closed and securely locked outside of business hours. In no case shall the fence be less than a height necessary to screen effectively all storage and other operations from view. 
d.  The yard is to be located no closer than 100 feet from the right-of-way of any major arterial roadway as defined by the City of Douglas. 
e.  Junked or wrecked vehicles shall not be stacked. 
f.  All sides of each individual stockpile areas shall be accessible by fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be a minimum of one and one-half times the height of the pile, but in no case shall the fire lane be less than 20 feet wide. 
g.  All stockpiles shall be surrounded with a network of fully operating fire hydrants spaced at intervals of no more than 250 feet. No portion of a stockpile yard shall be more than 200 feet away from a fire hydrant. 
h.  The total site that may be covered with debris storage areas shall not exceed 60 percent of the site. 
i.  The base area on which the stockpiles are located, and the access aisles between the stock piles, must be constructed of either a concrete surface, asphalt surface, or other clean all weather stabilized surface that is acceptable to the city. 
j.  All recycling, scrap, waste and salvage/junkyard operations shall submit to an annual fire prevention inspection by the city fire chief. 
k.  Every recycling, scrap, waste and salvage/junkyard operation authorized under this section, shall establish a cash security fund, bond or provide the city with an irrevocable letter of credit based on the schedule below, to secure the cost of removing of all accumulated debris and materials from the site if it has been determined by the city commission, following a duly noticed public hearing, that the recycling, scrap, waste or salvage/junkyard operation has been abandoned or operations have ceased for a period in excess of six months or the permit has been revoked for any reason. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to and recycling, scrap, waste or salvage/junkyard operation operated by any unit of local government within the city. 

 
(45) - Satellite dish antennas. 
a.  All satellite antennas shall meet all manufacturers' specifications, be located on noncombustible and corrosion-resistant material and be erected in a secure, wind resistant manner, in accordance with the latest version of the International Building Code and designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222 standards (latest revision), as applicable. 
b.  All satellite antennas shall be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning. 
c.  No satellite antenna shall be allowed within a required front yard. 
In residential districts: 
d.  No dish may be larger in size than 36 inches in diameter. 
e.  No satellite antenna shall be closer than five feet from the real property lines. 
f.  No advertisements of any sort shall be allowed. 
g.  In the event that usable satellite communication signals cannot be received in a permitted location, such antenna may be placed in the front yard or on the roof of the dwelling upon approval by the community development director. 
In nonresidential districts: 
h.  Satellite dishes may be installed above ground level and on building roofs, but the combined height of any such antenna system and the building shall not exceed the overall height of 35 feet. All antenna systems installed on a building roof shall be located so that they may not be seen from street level. A ground mounted satellite dish shall not exceed a height of 20 feet including any platform or structure on which it is mounted. 
i.  All antenna systems shall be installed at least 20 feet (measured from the edge of the dish) from any adjoining residential property line. 
j.  If useable satellite signals cannot be obtained from an antenna installed in any permitted yard or with the height limitation in #8, such antenna may be installed in a required front yard or at a greater height upon approval by the community development director. Under no circumstance shall such satellite antenna exceed a height of 50 feet. 
k.  All satellite television antenna systems shall be deemed accessory uses and structures and shall require a building permit before construction. An application for the permit shall be made to the community development department accompanied by a site plan sketch showing the dimensions and location of the proposed satellite television antenna system in relation to the boundaries, setback lines and existing structures on the property. 
(46) - Schools, K—12, private. 
a.  This use shall be located with direct access to an arterial or connector street. 
b.  The minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
1.  Elementary school: Two acres, plus one acre for each 100 student capacity. 
2.  Middle school: Three acres, plus one acre for each 100 student capacity. 
3.  High school: Five acres, plus one acre for each 100 student capacity. 
c.  A 50-foot landscape buffer is required adjacent to residential zoning districts or residential uses. 
d.  Driveways and parking areas must be set back 25 feet from side property lines. 
e.  The scale, intensity and operation of the use shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic, congestion or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties. 
f.  Any buildings or structures shall be harmonious with the surrounding character of the residential neighborhood. 
g.  Permitted accessory uses in addition to customary accessory uses include a chapel, library, administrative offices, educational facilities, fellowship hall, related kitchen and dining area, ornamental garden, and outdoor recreational facilities occupying less than 10,000 square feet. 
h.  No signage shall be permitted for accessory uses or facilities. 
i.  Outdoor activities shall be limited to the hours from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
j.  Recreational facilities and associated outdoor lights shall be located at least 100 feet from property lines with adjacent residential properties and uses. 
k.  Retail and commercial sales uses shall be prohibited as accessory uses to a private school that is located in a residential zoning district. 
(47) - Scrap, waste and recycling operations. 
a.  The collection operations shall be limited to the acceptance of glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, metal cans, non-ferrous materials and yard waste. 
b.  The property on which the collection activity is to take place, shall be at least one acre and not more than four acres in total area. 
c.  The property on which the collection activity is taking place shall be surrounded by a fence, wall or vegetative screening eight feet in height. Such fence or wall shall be of similar composition, construction, and color throughout and shall be constructed without openings except or one entrance and one exit. The entrance and exit shall be equipped with unpierced gates which shall be closed and securely locked outside of business hours. 
d.  The reprocessing of the collected material into any other product, by-product or other use or form is not allowed, unless the reprocessing is allowed in conjunction with manufacturing of a new product or material as would otherwise be permitted in M-1 or M-2. 
e.  No junked vehicle or any other junk or scrap shall be located for storage, dismantling or any other purpose. 
f.  All sides of each individual stockpile areas shall be accessible by fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be a minimum of 1 ½ times the height of the pile, but in no case shall the fire lane be less than 20 feet wide. 
g.  All stockpiles shall be surrounded with a network of fully operating fire hydrants spaced at intervals of no more than 250 feet. No portion of a stockpile yard shall be more than 200 feet away from a fire hydrant. 
h.  The total site that may be covered with debris storage areas shall not exceed 60 percent of the site. 
i.  The base area on which the stockpiles are located, and the access aisles between the stock piles, must be constructed of either a concrete surface, asphalt surface, or other clean all weather stabilized surface that is acceptable to the city. 
j.  All recycling, scrap, waste and salvage/junkyard operations shall submit to an annual fire prevention inspection by the city fire chief. 
k.  Every recycling, scrap, waste and salvage/junkyard operation authorized under this section, shall establish a cash security fund, bond or provide the city with an irrevocable letter of credit based on the schedule below, to secure the cost of removing of all accumulated debris and materials from the site if it has been determined by the city commission, following a duly noticed public hearing, that the recycling, scrap, waste or salvage/junkyard operation has been abandoned or operations have ceased for a period in excess of six months or the permit has been revoked for any reason. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to and recycling, scrap, waste or salvage/junkyard operation operated by any unit of local government within the city. 

 
(48) - Store front religious facilities. 
These are religious facilities in existing structures in C-G (Commercial General) and G-W (Gateway Commercial) zoning districts. Such use shall be limited to the worship activities of the named applicant for the temporary used permit including educational programs conducted in conjunction with the worship service, but shall not include child care programs conducted independently from the worship service or the establishment of schools. The temporary permit used shall be valid for a period of one year. One extension of maximum one year to the initial one-year period shall be granted only if the commission determines that the religious facility has made a good faith effort to relocate to a permanent facility. Alcohol distance requirements shall not apply. 
(49) - Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
a.  All swimming pools, unless entirely screened in, shall be completely enclosed with a fence or wall at least four feet high and so constructed as to be not readily climbable by children. All gates and doors providing access to the pool area shall be securely locked when the pool area is not in actual use or shall be quipped with a self-closing and self-latching device installed on the pool side. The fence and gate shall be installed prior to filling the pool with water. 
b.  All swimming pools must be consistent with Appendix G of the International Residential Code. 
(50) - Temporary uses, including special events and structures. 
a.  Temporary uses are permitted in any zoning district subject to the following standards, provided that all temporary uses shall meet the dimensional and parking requirements for the zoning district in which the use is located. 
b.  Permitted temporary uses. 
1.  Garage sales. 
2.  Indoor and outdoor craft shows, bazaars, carnivals, revivals, circuses, sports events and exhibits provided that no more than four events of ten days each are conducted on the same property during any calendar year. 
3.  Tents for temporary uses and functions that are used as temporary cover during special events or sales provided that the applicant secures a written statement from the fire chief that the tents under which the use is to be held are fireproof material and will not constitute a fire hazard. 
4.  Christmas tree sales. 
5.  Construction offices, which may also be used for security purposes, and equipment sheds in which erection, addition, relocation or structural relocation is taking place provided that such use shall be limited to the period of actual construction. 
6.  Manufactured homes may be used as construction offices in any district in which erection, addition, relocation, or structural relocation is taking place provided that such use shall be limited for the period of actual construction, tie down permits shall be obtained; all such manufactured homes shall comply with applicable regulations; and the manufactured home in which the security employee lives shall not remain after the period of actual construction. 
7.  Religious facilities in existing structures in C-G (Commercial General) and G-W (Gateway Commercial) zoning districts. Such use shall be limited to the worship activities of the named applicant for the temporary used permit including educational programs conducted in conjunction with the worship service, but shall not include child care programs conducted independently from the worship service or the establishment of schools. The temporary permit used shall be valid for a period of five years. Extensions to the five year period shall be granted only if the commission determines that the religious facility has made a good faith effort to relocate to a permanent facility. Alcohol distance requirements shall not apply. 
8.  Temporary on-site real estate offices. Included as part of site plan approval, specific authorizations may be granted permitting the installation or construction of a temporary on-site sales office prior to the issuance of any building permits for the primary portions of a development project. All on-site sales offices shall be constructed in accordance with applicable city regulations and shall be required to obtain all necessary permit approvals, including but not limited to stormwater management permits, driveway permits and all required building and public health permits. All temporary on-site sales offices shall be removed from the development site upon the completion of the last phase or unit of the approved development. 
9.  Special vehicle and boat sales events on sites not approved for the permanent display vehicle and boat sales may be approved by the community development director provided that these events shall be conducted on property having a CG, G-W, M-1 or M-2 designation or on property approved and designated by the city as special events sites. Such events shall be conducted on property with existing, permanent and permitted driveways and access points. The event shall have a duration of four or fewer consecutive days and shall be conducted by one or more dealers having a valid local business license. Sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with applicable health department regulations. Used motor vehicle dealers must have a temporary site permit issued by the Georgia State Board of Used Motor Vehicle Dealers before the city issues a local occupational license. 
(51) - Trash and refuse areas. 
Trash and refuse shall either be stored inside a building or within an opaque screened area, which shall be at least six feet high. 
(52) - Utility substation. 
a.  Structures shall be placed no less than 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  Structures are to be enclosed by a solid or chain-link fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade. 
c.  The lot shall be suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the front, side and rear property lines; planted with one tree for every 30 feet and a continuous hedge or shrubs that will grow eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
(53) - Veterinary services/animal hospitals in residential districts/kennels, pet boarding. 
a.  Any structure used as an animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall be located and its activities conducted at least 50 feet from any property line in any residential district. 
b.  Medical treatment or care shall be practiced only within an enclosed building or structure. 
c.  Kennel or boarding operations incidental to the principal use shall be permitted only within an enclosed building or structure located at least 100 feet from the property line in any residential zoning district. Sound proofing of the building is required. 
d.  Outdoor runs are permitted in any other zoning district. Drains need to be connected to an approved sanitary facility. Odor and pest control are required. Hours of operation for outdoor runs are 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
e.  All kennels must be licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
( Ord. No. 05082017(3), 5-8-17 ) 
CHAPTER 8. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

(1) - Protected river corridors. 
a.  Under the Mountain and River Corridor Protection Act, the City of Douglas is required to adopt a "Corridor Protection Plan" for these river segments in accordance with the minimum criteria contained in the Act and as adopted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
The City of Douglas shall review the provisions of the Act and propose implementation of its provisions by adoption of amendments to its erosion and sedimentation control ordinances, zoning ordinances, building permit requirements, and a septic tank permitting program, as appropriate. 
b.  The River Corridor Protection Area extends from the top of the riverbank on both sides of the river for a distance of 150 feet landward. The top of the riverbank is the uppermost part of the riverbank, usually marked by a break in the slope. All land that lies within this corridor is part of the river corridor protection area. 
c.  A natural vegetative buffer area shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the river as measured from the riverbanks and all construction within the buffer shall be prohibited. 
(2) - Watershed protection areas or water resource protection districts ordinance. 
The water resource protection ordinance protects water resources managed by the water district by regulating modifications, entry, use or access to water district facilities and/or water district easements. 
(3) - Wetlands protection (adopted in 2004). 
a.  The purpose is to recognize and require adherence to federal regulations and procedures that govern the development of land that contain wetlands within the city. The regulations contained in this article are created under the requirement of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1344), ("CWA"). Any city government action does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. In the event of a conflict between or among any provisions of this article, the Clean Water Act or any other ordinance, resolution or regulation of the city, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. It is not the intent to regulate individual properties where activities will not impact wetlands and do not require a land-disturbing permit. 
b.  All wetlands shall be determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or a qualified environmental engineer. 
c.  If determined that jurisdictional wetlands on site will be disturbed the applicant shall first obtain a wetlands alteration section 404 permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
CHAPTER 9. - BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

(1) - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and laws enacted pursuant thereto. 
(2) - Purpose. 
These regulations are intended to serve the following purposes: 
a.  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
b.  To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and other policies and objectives of the city. 
c.  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new developments and to redevelopments in conformance with public improvement policies of the city. 
d.  To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments and in redevelopments. 
(3) - Intent and application. 
It is the intent of this chapter that it will apply to and provide guidance for the development of lands within the incorporated limits of the City of Douglas, Georgia, whether the developments involve the subdivision of land or the construction of buildings and/or other improvements on a single parcel. Any land development activity must first comply with this Code. 
(4) - General provisions. 
a.  Zoning ordinance. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required under this section and those contained in the building codes or other ordinances or regulations of the City of Douglas, the most restrictive shall apply. 
b.  Required public improvements. Every developer of lands within the jurisdiction of this Code shall provide the public improvements included in this Code, in accordance with this Code and other pertinent ordinances, codes, and regulations of the City of Douglas. These public improvements together with associated rights-of-way, easements, and other lands shall be provided at no cost to the city and shall be dedicated or otherwise transferred, as required, to the public in perpetuity and without covenant or reservation. 
c.  Plan review and approval. Any developer of land within the City of Douglas shall first submit to the community development department such plans, plats, or construction drawings as may be required by these regulations and receive approval of those documents by the city prior to the initiation of development activities. Approval of plans, plats, or construction drawings by the city shall not imply nor transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, surveying, architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans, plats, or construction drawings were prepared and sealed. 
d.  Other permits. Nothing in this Code shall impose any obligation on the city to obtain or assist in obtaining permits, approvals, and/or clearances from other local, state or federal agencies having jurisdiction over elements of a project. It is solely the developer's responsibility to obtain all such required permits, approvals, and/or clearances. The developer shall furnish the community development department with copies of all such permits, approvals and/or clearances before authorization to proceed with development is requested. 
e.  Standard specifications. In addition to the construction standards found in the text of this Code, the city will maintain on file for consultation and distribution a series of standard specifications for construction of improvements required for the development of land in accordance with this Code. 
In conjunction with this Code, the standard specifications describe minimum acceptable standards for the construction of required improvements, but shall not supersede more restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practice as applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. 
The standard specifications are included in this Code as Appendix A. 
f.  Standard drawings. The city will maintain on file for consultation and distribution a series of standard drawings illustrating details of construction of public improvements, and other elements related to the development of land in accordance with this Code. 
The standard drawings illustrate minimum acceptable construction standards for public improvements required under this Code, but shall not supersede more restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practice as applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. 
The standard drawings are included in this Code as Appendix B. 
(5) - Street improvement standards. 
Streets, whether abutting or internal, existing or new, public or private, shall be constructed or improved under those circumstances and to the standards as established in this section. Roadway improvements shall be in accordance with the street classification system defined in section (6). Specific street classification designations shall be as shown in adopted transportation plans of the city. 
a.  Right-of-way requirements. 
1.  Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths: 
i.  The minimum widths for public rights-of-way or private street ingress/egress easements and pavements shall be as shown in "Table of Minimum Right-of-Way and Lane Widths." See Appendix B, Standard Drawings for detailed dimensions. Total width of streets includes land width plus curb and gutter (back of curb to back of curb) or from edge of pavement if no curbs exist. Local streets will use a 24-inch curb and gutter. Other road/street classifications will use a 30-inch curb and gutter. If an existing street is used for access, the developer shall conform to the existing street width. 
ii.  Minimum widths of right-of-way and lanes shall be as shown in the "Table of Right-of-Way and Lane Widths." 
Table 9-1 Minimum Right-of-Way and Lane Widths 

 
2.  Right-of-way dedication: 
i.  The minimum width of right-of-way shall be dedicated based upon the street classification, as provided in this section and approved by the city engineer. 
ii.  On any existing street abutting a proposed development, one-half of the required width of right-of-way shall be dedicated, at no cost to the City of Douglas, as measured from the centerline of the roadway along the entire property frontage. Right-of-way widths for existing streets shall be based on the current classification as determined by the city engineer. 
iii.  Additional right-of-way may be required at intersections or other locations fronting the property where turning lanes, storage lanes, medians, re-alignments or other traffic safety improvements are required. 
iv.  If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by the City of Douglas or the State of Georgia to adjoin or traverse the property, the proposed road shall be accommodated into the development plans of the property in accordance with these regulations. These right-of-way requirements shall govern except where there exist clearly defined plans of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) or the City of Douglas that require additional right-of-way. In that case, the greater right-of-way requirements shall govern. 
3.  Clear zone requirements: All new roads/streets should utilize the concepts, designs, and philosophies in the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Roadside Design Guide, where practical and feasible to use the latest state-of-the-practice in roadside safety. New roads/streets should also use context-sensitive design concepts in the applications of clear zone. Context-sensitive design concepts are also on the GDOT web site (www.dot.state.ga.us). The application of clear zone concepts on existing roads/streets needs to be used where the greatest safety benefit can be realized. Crash reports, site investigations, and maintenance records offer starting points for identifying these locations. 
b.  Access management. 
1.  Applicability: Except for development projects consisting of single-family dwelling units or industrial development, land development that takes its primary access from a state or federal highway or a thoroughfare classified as a collector, principal arterial or minor arterial shall comply with these standards. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the GDOT. 
2.  Joint and cross access: 
i.  Adjacent commercial or office properties on collector, principal arterial or minor arterials shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. 
ii.  Joint driveways and cross access easements shall be established for multi-parcel commercial, office or industrial development, wherever feasible, along collector, principal arterial or minor arterial corridors. The building site shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous service drives or cross access corridor connecting adjacent parcels along the thoroughfare. 
b.  A design speed of 15 miles per hour and a two-way travel aisle width of 24 feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles and loading vehicles. 
c.  Driveway aprons, stub-outs and other design features to allow abutting properties to be connected and provide cross access via a service drive. 
3.  Minimum driveway setbacks from street intersections: 
i.  Driveway connections shall not be permitted within the functional area of the intersection, of two public streets. The functional area includes the longitudinal limits of auxiliary or turning lanes. 
ii.  Minimum standards. No driveway access shall be allowed within 150 feet of the centerline of an intersecting major collector or arterial street, or within 100 feet of any minor collector street. The city engineer may reduce these required distances where they prove impractical due to lot frontages of less than 100 feet. 
4.  Minimum access requirements: 
i.  All developments shall have one or more driveways or entrances to a public right-of-way. 
ii.  The number of such access points shall be as shown in "Table of Minimum Number of Access Points." 
Table 9-2 Minimum Number of Access Points 

 
5.  Separation of access points: 
i.  Subdivisions located along existing city roads shall be required to provide reverse frontage lots or parallel frontage roads where feasible. All other lots must comply with the following. 
ii.  Along state or federal highways, no more than one point of vehicular access from a property shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof, although requirements of the GDOT shall apply whenever more restrictive. 
iii.  Along arterial or collector roads other than state or federal highways, no more than two points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided, however, that lots with less than 200 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. The city engineer shall determine whether the points of access may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. To make this determination the city engineer may require a traffic study to be performed by the owner. 
iv.  No point of access shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersections for single-family and two-family residential lots and within 50 feet for multifamily and nonresidential properties. 
v.  Corner lot access shall be located as far from the intersection as reasonably possible to reduce turning movement conflicts and to promote proper traffic circulation. 
vi.  The separation of access points on any street or road shall be determined by the established speed limit of the street or road, with the following minimum spacing requirements as provided in "Table of Minimum Driveway Spacing." 
Table 9-3 Minimum Driveway Spacing 

 
vii.  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent driveway or roadway. 
viii.  Driveways shall be located so that the radius return is a minimum of four feet from a property line that intersects the right-of-way line. 
ix.  The city engineer may reduce the required separation distance of access points where the minimum required distance proves impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Joint-access driveways and/or cross-access easements are provided in accordance with this section. 
b.  The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system for vehicles and pedestrians. 
x.  The requirements of this section are not intended to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
6.  Emergency access: All public streets, private and residential drives shall be designed and maintained so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles, as required by the City of Douglas fire chief. New developments with restricted access, such as gated subdivisions, must receive a variance from this requirement based on review and approval of the City of Douglas Police Department. 
c.  Driveway design standards. 
1.  Permits required. No driveway shall be constructed abutting a city-maintained road or street until all applicable driveway permits have been approved and issued by the city. For driveways that abut a state or federal highway, all applicable permits shall be obtained from the GDOT prior to construction. 
2.  General requirements. 
i.  Joint access driveways are permitted in order to achieve minimum driveway spacing requirements. 
ii.  No property may have a curb cut in excess of 50 feet in width without approval of the city engineer. 
iii.  If a nonresidential driveway design is one-way in or one-way out, then the driveway shall be a minimum width of 16 feet and shall have appropriate signage designating the driveway as a one-way connection. 
iv.  For two-way, nonresidential access, each travel lane shall have a minimum width of 11 feet. When more than two lanes are proposed, a specific driveway design must be approved by the city engineer. 
v.  Driveways that enter an arterial or collector street at traffic signals must have at least two outbound lanes of at least 11 feet in width and one inbound lane with a maximum width of 12 feet. 
vi.  Except for single-family and two-family residences, driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Design Standards. 
vii.  Driveways shall intersect roads or streets with no more than a ten degree skew from a 90 degree angle. 
viii.  Driveway aprons shall slope from the right-of-way to the edge of pavement or gutter flow line. For all non-single-family driveways and entrances, a storm sewer inlet or grade break shall be provided at the right-of-way line to prevent discharge of stormwater onto the public right-of-way. 
ix.  Driveways shall comply with the minimum requirements of the City of Douglas Standard Drawings Appendix B, based on projected use and classification. 
x.  Driveways serving single-family detached or duplex residences may be no less than ten feet wide at the right-of-way line and shall provide a radius to the back of the curb or edge of the pavement of the roadway of no less than five feet. All other driveway curb cuts on public streets shall conform to the standards shown on the driveway details contained in the Standard Drawings, Appendix B. 
xi.  All driveways and driveway curb cuts on state highways shall conform to GDOT Standards. 
3.  Driveway construction standards: 
i.  Sidewalks and curbs adjacent to driveways shall meet requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
ii.  Portions of driveways within the public rights-of-way shall be six inches thick, 4,000 psi fiber-reinforced concrete or asphalt. Pavement requirements of asphalt driveways located in the city ROW shall meet the design requirements of the adjoining street. 
iii.  Driveways shall be no closer than three feet, at the closest point, to an at-grade utility structure, including, but not limited to, curb inlets, drainage structures, streetlights, telephone and electrical poles, boxes and transformers, manholes, handholes and fire hydrants. 
iv.  Driveways shall be no closer than ten feet from a street tree or fire hydrant. 
v.  Water and sewer lines shall be located outside of driveways, except for generally perpendicular crossings. 
vi.  Commercial driveways shall provide a 35-foot minimum radius at intersection with a public street. If designed for tractor-trailer trucks, the minimum radius shall be 75 feet. 
4.  Auxiliary lanes: 
i.  Along any arterial or major collector street, a deceleration lane, acceleration lane, left turn lane, larger turning radius, traffic islands or other devices or designs may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards that, otherwise, would be created by the proposed driveway location, except in instances where the driveway is for a one- or two-family residence. 
ii.  Deceleration lanes shall be required by the City of Douglas at each access point on roads classified as arterials or collectors when the posted speed limit is 30 miles per hour or higher and otherwise where considered necessary by the city engineer based on traffic volumes. Deceleration lanes are required on city roads classified as arterial and major collector streets when the posted speed limit is 30 miles per hour or higher. Minimum deceleration lengths are specified in the "Table of Deceleration Lane Requirements." The city engineer may vary length requirements based upon a consideration of available sight distance and traffic volumes. For state routes and federal highways, GDOT requirements shall apply whenever more restrictive. 
Table 9-4 Deceleration Lane Requirements 

 
Deceleration lane length and taper lengths in Table 9-4 are considered minimum design values actual lengths may be greater when all design constraints are considered. Refer to the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials Manual. 
iii.  When a new deceleration lane required by this section is proposed to begin or end within 50 feet of an existing deceleration lane, driveway or street intersection, then the new deceleration lane shall be extended as needed to provide a safe, continuous connection with adjacent or nearby deceleration lanes, driveways and intersections. 
5.  Sight distance: All roads, streets, and driveways shall provide adequate sight distance as shown in the Table of Intersection Sight Distance Requirements. 
Table 9-5 Intersection Sight Distance Requirements 

 
The sight distances given in Table 9-5 are for undivided highways. If the highway is divided, the effect of the median should be considered in determining the required sight distance. See American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials manual for adjustments due to grades greater than three percent and design vehicles other than passenger cars. 
d.  Requirements for new streets and roadways. 
1.  All new streets proposed to be constructed in a subdivision or other development shall be designed and constructed to the minimum standards contained in these regulations, in accordance with the classification of streets. 
2.  If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by the City of Douglas or the State of Georgia to traverse the property, the proposed road shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the street classification as shown in these regulations or as shown on plans proposed by the city or State of Georgia. The specific vertical and horizontal alignment of the proposed roadway shall be as established or approved by the City of Douglas and/or the State of Georgia, as applicable. 
3.  Street widening: When property fronting on an existing city street is to be developed and when the property is to be accessed from the existing city street, roadway improvements (pavement, curb and gutter and drainage) are required along the existing road across the entire property frontage. Required improvements shall not be less than provided in these regulations for the designated street classification. 
4.  Widening, curb and gutter and drainage shall be provided from the centerline of the existing roadway along the side of the road upon which the property abuts. In lieu of installation of curbs and gutters and/or related improvements, the developer must have presented to and received approval by the city for a street improvements and stormwater drainage plan for the development and its affected environs. Said plan must provide for adequate stormwater drainage, and will further address as a minimum, street grading, paving, and curbs and gutters, and/or other innovative provisions for said drainage. This plan must conform to the applicable standards and specification established by the city and be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Georgia registered professional engineer. 
5.  The developer shall be responsible for the relocation and/or modifications of public and/or private utilities as necessitated by the required street improvements. 
6.  Substandard streets. 
i.  If a substandard street (dirt or gravel road or inadequate width of pavement or right-of-way) provides a means of access to a development, the street shall be upgraded to the street classification standard required by this [chapter] article. These improvements shall extend from the entrance of the development to the nearest standard paved road of an equivalent or higher classification, along the route of primary access. 
ii.  In the event that a development has access to a substandard street and if that substandard street is other than the primary means of access to the development, the substandard street, except as indicated below, shall be fully upgraded only along the entire property frontage and shall be paved on the opposite side of the road from the development, 12 feet from the street centerline. 
iii.  The upgrading of substandard streets used for access will not be required if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The development consists of a single one- or two-family residence on an existing recorded lot within the city; 
b.  Total traffic on the substandard street is less than 2,000 vehicles per day including projected traffic volume from the development. 
7.  Improvements along state highways: For any development which abuts a state or federal highway, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation and these regulations. A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved by the GDOT and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the city. 
8.  Permanent dead-end streets: New streets shall connect at both ends to existing streets unless the city engineer determines that unique parcel configuration or terrain make a fully connected street pattern infeasible or unsafe. 
i.  When necessary, streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround and may be no more than 600 feet in length, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
ii.  The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center of the cul-de-sac to the center of the intersection with another street. 
iii.  Culs-de-sac shall conform to the standard drawings found in Appendix B (reserved). 
9.  Temporary dead-end streets: 
i.  A temporary dead-end street shall be provided to the boundary of a subdivision to provide access to abutting property for planned continuity of future circulation, improved access for public safety vehicles or for the extension of public water or other utilities to neighboring properties. Such dead-end streets shall be designed to meet the requirements of these regulations and to allow their reasonable extension and shall be located so as to be reasonably incorporated into a street design for the neighboring property. A temporary vehicular turnaround shall be provided as required by the subdivision regulations section IV. B. 17. 
ii.  Existing dead-end streets on abutting property shall be extended into a proposed subdivision and incorporated into the street design of the development. 
iii.  Paragraphs a. and b. of this subsection may be modified by the city engineer in cases of serious topographical hardship or unacceptable land use conflicts between the two developments. This modification may be conditioned on the provision of easements necessary for the extension of public utilities, the provision of a cul-de-sac or other permanent turnaround on the dead-end street or the removal of the dead-end street back to its nearest intersection. 
iv.  Where a dead-end street (other than a cul-de-sac) serves four or more lots in a multi-phase subdivision and such street is to be extended later, the developer shall be required to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround complying with paragraph 1. above. This requirement may be waived if extension of the dead-end street is approved and under construction prior to its inclusion in a final plat. 
10.  Access roads: Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, major utility easement, limited access highway right-of-way or a major thoroughfare; a public street may be required to be constructed and dedicated within the development approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way. Locations of such service roads shall be aligned with similar service roads on adjacent properties. 
11.  Construction access drives: Construction access drives are required for vehicles with gross weight of 10,000 pounds or more. 
i.  On multi-phase developments, the developer shall be required to dedicate, install, maintain and remove temporary construction access drives for the ingress and egress of construction vehicles, personnel and equipment. 
ii.  Temporary construction access drives shall be shown on the concept plan and preliminary plat and shall access an existing city road where possible. Construction access drives shall be permitted through the city, and shall comply with sight distance requirements in Section 403(E), Sight Distance. 
iii.  Temporary construction access drives shall be utilized as the sole means of ingress and egress during the construction of subsequent phases of the development, to prevent the flow of construction and heavy vehicular traffic on newly constructed streets completed under earlier phases. 
iv.  If the city engineer determines that a temporary construction access drive cannot be provided, due to site-specific restrictions, then the developer shall provide a maintenance bond for those portions of the newly constructed roadway utilized for construction access. 
12.  Half streets: Both the construction of new half streets and the extension of access to existing half streets shall be prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed development tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed development. 
13.  Reserve strips: Land in private ownership adjacent to public rights-of-way, which could control or is intended to control access to streets, alleys or public lands, shall not be permitted unless control is given to the city under ownership, dedication or easement conditions approved by the city attorney or acceptable to the city engineer. No development shall be designed so as to deny access to abutting properties. 
14.  Alleys: Alleys are to be constructed to the following standards: 
i.  Minimum width of right-of-way or easement: Twenty feet. 
ii.  Minimum 14-foot wide paved travel lane. 
iii.  Twenty-four-inch rolled curb and gutter. 
iv.  Minimum four-foot building setback from the edge of the pavement. No obstructions are permitted in this clear zone. 
v.  Utility easements as required by the city engineer. 
vi.  Maximum length, 1,200 feet with a minimum of two points of access/egress to a local street or higher classification. No dead end alleys may be longer than 200 feet. 
a.  Maximum grade of eight percent. 
b.  Paving and base must be constructed to standards of public streets. 
c.  Alleys shall be signed, "Fire Lanes - No Parking." 
15.  Street jogs: 
i.  Local streets shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet for residential subdivision streets and a minimum of 200 feet for nonresidential subdivision streets, as measured between the centerlines. 
ii.  Where it is not feasible to align new streets or entrances with an existing street intersecting nearby on the opposite side of a collector or arterial street, then the new street intersection shall be no less than 600 feet from the intersection of the existing street, as measured between centerlines of the two opposing streets. 
16.  Traffic-calming measures: Street layout and configuration should include a series of relatively short interconnected roadways in lieu of longer straight roads, to discourage excessive speeds. Additional traffic-calming measures may be required by the city engineer. Any specific measures employed shall be approved by the city engineer. 
e.  Street intersection. 
1.  Angle of intersections: Intersections of two public streets shall form an angle that is between 80 and 100 degrees, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. If the intersection is signalized, the angle of the intersection may be reduced subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. 
2.  Intersection approaches. 
i.  The approaching street at any intersection shall be designed and constructed to provide both the minimum horizontal and vertical approach distances, as defined in this section and indicated in the "Table of Intersection Approach Distances" contained in this section. 
ii.  Minimum horizontal approach distance is defined as the minimum distance required along the centerline of an approaching street, perpendicular or no less than 85 degrees to the intersected street, as measured from the edge of pavement of the intersected street to the point of horizontal curvature on the approaching street. 
iii.  Minimum vertical approach distance is defined as the minimum distance required along the centerline of the approaching street, at a grade less than or equal to the recommended grade indicated in the "Table of Intersection Approach Distances," as measured from the edge of pavement of the intersected street to a point on the profile of the approaching street where grades exceed recommended values. 
iv.  The use of vertical curves, drainage boxes or other approved methods shall be used in the design of the approaching street at any intersection to prevent drainage of surface water from draining into the travel lanes of the intersected street. 
Table 9-6 Intersection Approach Distances 

 
3.  Crown taper: The typical crowned street cross section shall be tapered over a distance of not less than 50 feet on the approaching street at all intersections, in order to connect flush with the line and grade of the edge of pavement on the intersected street. The cross section taper shall be designed and constructed so as to provide for the adequate drainage of surface water from all portions of the travel surface and gutter. 
4.  Intersection radii: Intersection radii for roadways measured at back of curb and for the right-of-way lines shall be as shown in the "Table 9-7 of Intersection Radii." For intersecting streets of different classification, the larger radii shall be provided. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at angles less than 90 degrees. In all cases, adequate right-of-way shall be provided to maintain a minimum of 12 feet from back of curb to right-of-way line. Miters are acceptable. The engineer should utilize design radii in accordance with the Geometric Design of Highways and Streets Manual, but they should not be less than shown in Table 9-7. 
Table 9-7 Intersection Radii 

 
5.  Islands: In no case shall anything in an island extend more than three feet above the street grade within the right-of-way; except traffic regulatory devices, street trees and other infrastructure erected or approved by the City of Douglas. No island shall be approved that contains less than 100 square feet. Irrigation or other private systems shall not be installed within public right-of-way. 
6.  Intersection corner sight distance. 
i.  Intersections shall be designed with adequate corner sight distance for each approaching street. Where necessary, back slopes shall be flattened and horizontal or vertical curves lengthened to provide the minimum required sight distance. 
ii.  The minimum corner sight distance from the approaching street shall be calculated using latest edition of AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets." 
7.  Obstructing visibility at intersections: On all corner lots located at a street intersection, a clear sight zone shall be maintained at all times. The design and location of new intersections shall meet the standards of Section 403(E). 
8.  Turning lanes at intersections: Both center left-turn and right-turn lanes shall be provided on all new internal project streets, and on all existing city roads, where traffic volumes and turning movements warrant the installation. At the request of the city engineer, the developer or applicant shall prepare and submit a detailed traffic study (as defined herein), outlining projected traffic volumes, turning movements and auxiliary lanes required. The methodology and conclusions presented in the traffic study are subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. 
i.  Center turn lane storage. A minimum storage length of 150 feet shall be provided for center left turn lanes on any arterial streets. A minimum storage length of 100 feet shall be provided on all collector streets. Additional storage capacity shall be provided as required, based on projected peak traffic volumes and turning movements. 
ii.  Taper length. The taper length shall be in accordance with AASHTO design standards, based on the lane widths and design speed of the subject street. 
iii.  The design, right-of-way acquisition, drainage system improvements, roadway widening, asphalt construction, traffic control, traffic striping, signage and all other improvements required or incidental to the installation of auxiliary turn lanes required to support any proposed development shall be completed by the developer or applicant, at no cost to the City of Douglas. 
iv.  Under the following conditions, left storage lanes shall be added to two-lane collectors or arterials with speed limits of 30 miles per hour or more, at unsignalized locations where left turning vehicles will leave the arterial or collector street and enter major driveways or development entrances. See the "Table of Left Storage Lane Requirements." 
Table 9-8 Left Storage Lane Requirements 

 
v.  The length of left turn storage lanes and tapers shall be as prescribed in the Table 4-9, "Minimum Design Elements of Left Turn Lanes", GDOT "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control", and the latest edition. 
f.  Geometric design standards. 
1.  All streets and roadways shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO Standards, as provided in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," latest edition and any amendments thereto. All applicable signage, markings or other traffic control measures shall be designed in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices (MUTCD), latest edition and any amendments thereto. 
2.  Horizontal curvature and super-elevation: All new streets shall adhere to the standards governing horizontal curvature and super-elevation in "Table of Horizontal Curvature and Super-Elevations," unless otherwise specified by AASHTO standards: 
Table 9-9 Horizontal Curvature and Super-Elevations 

 
3.  Tangents: Between reverse horizontal curves there shall not be less than the minimum centerline radii and tangents shown in the "Table of Horizontal Alignment and Reverse Curves," unless otherwise specified by AASHTO Standards. Compound radii are prohibited. 
Table 9-10 Horizontal Alignment and Reverse Curves 

 
4.  Vertical alignment. 
i.  All changes in street profile grades having an algebraic difference greater than that shown the latest edition of the GDOT Design Manual shall be connected to a parabolic curve having a minimum length in feet (L), which is equal to the algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) multiplied by the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its classification and design speed (i.e. L = KA). 
ii.  (K) values shown in the Table of Constant (K) Values for Vertical Alignments shall be utilized in all cases, and in no case shall the constant (K) value be less than the minimum permitted. 
Table 9-11 Constant (K) Values for Vertical Alignments 

 
5.  Street centerline grades. 
i.  Street or road grades exceeding ten percent for a minor collector and 12 percent for local streets are prohibited, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may grant limited exceptions on maximum grades, based on conclusive evidence that shows a lesser grade is impractical due to topographic or site specific limitations. 
ii.  The minimum centerline grade for any street or roadway shall not be less than 1.5 percent, without exception, due to drainage concerns. A desirable minimum centerline grade of two percent shall be provided where possible. 
iii.  The maximum centerline grade across any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be five percent. 
6.  Crown slope: Unless super-elevated, all streets and roadways, except alleys, shall be designed and constructed with a crown slope of one-fourth-inch per foot, to provide for the adequate drainage of surface water from the street centerline to the gutter or edge of pavement. 
7.  Super-elevation: The design of arterial and major collector roadways may require the super-elevation of the travel surface on horizontal curves in accordance with AASHTO Standards. The design and horizontal alignment of minor collectors and local streets serving residential areas should avoid the use of super-elevation where possible. In all instances, the maximum super-elevation rates shall be in accordance with paragraph b. above. Under no circumstance is a curved street of any classification to be reverse super-elevated. 
8.  Pavement design. 
i.  Pavement sections shall be constructed in accordance with the standards in the "Table of Standard Pavement Sections." 
Table 9-12 Standard Pavement Sections 

 
Add a column to above table street type-soil cement -6", 6", 8", 8", 8", N/A. 
ii.  The developer may submit for review and approval an alternative pavement design, prepared at the developer's cost. This submittal shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Design prepared by a professional engineer licensed in Georgia. 
b.  Soils testing results prepared by a professional engineer licensed in Georgia. 
c.  Design shall be completed using the GDOT's "Asphalt Pavement Design Procedures," latest edition. 
d.  Design shall be based on 15-year pavement life. 
e.  Traffic shall be calculated using the Trip Generation Manual, by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, latest edition. 
f.  Traffic projections shall be made for any streets that serve areas outside of the proposed development. 
g.  Traffic counts, including truck traffic, shall be made as required on existing roads. 
h.  The City of Douglas will require written certification that material used in sub-base conforms to the soils test results used in the design. 
i.  Cores of pavement and base will be made as necessary to verify actual thickness of each pavement layer (surface, base, and sub-base). Test results shall be certified by a third party contractor at the expense of the developer. Copies of the test reports will be made available to the city engineer. The minimum number of cores of surface, binder, base, and sub-base is one core per 100 feet of each street (or one core with streets less than 100 feet in length). 
g.  Street construction standards and specifications. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for street construction shall conform to the latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications—Construction of Transportation Systems including all amendments. 
1.  Clearing and grubbing: Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared and grubbed of all trees, stumps, roots, brush, debris and other objectionable materials per GDOT specifications A—Clearing and Grubbing Specifications). All erosion control measures shall be installed as required by the approved plans and in accordance with chapter 38, article III—Erosion and Sedimentation Control of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglas. For specific technical requirements reference is made to Georgia DOT Specifications Section 201—Clearing and Grubbing Right-of-Way. Combustible material generated from clearing and grubbing operations may be burned only when authorized and permitted by the City of Douglas fire chief. 
2.  Rough grading: Conduct street earthwork construction in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Sections 205—Roadway Excavation and 208—Embankments. 
i.  For purposes of these regulations, the maximum density of soil material shall be determined by ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) test procedures. 
ii.  Complete rough street subgrade construction before starting utility and drainage installation. 
3.  Final grading and subgrade preparation. 
i.  Perform subgrade construction in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Section 209—Subgrade Construction. 
ii.  The developer shall provide quality control testing during earthwork and subgrade construction as necessary to assure the entire earthwork, including all fill layers and subgrades, meet the minimum requirements of these regulations. The minimum quality control testing to be provided consists of the following: 
a.  Moisture-density relationship curve for each type soil encountered. 
b.  One in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other recognized method) per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of subgrade or base to be paved. 
c.  One in-place density test (ASTM D1556 or other recognized method) per 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof of fill placed. 
iii.  Earthwork which falls below specified minimum quality control limits shall be removed, reconstructed and retested until compliance with specified requirements is achieved. 
iv.  After completing street earthwork operations and before beginning street base construction, the developer shall file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these requirements with the city. At any time during the construction process, representatives of the city may request to review and the developer shall provide quality control test results. 
4.  Street and alley base construction. 
i.  Street and alley bases shall be constructed in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Section 300—Specifications Applying to All Base and Subbase Courses. 
ii.  The following Georgia DOT specification sections shall apply to base materials indicated on the standard detail typical street sections: Graded Aggregate Base—Section 310—Graded Aggregate Construction. 
5.  Surface and binder asphaltic paving course construction: Surface and binder asphaltic paving courses, including prime, shall be constructed in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Section 400—Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Construction. 
6.  Post-construction stabilization of disturbed areas: When earthwork and paving are complete, the developer shall grass and stabilize all disturbed areas including roadway shoulders which are not covered by paving or other improvements per GDOT specifications for grassing. It shall be the developer's responsibility to maintain grassed areas by watering, fertilizing, weeding, mowing, trimming, regrading and replanting as required to establish a smooth, acceptable stand of grass free of eroded or bare areas. Grassed areas will be considered acceptable when a viable stand of grass covers at least 90 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. Grassing operations shall meet the technical requirements of Georgia DOT Specification Section 700—Grassing for Planting Zone 4. 
7.  Quality control testing required: 
i.  The Developer shall provide quality control testing during base and pavement construction as necessary to assure the entire pavement structure meets the minimum requirements of these regulations. The minimum quality control testing to be provided consists of the following: 
a.  Moisture-density relationship curve for each base material used on project. 
b.  For soil cement base, conduct mix design to determine Portland cement content (percent of dry weight of the soil) to achieve a minimum compressive strength of 300 psi at seven days when testing in accordance with ASTM D 1632 and D 1633. 
c.  One in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other method acceptable to the city) per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
d.  One thickness measurement normal to base surface per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
e.  One surface tolerance measurement using a 15-foot straight edge per 250 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
f.  One asphalt extraction (ASTM D 2172) and aggregate gradation analysis (ASTM C 136) per 2,400 square yards or fraction thereof of surface course and per 2,400 square yards or fraction thereof of binder course (if any). Obtain samples for extraction and gradation tests in accordance with ASTM D 979.7) One density and compacted thickness measurement per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of each course placed. Density determined to be made in accordance with ASTM D 1188. Remove not less than three-inch diameter nor larger than 12 inch square test specimens. Repair test specimen holes with full depth application of fresh hot asphaltic plant mix. 
g.  One surface tolerance measurement using 15-foot straight edge per 250 square yards or fraction thereof of surface course. 
ii.  Base and/or paving construction which falls below specified minimum quality control limits shall be removed, reconstructed and retested until compliance with specified requirements is achieved. 
iii.  After completing base and paving construction, the developer shall file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these regulations with the city. At any time during the construction process, representatives of the city may request to review and the developer shall provide quality control test results. 
8.  Use of nonspecified base or paving materials or systems: In the event the developer desires to utilize base or paving materials or systems not included in these regulations, the developer shall provide an engineering study prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer comparing the proposed material or system to the appropriate system which is included in these regulations. The engineering study will include a pavement structural design based on the AASHTO "Guide for Design of Pavement Structures" and suggested specifications for the materials and construction of the proposed system. The city will treat the developer's request through the appeals process described elsewhere in this Code. 
h.  Curb and gutter. 
1.  All new streets or street widening sections shall be provided with curb and gutter, except as provided herein under. All gutters shall drain smoothly with no areas of ponding. 
2.  In lieu of installation of curbs and gutters and/or related improvements, the developer must have presented to and received approval by the city for a street improvements and stormwater drainage plan for the development and its affected environs. Said plan must provide for adequate stormwater drainage, and will further address as a minimum, street grading, paving, and curbs and gutters, and/or other innovative provisions for said drainage. This plan must conform to the applicable standards and specification established by the city and be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Georgia registered professional engineer. 
3.  All concrete curb and gutter shall be GDOT Standard 9032B, Type 2 (except in subdivisions, where the curb and gutter shall be 24 inches wide, while all other dimensions remain). 
4.  Curbing shall conform to the following standards: 
i.  Concrete shall be Class "A" as defined by the GDOT, and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days; a two-inch to four-inch slump (ASTM C 143) and, three to six percent air content (ASTM C 231 or C 173) and shall comply with ASTM C 94. 
ii.  One-half inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be provided at all structures and radius points and at an interval not to exceed 250 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. Contraction joints also shall be provided at ten-foot intervals along the curb line. 
iii.  When the development ties into existing curbing, the curb and gutter shall transition to match the existing width and profile at the connection point. 
iv.  Termination or curb tapers shall be provided at the end of any gutter. The curb height shall be tapered from six inches to zero inches over a distance of six feet. 
5.  The developer shall use a standard curb and gutter section. The section is shown in Appendix B, Standard Drawings. 
6.  Curb and gutter shall be set true to the line and grade of the street on a properly prepared subgrade with application of Georgia DOT Type 2 membrane curing compound, horizontally and vertically field staked and finished to the section shown on the plans. Line and grade shall be established by the developer's engineer or surveyor. Offset staking shall be provided at 50-foot intervals. 
7.  Curbing not installed in accordance with the requirements of this section or Appendix B, Standard Details shall be removed and replaced at the developer's expenses. The city may require and the developer shall provide core samples to verify concrete thickness. 
8.  Disturbed areas along curbing shall be back-filled, compacted, stabilized and grassed. 
i.  Street lighting. The developer shall provide a street lighting standard at each street intersection and at an interval not exceeding 400 feet. The developer shall provide lighting standards at no cost to the city. 
1.  The developer or other person developing a residential subdivision shall be required to provide street lights that conform to all of the standards provided for in this section and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain approval of the street light layout from the city engineer prior to the construction of any street light facilities. Approval or final acceptance of the subdivision requires compliance with this section. 
2.  The developer or other person developing a shopping center, industrial park, office park, apartment complex or like development within a designated street light district shall provide street lights along public rights-of-way adjoining that property that conform to all standards provided for in this section; and the developer shall obtain approval of the street light layout from the city engineer prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
3.  The city engineer shall not recommend the acceptance of any public streets or roads proposed to be dedicated to the city for perpetual ownership and maintenance until such time as the street lights conform to the approved street light layout. 
4.  Street lights: Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions or other developments utilizing new streets or roads to be dedicated to the city or existing city streets or roads or any combination, unless waived by city commission. Unless so waived, the developer, at the time of submitting the final plat to the city shall: 
i.  Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company, which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the development or subdivision. For residential and nonresidential subdivisions, this drawing must be approved by the city engineer prior to obtaining any building permit within the subdivision. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company, which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities, and by the city engineer. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 25 feet above the ground, and each fixture shall have appropriate arm length to illuminate the street. Lights must be located at any or all street intersections within the subdivision or other development and 400 feet apart along any streets with the subdivision or other development. 
ii.  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
iii.  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the city. 
iv.  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
5.  Standards of installation and operation. In order to ensure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1983), as from time to time amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the City of Douglas, with the following exceptions: 
i.  Except for principal arterials, lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal foot-candle illumination level by roadway classification shall be as shown in "Table of Minimum Average Street Illumination Levels". 
Table 9-13 Minimum Average Street Illumination Levels (foot-candles) 

 
ii.  The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal foot-candle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be no less than one-sixth of this average. 
iii.  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the city engineer for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. 
iv.  Should the city engineer disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. 
v.  Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the city engineer may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the city engineer, a notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval. It shall be the responsibility of the city engineer to transmit forthwith to the building inspector board of zoning appeals all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The board of zoning appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed. 
vi.  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street, and shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the city engineer shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
vii.  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way, for whatever purpose, shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
j.  Sidewalks and bikeways. Sidewalks shall be provided along public streets for all developments and in such other locations as deemed necessary by the city for safe pedestrian movement. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be located on both sides of the street or road and on existing or new street frontage that is part of any new development and shall meet all current ADA requirements. 
2.  Sidewalks in subdivisions shall be continued to the nearest arterial street. 
3.  All new sidewalks shall match and provide a smooth transition to any existing sidewalk. 
4.  Sidewalks shall be installed on an individual lot basis at the time of building construction. The city shall inspect the location and construction of the sidewalk and shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the required sidewalk is properly installed. 
5.  A strip of grass or other approved landscape material at least four feet in width shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs on public streets. Sidewalks shall be concrete and a minimum of five feet wide and four inches thick. Concrete shall be Class "A," as defined by the GDOT, and have strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. Disturbed areas along sidewalks shall be backfilled, compacted, stabilized and grassed. The city may require and the developer shall provide core samples to verify core thickness. 
6.  Additional sidewalks and/or pedestrian easements may be required in subdivisions or developments where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
7.  Bicycle lanes, where provided, shall be a minimum of four feet in width and placed between the outside lane of a roadway and the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with appropriate markings, as required by MUTCD Standards. Bikeways and bicycle lanes must be pre-approved by the city engineer and meet the requirements of AASHTO "Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities," latest edition. 
k.  Traffic calming devices. 
1.  Traffic calming devices and associated signage may be required by the city engineer. 
2.  The city engineer may establish specific standards for the design, construction, placement, and if applicable, planting plan for traffic calming devices. These standards shall be known as "Traffic Calming Device Design and Placement Standards for the City of Douglas," further referred to and known as the design and placement standards and are hereby made a part of this section by reference. The city will maintain on file for consultation and distribution a series of design and placement standards for traffic calming devices. The city engineer may, from time to time, modify these technical standards. 
3.  Traffic calming devices for all local streets shall be placed, designed and installed in accordance with the design and placement standards. 
4.  Other designs or types of traffic calming devices not included in the design and placement standards may be approved at the discretion of the city engineer, provided that such devices meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  The proposed traffic calming device must be recognized as such by the transportation industry, i.e., it must be recognized by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, American Association State Highway Transportation Officials, the Federal Highway Administration, the American Traffic Safety Services Association or other nationally recognized transportation industry organization or guiding authority. 
ii.  The proposed traffic-calming device must be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the minimum standards of the approving organization or guiding authority. The city engineer may impose additional design, location or construction criteria prior to approving such a device. 
iii.  The proposed traffic-calming device must include plantings, water quality or other environmental enhancements or beautification elements. 
iv.  Traffic calming may be accomplished via proper geometric design of the streets. Such designs may be accepted by the city engineer in lieu of other structural traffic calming devices. 
v.  The city engineer may disallow the use of devices that meet the criteria set forth in subsections a. through d. of this section if, in his judgment, the installation of such a device would create unusual or costly maintenance, create a safety hazard, restrict movement of emergency vehicles, or would otherwise not be in the best interest of the city. 
5.  Islands that are not specifically for traffic calming, such as entrance islands, cul-de-sac islands, tree save islands or other decorative islands may be approved for construction by the city engineer, if they conform to the design principles contained in the design and placement standards. 
6.  All plant materials included in islands shall be installed at the expense of the developer and shall be maintained by the subdivision's homeowner's association. A notification to this effect shall be included on the final plat recorded for the subdivision. 
7.  The city engineer may, at his or her discretion, approve unusually shaped islands or innovative designs. 
l.  Traffic control devices. 
1.  Traffic control devices consisting of street name signs, traffic control signs, traffic markings and traffic signals shall be provided by the developer as appropriate to serve each development. All traffic control devices and installation thereof shall conform to the Federal Highway Administration "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices". 
i.  For residential developments, minimum traffic control devices shall consist of street name signs at each street intersection, stop or yield signs at each intersection, one speed limit sign per block, school or pedestrian crossing signs where appropriate, and limited pavement marking such as crosswalk lines for school or pedestrian crossings. 
ii.  Minimum traffic control devices for nonresidential developments shall include those devices for residential developments and lane and centerline markings, stop lines, and parking space markings. Additionally, other appropriate signs and signals shall be provided by the developer. 
m.  Street improvement plans. 
1.  Plans required: Street improvement plans for all new streets, street widening and existing street upgrades shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer. At least three copies of the plans shall be submitted to the city for review and comment. An electronic copy (in PDF format) may be submitted in addition to other plans. Within 30 days of submittal of the plans, the city will either approve the plans or make comment on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans can be approved by the city. 
2.  Required information: All plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
i.  Profiles of existing ground levels along street centerlines and each right-of-way. Field determined elevations shall be indicated at intervals not exceeding 25 feet. Where cross sections are provided at least every 25 feet, only centerline elevations need be shown on the profile. 
ii.  Existing facilities and features within and adjacent to rights-of-way which affect or could be affected by street improvement construction. Items include, but are not limited to, streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, buildings, parking lots, driveways, fences, tree lines, and railroads. 
iii.  All drainageways, lakes, streams, creeks, channels, wetlands, and drainage facilities. 
iv.  All existing utilities and appurtenances within and adjacent to rights-of-way which affect or could be affected by street improvement construction. Items include, but are not limited to, sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street lights. The utility type, size, depth, material and location in relation to street improvements should be indicated. 
v.  Existing and proposed property and easement lines and land lot and land district lines intersecting street rights-of-way. 
vi.  Limits of new construction. 
vii.  New road improvements, including but not limited to, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, pavements, driveways, wheel chair ramps, traffic control devices, and street lights (if any). 
viii.  Profiles of each pavement edge or line of curb and gutter with new finished grade elevations at intervals not exceeding 50 feet. 
ix.  Horizontal and vertical street geometry including street centerline angles of deflection, radii, degree of curvature, design speed, tangent lengths, arc lengths, bearings street grades, and lengths of vertical curves. Stations for all points of curve, points of tangency, points of intersection, both horizontal and vertical, should be shown. 
x.  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
xi.  Name of the development, names, addresses and telephone numbers of developer and developer's engineer, engineer's seal, north arrow, scale, and date. 
3.  Plans shall conform to the following standards: 
i.  Where specific design guidance is not given in these regulations or other City of Douglas regulations, rules, or ordinances the AASHTO publication "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets", latest edition shall be followed. 
ii.  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
iii.  Plan drawings shall be at a scale of at least one-inch equals 50 feet. In developed or congested areas, the city may require a scale of one-inch equals 20 feet or less to be utilized. 
iv.  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least one-inch equals ten feet. A one-inch equals five feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict grade changes in flat areas. 
v.  The desired drawing size is 18 inches by 24 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
vi.  One set of Mylar drawings are to be provided. 
(6) - Utilities. 
All authorized public utilities must be installed by a Georgia licensed underground utility contractor who must meet minimum bonding and insurance requirements as determined by the city. 
a.  Placement of utilities. All authorized public and private underground or overhead utilities shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street or within an easement designated for such use. Within public street rights-of-way, placement of the various authorized utilities (water, sanitary sewer, natural gas, power, telephone, and cable TV) shall conform to the specific locations for such use designated by the city. Private underground utilities such as lawn sprinkler systems, septic tanks and drain fields, exterior lighting systems, and heating and cooling piping are not permitted within public street rights-of-way. 
b.  Easements. 
1.  Easements required: Permanent easements for public water, drainage and sanitary sewer facilities shall be dedicated to the city. 
2.  Easement widths: The minimum width permanent easements for a single utility shall be 15 feet. Where more than one utility has a common easement, the minimum easement width shall be increased by five feet for each additional utility. However, additional easement widths may be required by the city where the depth of the utility is excessive or other conditions will cause difficulty in accessing the utility. 
3.  Dedication requirements: Before dedication, the developer shall grass and stabilize all disturbed areas within and adjacent to easements which are not covered by paving or other improvements. An acceptable stand of grass free of eroded or bare areas must be achieved before the city will consider dedication. 
c.  Utility line extension requirements. If existing water mains and or sanitary sewers must be extended to serve a development, the developer shall install or have installed the necessary extensions at no cost to the city under the existing city policy and procedures at plan approval time. 
d.  Water distribution system design criteria. 
1.  Pressure: All water mains, including those not designed to provide fire protection, shall be sized after hydraulic analysis performed by a Georgia registered professional engineer to maintain a minimum pressure of 40 psi at ground level under all conditions of design flow. Regardless of water system design pressure and flows, all water mains shall be a minimum of eight inches. 
2.  Design flow: The design flow is to consist of projected peak demand plus fire flow (where applicable). To determine projected peak flow for residential developments, utilize values in "Table of Peak Water Demands for Residential Developments." For developments other than residential, utilize AWWA "Manual of Water Supply Practices M22, Sizing Water Service Lines and Meters" to estimate peak demand. For fire flow, select proper value from the "Table of Minimum Design Fire Flows". 
3.  Sprinkler connections: For each fire protection sprinkler connection to the city's water system, the developer must provide a double detector check valve installation consisting of not less than two detector check valves with by-pass meter on the second unit and two gate valves all enclosed in an accessible, non-floodable concrete pit. The pit is to have a double leaf aluminum access hatch which should be sized for easy access for maintenance. 
4.  State approval: It is the developer's responsibility to obtain the approval of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources of all water distribution system additions and extensions. In addition to the other requirements, the city must receive a copy of the approval before the developer will be allowed to proceed with construction. 
e.  Location of water mains, fire hydrants and other fixtures. 
1.  Water mains: Water mains shall be located along city streets on the south and west side of the street, five feet from the back of the curb. The minimum cover is to be 42 inches. Locate water service laterals with a minimum cover of 24 inches within street rights-of-way. Within five feet of the water meter, service lateral cover may be reduced to not less than 18 inches 
Table 9-14 Peak Water Demands for Residential Developments 

 
Table 9-15 Minimum Design Fireflows (1) 

 
2.  Fire hydrant spacing: Provide fire hydrant spacing as requested by the fire chief and as follows: 
i.  One- and two-family residential uses: Space fire hydrants not more than 500 feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary so that the maximum hose lay from a hydrant to the furthermost part of any building does not exceed 500 feet. 
ii.  Multiple-unit residential uses: Space fire hydrant not more than 500 feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary so that the maximum hose lay from a hydrant to the farthermost part of any building does not exceed 400 feet. 
iii.  Office, institutional, commercial and industrial uses: Space fire hydrants not more than 400 feet apart so all portions of buildings can be reached by hose lays of not more than 400 feet. 
iv.  Except when waived by the fire chief, a fire hydrant shall be located at all street intersections in all zoning districts. 
v.  Locate fire hydrants between the water mains and right-of-way and within five feet of the right-of-way. 
3.  Valves: Locate valves at not more than 1,000-foot intervals in residential areas and 500-foot intervals in nonresidential areas. At water main junctions, the minimum number of valves to be provided shall equal the number of pipes extending from the junction minus one. 
4.  Meters: Locate water meters in public rights-of-way within six inches of the right-of-way except where alternate location is approved by the water department. Water meters will be furnished and installed by the city upon payment of appropriate fees. 
f.  Sanitary sewer design criteria. 
1.  Design capacity: Design sewer systems for the estimated ultimate development tributary population and/or area. In establishing design capacity, the following factors must be considered: 
i.  Maximum hourly residential sewage flow. 
ii.  Maximum hourly commercial/institutional sewage flow. 
iii.  Maximum hourly industrial sewage flow. 
iv.  Ground water infiltration. 
v.  Topography of the area. 
vi.  Pumping requirements. 
vii.  Design new sewers in residential areas on the basis of an average daily flow of sewage of not less than 400 gallons per household per day. A peaking factor of not less than 2.5 must be applied to the average daily flow to establish peak design flow. Sewers shall be designed to carry peak design flow when flowing one-half full. 
viii.  In nonresidential developments, base sewer design on the estimated peak flow from the development but in no case less than 0.4 gallon per square foot of gross building areas. Sewers shall be designed to carry peak flow when flowing one-half full. 
2.  Size and shape: The minimum size sanitary sewer shall be eight inches. Design sewers to give mean velocities, when flowing half full, of not less than 2.0 feet per second based on the Manning formula using an "n" value of 0.013. The "Table of Minimum Sewer Slopes" contained in this section gives the minimum as built slopes which must be provided to allow dedication of sewers to the city, however, where possible greater slopes are desirable. Sewers shall be placed with a uniform slope between manholes. 
3.  Manholes. 
i.  Install manholes at the following locations: 
a.  End of each sewer. 
b.  At all changes in grade, size, or alignment. 
c.  At all sewer intersections 
d.  At distances not greater than 400 feet for sewer 15 inches and smaller. 
ii.  When pipe sized change at a manhole, the 0.8 depth point of both sewers shall be aligned at the same elevation. 
iii.  When the same size pipe enters and leaves a manhole, at least a 0.1-foot drop in elevation shall be provided between the entering and the exiting inverts. 
iv.  U-shaped flow channels shall be constructed through manholes. 
4.  Relation to water mains. 
i.  Whenever possible, lay sewers at least ten feet horizontally from any existing or proposed water main. Should conditions prevent a separation of ten feet, lay the lines in separate trenches. In either case, construct the elevation of the crown of the sewer at least 18 inches below the bottom of the water main. 
ii.  When sewers cross under water mains, lay the sewer so that the top of the sewer is at least 18 inches below the bottom of the water main. Install the two pipes such that a full length of pipe will be centered over the crossing so that all joints will be separated as much as possible. Install ductile iron pipe for both lines when the crossing is less than two feet of separation. 
Table 9-16 Minimum Sewer Slopes 

 
iii.  Sewer locations: When sewers are laid in public streets, construct the sewer along the approved right-of-way or easement at a depth of not less than five feet from the road surface to the top of the pipe. In curved streets, install the sewer between gutter lines to avoid conflicts with other utilities. 
iv.  State approval: It is the developer's responsibility to obtain the approval of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for sanitary sewer collection system additions and extensions. In addition to other requirements, the city must receive a copy of the approval before the developer will be allowed to proceed with construction. 
g.  Natural gas system. All gas mains and services will be installed in accordance with the City of Douglas Natural Gas Department Operations and Maintenance Manual. 
h.  Electrical system. All electrical systems will be installed according to the latest edition of the National Electrical Code and the City of Douglas Electric Service Manual. 
i.  Preparation of utility plans. 
1.  Plans required: Utility plans for all extensions, additions, improvements and/or modifications for the water distribution and sanitary sewer collection systems shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer. At least three copies of the plans shall be submitted to the city for review and comment. Within 30 days of submittal of the plans, the city will either approve the plans or make comment on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans can be approved by the city. 
2.  Information to be shown on the plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
i.  Existing facilities and features in the vicinity of utility construction which affects or could be affected by such construction. Items include but are not limited to streets, rights-of-way, buildings, driveways, parking lots, fences, tree lines and railroads. 
ii.  All drainageways, lakes, streams, creeks, channels, wetlands, and drainage facilities. 
iii.  All existing utilities and appurtenances in the vicinity of utilities construction which affect or could be affected by such construction. The utility type, size, depth, material and location in relation to utilities improvements should be indicated. 
iv.  Existing and proposed property and easement lines and land lot and land district lines intersecting utility line construction. 
v.  New utilities construction including as applicable, but not limited to, pipelines, manholes, lift stations, force mains, valves, fittings, fire hydrants, meters, casings, services facilities, special construction and details for connections to existing utilities. Pipe sizes and materials shall be indicated on the plans. Include horizontal geometry as necessary to define location of new utilities. 
vi.  Profiles of sanitary sewers showing existing ground surface, sewers, manholes with top and invert elevations, line lengths and grades, crossing utilities, and limits for special construction. 
vii.  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
viii.  Name of the development, names, addresses and telephone numbers of developer and developer's engineer, engineer's seal, north arrow, scale and date. 
3.  Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the following: 
i.  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
ii.  Plan drawing shall be at a scale of at least one-inch equals 50 feet. In developed or congested areas, a scale of one-inch equals 20 feet or less shall be utilized. 
iii.  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least one-inch equals ten feet. A one-inch equals five feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict pipeline conditions. 
iv.  The desired drawing size is 24 inches by 36 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
v.  Utilities construction may be shown on street improvement plans provided the resulting drawings are clear, legible and plainly show all necessary information. 
j.  Construction record drawings. At the completion of utilities construction and before dedication to the city, the developer shall furnish two copies of construction record drawings for the development to the city. The record drawings shall be made from the original drawings of the approved development drawings revised to reflect actual construction. Drawings shall be signed/sealed by Georgia licensed surveyor. 
(7) - Grading and drainage. 
a.  Site grading. 
1.  Site grading shall be done in accordance with the finished grades shown on the approved development plans. Site grades shall direct surface drainage away from buildings without causing adverse impact on adjacent properties. 
2.  The maximum slopes for soil cut or fill shall be two feet of horizontal run for each foot of vertical rise or fall except for stable rock slopes. If actual soils encountered require a flatter slope for stability, the lesser slope shall be used. 
3.  Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be provided as required in chapter 38, article III, Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglas. 
b.  Drainage. Provisions for stormwater drainage and detention designs are to be in accordance with the City of Douglas Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
c.  Specifications for drainage construction. Refer to Georgia Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition for specifications for drainage construction. 
d.  Preparation of grading and drainage plans. 
1.  Plans required: Grading and drainage plans for all developments except individual one- and/or two-family dwelling units, shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer or landscape architect. 
2.  Plan submittal requirements: At least three copies of the plans and detention study shall be submitted to the city for review and comment. 
3.  Plan review process. Within 30 days of submittal of the plans, the city will either approve the plans or make comment on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans can be approved by the city. 
4.  Required plan information: Information to be shown on the plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
i.  Topographic map of the existing conditions for the development showing existing facilities and features which affect or could be affected by grading and drainage improvements. Utilize a contour interval of not greater than two feet with spot elevations as necessary to define existing ground surfaces. 
ii.  All drainageways, lakes, streams, creeks, swales, ditches, channels, wetlands, and drainage facilities. 
iii.  All existing utilities and appurtenances which affect or could be affected by grading and drainage improvements. The utility type, size and location in relation to grading and drainage improvements should be indicated. 
iv.  Existing and proposed property and easement lines and land lot and land district lines intersecting or bounding grading and drainage improvements. 
v.  Finished grades depicted by finished contours and/or spot elevations as necessary to define finished grade surfaces. 
vi.  New drainage improvements including, but not limited to, pipes, culverts, catch basins, area drains, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, berms, dikes and detention basins with outlet works. The drainage areas tributary to each drainage structure, design flow, and time of concentration shall be indicated. 
vii.  Profiles of storm drains showing existing and finished ground surfaces, pipes, drainage structures with top and flow line elevations, distances from centerline to centerline of drainage structures, pipe and ditch grades, crossing utilities, and limits of special construction. 
viii.  Pipe design chart including: 
a.  Drainage area. 
b.  Runoff coefficient. 
c.  Rainfall intensity. 
d.  Design flow. 
e.  Pipe size. 
f.  Pipe material. 
g.  Pipe slope. 
h.  Full flow capacity. 
i.  Flow velocity. 
ix.  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
x.  Name of the development, names, addresses and telephone numbers of developer and developer's design professional, design professional's seal, north arrow, scale and date. 
5.  Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the following: 
i.  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
ii.  Plan drawings shall be at a scale of at least one-inch equals 50 feet. In developed or congested areas, a scale of one-inch equals 20 feet or less shall be utilized. 
iii.  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for the associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least one-inch equals ten feet. A one-inch equals five feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict drainage conditions. 
iv.  The desired drawing size is 24 inches by 36 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
v.  Drainage construction may be shown on street or utilities improvements plans provided the resulting drawings are clear, legible and plainly show all necessary information. 
(8) - Schedule of fees. 
If applicable, the schedule of fees for development plan review, appeals, waivers, reinspections, and other items is on file with the city clerk and may be altered or amended from time-to-time by the city commission to help defray the costs of the administration of these regulations. 
Development plan review fees, if any, shall be paid at the time development plans are submitted for review. A development plan review fee shall be paid each and every time development plans or parts thereof are submitted or resubmitted. 
(9) - Administration and enforcement. 
This Code shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the city manager. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to maintain an accurate and up-to-date compilation of this Code, including appendices, and all amendments, and to publish said compilation and make it available to the public for a fee set by the city commission. 
In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of this Code, not in compliance with the provisions of a permit issued by the city, or without authorization of a permit which would otherwise be required, the city manager is hereby authorized to order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public health, safety and welfare. The stop work order shall be posted on the property and delivered or mailed to the developer. 
(10) - Variances. 
Requests for variances to requirements of this chapter shall be submitted in a form as prescribed by the city manager along with such fee as shall be established by the city commission. 
The city manager shall coordinate the review of each variance request by all other affected city departments and shall summarize such comments and/or recommendations as may be received in a report to the board of zoning appeals for final action in their normal course of business. 
In granting variances and modifications, the board of zoning appeals may require such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(11) - Appeals. 
a.  Appeals, hearings, and notice. It is the intention of this chapter that all questions arising in connection with the interpretation and enforcement of this Code shall first be presented to the city manager, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of zoning appeals only on appeal from the decision of the city manager, and that from the decision of the board of zoning appeals, recourse shall be to the courts as provided by the law. 
Appeals to these regulations may be taken to the board of zoning appeals by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of zoning appeals' notice of said appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city manager shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
An appeal stays all legal proceeding in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the officer, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notices to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(12) - Penalties for violations. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Code shall be upon conviction and shall be punished for each offense according to section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
Each day such violations continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
CHAPTER 10. - SIGNS 

(1) - General provisions. 
a.  Purpose. The purposes of these sign regulations are to encourage the efficient and effective use of signs as a means of communications in the city; to balance, maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment of the city and its ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic flow and safety; to minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. These concerns are reflected by the city actively participating in and regulating the size, location and number of signs and the overall appearance and design of signs. 
The following goals are incorporated into the regulations: 
1.  Communication. Signs should not deny other persons or groups the use of sight lines on or to public rights-of-way, should not obscure important public messages or warnings, and should not overwhelm readers with too many messages. 
2.  Preservation of the city's beauty. The city includes a historic district, as well as commercial centers and residential areas. The city relies heavily on the beautification efforts of its active population to obtain and maintain an economic advantage in the region. 
3.  Property value protection. Signs should not create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, brightness or movement. They should be in harmony with buildings, the neighborhood, and other conforming signs in the area. 
(2) - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, and change or erect a non-exempt sign or any structure that requires a permit, without first having obtained a permit. Signs or sign structures erected without a valid permit shall be in violation, and it shall be mandatory to obtain a permit, based on this chapter, or failing which the sign or sign structure then shall be removed by the owner or occupant, or by the city, as provided herein. All signs not expressly allowed by these regulations are prohibited. 
(3) - Nonconforming signs. 
Signs erected, under a valid permit, prior to February 28, 2011, which have since become nonconforming, shall be allowed to remain in accordance with the time limitation and structure requirements as specified in this Code. 
(4) - Permit procedures. 
a.  Permit applications. Permit applications shall be reviewed by the community development director within 30 days of submission of the permit application. Upon satisfactory compliance with the minimum submission requirements of the Code and a determination that the proposed sign meets all applicable standards as set forth in this Code, the community development director shall cause a sign permit to be issued to the applicant. The permit shall be valid for 180 days from its approval, during which period the sign may be erected. The community development director may extend the period by an additional 90 days upon payment of 100 percent of the original application fee, provided, there have not been standards enacted in the previous 180 day period, with which the permit would be in violation. Permits shall be required for all signs not listed within this Code as either exempt or prohibited. 
b.  Application form. Permits for all lawful signs shall be on a form developed and provided by the community development director. 
c.  Application information. The application form and corresponding submission materials shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The type of sign and/or sign structure as described in this Code. 
2.  The street address of the property on which the sign and/or sign structure is to be located along with identification of where on the specific property the sign will be located. 
3.  The area per sign face and the aggregate area of the sign and/or sign structure. 
4.  The name of the owner or other person in control or possession of the real property on which the sign and/or sign structure is to be located. 
5.  Written consent of the owner, or his designated agent, granting permission for the construction, operation, maintenance, or display of the sign and/or sign structure. 
6.  Two copies of a detailed drawing (CAD), blueprint, sketch, blue line print or similar presentation, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing elevations of the sign as proposed and its relationship to other existing and proposed signs or sign structures in the area. In the case of a freestanding sign, the drawing shall include a sketch site plan showing the location of the sign and the immediately surrounding landscape. 
7.  Signs in excess of ten feet in height need to be signed and sealed by a Georgia registered engineer. 
8.  State GDOT permit if sign location is adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
(5) - Aesthetic qualifications. 
a.  The overall effect of the lettering, configuration or color of a sign shall not be too bright, gaudy, showy, glaring, and/or cheaply brilliant or involving excessive ornamentation. These signs are not in harmony with and are not compatible with the building or adjacent surroundings. 
b.  The scale of the sign in terms of area shall be consistent with the scale of the building on which it is to be placed or painted and the neighborhood or streetscape where it is located. Scale shall also be considered in terms of site design standards as described in this Code with respect to height and area. 
c.  All signs shall be of a professional quality and have a professional appearance that enhances the visual aesthetics of the area. 
The following sections describe basic standards which apply to sign. 
(6) - Types of signs permitted. 
a.  Freestanding/ground sign: A ground sign shall not be affixed to any structure and is limited to no more than two faces. 
1.  All freestanding signs shall be wood or composite material supported by one or two wood or composite posts, with the top edge of the sign no more than 20 feet above the finished grade and shall contain post caps or covers. 
2.  All monument signs shall be no higher than they are wide, composed of textured brick, concrete block, or other masonry, and finished with stucco or other textured material. The top edge of the sign shall be no higher than ten feet above the finished grade, or as specified otherwise in this Code. 
3.  All freestanding/ground signs shall have a landscaped area around the base which extends a minimum distance of three feet in all directions. Such landscape area shall be completely covered by natural drought tolerant ground cover and shrubs, hedges or similar vegetative materials. 
b.  Projecting sign: A projecting sign is affixed to a structure and extends at a right angle from the structure and is limited to no more than two faces. 
1.  A projecting sign must clear sidewalks by at least nine feet, clear vehicular driveways by at least 14 feet, and be no closer than two feet from the curb. 
2.  Signs must not project more than six feet from the wall face of a building. 
3.  The permitted size of a fixed projecting sign shall not exceed one-half square foot per linear foot (50 percent) of the front wall of the building, measured in a straight parallel line to the building street. 
4.  All businesses in the historic downtown are encouraged to have a projecting sign. Projecting signs are not permitted on Peterson Avenue, Madison Avenue, Ashley Street, and Ward Street without a GDOT permit. 
c.  Under canopy sign: A sign hanging from a canopy or ceiling of an arcade covered walkway. It may be rigid or may swing. The swinging sign must be removed during a storm event. Such sign is limited to not more than two faces and shall not extend beyond the face of the canopy to which it is attached. 
d.  Wall sign: A wall sign may be flush mounted or hand painted. Such a sign may be applied to a canopy/awning, mansard or building face. A wall sign may not extend more than 18 inches from the wall or façade of the building to which it is attached and shall not extend more than 24 inches above the roof or parapet of a building. 
e.  Off-premise sign and billboard: 
1.  Off-premise signs and billboards shall not be erected except on property located adjacent to state or federal highways and which are zoned industrial or commercial general or commercial gateway. 
2.  Off-premise signs and billboards shall not exceed a size of 100 square feet per sign face and shall be limited to not more than two faces and shall be one continuous sign face on each side. 
3.  Off-premise signs and billboards shall not be located closer than 300 feet to any residentially zoned land or an approved residential planned development, nor less than 1,000 feet from each other (on the same or opposite sides of a road), with such measurement to be made from the point of location of the sign structure to the nearest point of residentially zoned land or to the nearest point of location of the next sign structure, as applicable. 
4.  Off-premise signs designed to serve properties without direct frontage on a public road, exclusive of easements for ingress and egress, shall be subject to the zoning regulations of the applicable district in which the sign is located. 
5.  Prior to the issuance of a permit for such an off-premise sign, the applicant shall furnish a certified copy of the recorded ingress/egress easement upon which the site shall be placed. 
6.  No off-premise sign or billboard face shall exceed 20 feet in width or six feet in height, with the overall height of the sign and structure not to exceed 20 feet. 
7.  Shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any street right-of-way or property line. 
(7) - Sign area and height. 
a.  The sign area shall be expressed in square feet or square inches that are allowed in accordance with this Code for each sign face. The sign face includes any background material, panel, trim, color and direct or self-illumination used that differentiates the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface, or object upon which or against which, it is placed. When there is no such differentiation, the sign face shall be a rectangle just large enough to enclose all lettering, illustrations, ornamentation, symbols, or logos. A sign structure shall not be computed in sign area provided that no message, symbol, or any of the aforementioned is displayed on, or designed a part of, the sign structure. 
b.  The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign to the finished grade at the base of the sign, where the finished grade is defined as the grade adjacent to the sign, not including any artificial berm or swale. 
(8) - Setback requirements. 
The setback for a ground sign shall be a minimum of ten feet from the property line. The setback is measured from the closest portion of the sign, sign structure or sign footer to the property line. No sign, sign structure on sign footer shall extend into the right-of-way. Relief from the ten foot setback requirements up to five feet may be obtained by administrative variance, for good cause shown, which causes may include, but are not limited to sign encroachment into required parking, provision for additional landscape area and materials, a smaller sign, and less than permitted total signage. 
(9) - Location, safety, illumination and design requirements and restrictions. 
a.  Whenever a sign requires a permit and is allowed within a setback area or easement, the person erecting the sign shall be required to execute an agreement, which shall be countersigned by the property owner, providing that it is the obligation of the owner of the sign and/or the property owner to relocate the sign at such time that the city determines that additional right-of-way or setback is required, or if conflicts occur with it being located in an easement. 
b.  A sign shall not be located in such a manner as to obscure another sign or to be obscured by an existing sign, a structure, or existing vegetation, unless provisions are made for the removal of the obscuring sign, structure or vegetation. 
c.  No sign shall be located in such a manner that it is a hazard to automotive or pedestrian traffic nor shall any sign or lighting of a sign be so placed as to obstruct the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle where vision is necessary for safety. 
d.  The height of a sign within an intersection sight triangle shall be consistent with the recommendations of the "Geometric Design of Highways and Streets Manual". 
e.  Signs may be illuminated directly or indirectly unless specifically prohibited elsewhere in the Code. In residential zoning districts, all illumination shall be "cut off luminaries" or equivalent so that the light is not directed toward adjacent residentially zoned property. Illumination of monument or free-standing signs shall be external and directed from the ground via "plighting" or from behind individual letters via "backlighting". Illumination of signs shall exclude exposed neon tube lighting, or similar, and electronic changeable copy, unless permitted elsewhere in this Code. 
f.  A sign shall not involve or contain intermittent lighting, animation, motion or rotation of any part of a sign or sign structure or display; except for governmental traffic signals, traffic devices and traffic signs, as required by law. 
g.  A sign shall not produce noise or sounds. 
h.  A sign shall not produce or emit smoke, vapor, particles or odor. 
i.  Only two types of signs of either wall, monument and freestanding signs shall be permitted per street frontage per property. 
j.  Each separate building or location shall have the street number address located on a sign that is identifiable and readable (using normal 20/20 vision) from the adjacent roadway. 
(10) - Design standard matrix. 
Table 10-1 Design Standard Matrix 

 

 

 
(11) - Special purpose signs. 
a.  Gas station fuel pricing signs. 
1.  One fuel pricing sign shall be permitted per road frontage with a maximum of two signs per gas station. It shall be affixed to a permanent sign structure or to a building and shall not be located closer than ten feet to any property line. The price sign shall be included in the total areas of signage otherwise permitted. 
2.  Prohibited lighting for electronic fuel price signs shall include: lamps or bulbs in excess of 30 watts; exposed reflectorized lamps or bulbs; lamps or bulbs that are not covered by a lens, filter or sunscreen; and lamps or bulbs that scroll, flash, zoom, twinkle or sparkle. 
3.  No more than 12 square feet per sign face. 
4.  If part of a ground sign, the fuel price sign shall be included in the total area of the sign. 
5.  Signs placed on fuel pumps shall not exceed three square feet per sign face and a total of six square feet per sign. 
b.  Grand opening banner. One banner may be placed on the building of a newly opened location pursuant to the following: 
1.  Display is limited to four weeks. 
2.  The banner shall not exceed one square foot per linear frontage of occupancy, up to a total of 50 square feet. 
3.  The banner shall not be higher than 15 feet above finished grade, and must be placed on the building on the dominant street front. 
4.  Banners shall be made of color fast material, and shall be securely fastened so as not to become a safety hazard. 
c.  Drive-through window signs. Signs used at locations in conjunction with service at a drive-through window may be permitted as long as the size of the menu board does not exceed seven feet in height or 24 square feet in size. A maximum of two signs per drive-through window is allowed. 
d.  Special event non-roadway banner signs. Special banner signs for special events, in accordance with this section may be permitted by the community development director if it is determined that the sign meets the following criteria: 
1.  The sign provides notice to the general public of a public meeting or other public event; and 
2.  The sign shall be temporary, for a limited period of no more than 14 days prior to the advertised event and it must be removed no later than the second day after the event. 
3.  Each sign shall be limited to 20 square feet in area. 
4.  The sign will not conceal or obstruct adjacent land uses or signs. 
5.  The sign will not conflict with the principal permitted uses of the site or adjoining sites. 
6.  The sign will not interfere with, or obstruct the vision of, or distract, motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians. 
7.  The sign will be installed and maintained in a safe manner. 
8.  The approval or disapproval of such sign shall not be based on the content of the message contained in the sign. 
9.  The community development director shall render a decision within ten days after an application is made for this type of sign for a special event. Such a decision shall be deemed an administrative decision and any person adversely affected has the right to appeal the decision to the city manager in writing within ten days of the written rendering of the decision by the community development director. 
e.  Subdivision identification/entrance signs. Residential subdivision identification/entrance signs shall be located only at the entrance to the subdivision and subject to the following standards: 
1.  Such signs may either be one double faced sign or two signs where there are two walls at the entrance and where the signs are permanently affixed to the walls at each entrance of the subdivision. 
2.  Each sign area shall be no greater than 36 square feet in area. 
3.  Such subdivision entrance signs are permitted in all residential zoning districts. 
4.  Such subdivision entrance sign may be erected within rights-of-way or median strips adjacent to the subdivision if approved by the community development director. A subdivision entrance sign may also be located within the setbacks of private property within the subdivision or adjacent to the subdivision. 
5.  Any such sign erected within a right-of-way or setback shall be at least ten feet from a paved roadway and signs located within a median shall be at least five feet from any pavement. 
6.  Any such signs approved by the community development director for location within the right-of-way or median, if such right-of-way or median is not within the jurisdiction of the city, shall obtain written permission from the governmental entity controlling the right-of-way or median to erect the sign in the requested location. 
7.  Any signs proposed to be located on adjacent private property shall be approved and permitted by the owners of the adjacent property. Any such signs lying on private property shall be considered an additional permitted sign without regard to other applicable sections of this Code. 
f.  Construction signs. Temporary construction signs identifying where an approved active on-site development project is underway, provided that such signs meets the following criteria: 
1.  One temporary free-standing sign per road frontage, non-illuminated, with a sign area of not more than 32 square feet and not more than seven feet in height; or 
2.  One temporary wall sign per street frontage, which shall have a non-illuminated sign area of no more than 32 square feet. 
3.  All major development projects shall be allowed to install a construction fence with a temporary six-foot chain link fence with obscure fabric that may include graphics depicting the development project, or other visual barrier material around the site prior to the initiation of the construction phase. 
4.  Signs approved in planned developments (PD) projects are additionally subject to any conditions specified in the planned development agreement. 
5.  Construction signs may be installed at the time of submission of a building permit application. It must be removed upon expiration of the building permit or building permit application or when the project obtains certificate of occupancy. 
g.  Awning signs. 
1.  No portion of any sign projecting over a public sidewalk shall be less than nine feet above the grade of the sidewalk, with the exception of awning valances which shall not be less than eight feet above the sidewalk. 
2.  Signs consisting of one line of letters not exceeding nine inches in height may be painted, placed or installed upon the hanging border only of any awning erected and maintained in accordance with this Code. Any identification emblem, insignia initial or other similar feature not exceeding an area of eight square feet, may be painted, placed or installed elsewhere on any awning provided that any sign, insignia or other such similar item shall comply with all other provisions of this Code. 
h.  Window signs. 
1.  Plastic signs or signs painted on the glass may be placed upon windows when limited to 20 percent of the aggregate glass area, per tenant space or main use space. 
2.  Signs displayed from the inside of the glass, but which are visible from the outside shall be considered window signs. 
i.  Time and temperature signs. Signs giving time and temperature information shall be permitted when attached to or made part of an otherwise permitted sign. Such signs shall not be larger than 20 percent of the permitted area of the sign to which they are attached. Such signs shall be counted as part of the permitted area of the sign to which they are attached. 
j.  Manual changeable copy signs. Changeable copy information signs shall be permitted when attached to or made part of an otherwise permitted monument sign. Such signs shall be limited to two manual changeable copy message signs per parcel and shall be counted as part of the permitted sign area of the sign to which it is attached. The changeable copy element of the sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign area. 
k.  Changeable copy marquee event signs for theatres, auditoriums, convention centers, sports fields and arenas, and regional attraction facilities: 
1.  Content: The name, logo, address of the field or building and occupant to which the sign is accessory and other information pertinent to on-site events and performances. 
2.  Maximum total area of changeable copy event signage shall be pursuant to the zoning district regulations in Table 5.1 of chapter 5. 
3.  Each individual location or business shall not have more than two manual or electronic message sign faces. 
4.  Maximum height of changeable copy event signage shall be pursuant to the zoning district regulations in Table 5.1 of chapter 5. 
5.  Monument event signs shall not be closer than ten feet to any property line. 
6.  Prohibited lighting includes lamps or bulbs in excess of 30 watts; exposed reflectorized lamps or bulbs; lamps or bulbs not covered by a lens, filter, louver or sun screen; modes of operation that scroll, flash, zoom, twinkle, or sparkle. 
l.  Landmark or historic signs. Approval of the restoration, rehabilitation, or reconstruction of landmark or historic signs shall be based upon documentation of at least 25 year's prior existence and shall have existed as a character-defining feature of a landmark or historic building and/or historic event. Any landmark sign is subject to the final approval by the community development director. 
1.  Landmark signs shall be classified as legal signs and shall be permitted to be maintained and repaired. 
2.  Landmark signs shall maintain not greater than the historic square footage dimensions. 
3.  Landmark signs placement shall leave street corners free of obstructions to allow for safe movement of traffic and placement of utilities. 
4.  Landmark signs shall be exempt from dimensional, height and area requirements of this section. 
m.  Mural signs. Mural signs shall be painted only on the side or rear walls of a building, and shall be of such a design as to compliment the architectural style of the subject building and shall be in keeping with the general character of the zoning district. There shall be a maximum of only one mural sign per building. 
n.  Commercial and noncommercial messages. Notwithstanding anything contained in these sign regulations to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this Code may, at the option of the applicant, contain either a noncommercial message unrelated to the business located on the premises where the sign is erected, or a commercial message related to the business located on the business premises. Either the commercial or noncommercial message may occupy the entire sign face or a portion thereof. For the purposes of these regulations, noncommercial messages, by their very nature, shall never be deemed "off-premise" signs. 
(12) - Exempt signs (not requiring a permit). 
a.  Sidewalk signs. Use of sidewalk signs, not exceeding two square feet per face, for uses in the historic district and the downtown development district, shall be allowed, on the sidewalk portion of the public right-of-way, subject to meeting the following criteria: 
1.  Valet parking signs. The location of such a sign must be approved by the community development director and the police chief. The sign must be removed during hours when the approved valet parking queue is not in use. Plain, unmarked traffic control cones may be used for queuing purposes, but must be removed when the valet parking queue is not in use. 
2.  Ground floor uses only may have one sidewalk sign immediately adjacent to the building they occupy in areas where the sidewalk is not less than four feet in width, after the sign is placed, and subject to review and approval by the community development director. All such signs must be removed when the use is not open. 
3.  In the event that a sidewalk sign does not strictly conform to any of the above requirements, it may be removed from the public right-of-way by the city, and held by the city until the owner of the sign shall pay a fine to the city as follows: first offense = $25.00, second offense = $50.00, third and any additional offenses $100.00 each. 
b.  Automated teller machine (ATM) panels. 
c.  Directional signs, with a maximum height of five feet and six square feet sign area. 
d.  Flags. Flags may be displayed on any real property in the city in accordance with the following rules: 
1.  One United States national and two additional flags may be flown on any individual parcel of property. The United States national flag may be any United States national flag officially approved by Congress. The additional flag or flags shall not be greater in area or in vertical or horizontal dimension than the United States flag. 
2.  A flag pole shall not exceed 50 feet in height. Not more than two flags may be flown on such a single pole. Three flags may be flown from a single pole with a yard arm designed for such purpose. The maximum area of each flag shall be determined by the height of the flag pole. 
e.  Hours of operation signs with a maximum area of one square foot. 
f.  Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, danger signs, such as "no trespassing", "danger", and such temporary emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the chief of police. 
g.  Residential and professional name plates, one per building with a maximum area of two square feet. 
h.  Real estate signs, one sign per parcel, establishment, dwelling unit, shall not be illuminated and removed within ten days after the transaction is completed. 
i.  Temporary signs denoting the architect, engineer, contractor, lending agency or subcontractor on the premises of work under construction, no more than 16 square feet in area. 
j.  Tenant panels. 
k.  Temporary political signs shall be removed within ten days after the date of the election. 
l.  Bulletin boards and directories for public, nonprofit or religious facilities, located on the premises of the facility and not exceeding 12 square feet in area, attached to the building. 
m.  Memorial signs or tablets. 
n.  Signs not visible from the street, such as inside a building or backyard. 
o.  Signs erected by the city on public right-of-way. 
p.  Seasonal displays or decorations not advertising a product, service or establishment. 
q.  Garage sale signs. 
r.  Non-illuminated religious emblems. 
(13) - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs, or sign features, are prohibited within the City of Douglas. However, certain exceptions as noted here are allowed. It shall be unlawful for any persons to erect prohibited signs or use prohibited sign features. Further, any sign not expressly permitted or provided for in this Code, is also prohibited. 
a.  Banners and wind signs other than special event banners. 
b.  Off-premises signs other than billboards and double or triple stacked billboards. 
c.  Roof signs. A sign erected on the roof, or above the roof, or on the parapet. 
d.  Snipe signs. 
e.  Signs causing traffic confusion. This would be a sign or other advertising matter erected at any intersection or street right-of-way in a manner obstructing free and clear vision; or at any location where, by any reason of position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, a traffic signal, or traffic device, or which makes use of the words "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse vehicular traffic. 
f.  Vehicular signs (portable or trailer signs). Signs placed on vehicles or trailers that are parked in the street, public right-of-way or private property for the primary purpose of displaying the sign for advertising a commercial enterprise. 
g.  Private signs in public right-of-way. 
h.  Signs attached to trees, shrubs, or plants. 
(14) - Removal and disposition of signs. 
It shall be unlawful to erect, use or maintain a sign or sign structure when it does not comply with the requirements of this Code. The city is authorized to remove unlawful signs and sign structures pursuant to the provisions of this Code. Unauthorized signs are subject to removal pursuant to the following provisions: 
a.  Temporary signs. The city finds that, in view of the inexpensive nature of these signs and the administrative burden which would be imposed by elaborate procedural prerequisites prior to removal, any procedure other than summary removal of these signs when unlawfully erected and maintained would defeat the purpose of regulating such signs. The community development director, or designee, or any code enforcement officer, is hereby authorized to remove such signs when unlawfully erected and maintained, subject to the provisions contained herein. After removal of a sign pursuant to this section, and in addition to any notice of violation, citation or summons issued, a notice will be sent, either by hand delivery or by first-class mail to the occupant of the property from which the sign was removed, or if the sign identifies a party other than the occupant of the property, the party so identified. The notice shall advise that the sign has been removed and shall state that the sign may be retrieved within 30 days of the date of the notice upon payment of the fee established therefore, and that, if the sign is not retrieved within 30 days, it will be disposed by the city. 
b.  Permanent signs. Signs and sign structures not subject to removal pursuant to the provisions above, which are or have been erected or maintained unlawfully, are subject to all remedies available at law or equity to it to remove signs or sign structures which are or have been unlawfully erected or maintained. 
c.  Unsafe signs. Notwithstanding the provisions above, any sign which is declared to be a unsafe sign by the community development director, shall be removed or made to conform to the current building code immediately, upon notice, by the community development director. 
d.  Responsibility of maintenance; abandoned signs. 
1.  All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be cleaned and painted, if paint is required. Defective or damaged parts shall be replaced. 
2.  If any sign regulated in this section is found to be abandoned or the business advertised has moved from the property where the sign is located, the owner, agent or responsible person shall be responsible to remove the sign, cover the sign with a plain fabric cover or place a blank copy panel in the sign frame within 30 days of the abandonment or relocation of the business. 
3.  Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, agent, or responsible person to remove or repair any sign in violation of the provisions of this Code, within 30 days after written notification by the community development director, the city is hereby authorized and empowered to effect the removal of the sign which is in violation. 
e.  Responsibility for cost of repair or removal; lien right. When the city has affected the repair or removal of a sign or has paid for the repair or removal of the sign, the actual cost of the action, plus an administrative charge, shall be charged to the owner of the property. The charge shall be due and payable to the city within 30 days following written notice, given to the property owner, of the amount due. If the amount is not paid by the property owner, then such amount due to the city shall become a lien upon the property of the owner, and the city manager may cause the filing of such lien with the clerk of the court. 
(15) - Amortization of nonconforming signs. 
a.  All lawfully existing signs or sign structures on February 28, 2011, which are not otherwise permitted herein (nonconforming), shall be allowed to remain operational including change of copy, and may be repaired, but not replaced, for five years following their installation date, which in no event shall be later than February 28, 2016, at which time the sign or sign structure be removed, replaced or modified to comply with then-current sign requirements. 
b.  Any nonconforming off-premise or billboard sign constructed prior to February 28, 2011 shall be brought into compliance with the provisions of this section by February 28, 2012. The existence of an off-premise sign or billboard that does not comply with the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
c.  The community development director shall be responsible for notifying the owner of each existing nonconforming sign of this provision and the expected removal date. 
(16) - Procedure for permit denial. 
Permit applications may be denied for the following reasons: 
a.  The application for the permit is not complete or executed. 
b.  The application is not accompanied by the required application fee. 
c.  The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with the applicable licensing requirements, codes or ordinances of the city. 
(17) - Permit denials, appeals and notice. 
If a permit is denied, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant within five days of the decision. The applicant may appeal the decision to the city commission by giving written notice thereof, specifying grounds for the appeal within 30 days of the decision, to the city clerk, who shall, upon receipt of the notice of appeal, cause the same to be place upon the commission agenda for public hearing. 
CHAPTER 11. - HARDSHIP RELIEF 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this Code, where hardship would otherwise occur. Two forms of hardship are addressed: (1) addresses hardship that would be caused if nonconforming development were required to immediately come into compliance with this Code and (2) addresses the hardship that may be caused in particular cases by the imposition of the Code's development design standards. 

(1) - Existing nonconforming development. 
Existing land uses or structures which are inconsistent with the character, natural resources, and adopted future development map of the city shall be eliminated upon redevelopment. Historic and archaeological resources as identified in the Historic Preservation Ordinance are deemed to be consistent with the character of the city, its natural resources and the future development map and are therefore considered to be conforming development. 
Exceptions may be made if all three of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The existing use or structure is destroyed by accident or act of God; and 
b.  Neighboring land owners within a 300 feet radius support the rebuilding to prior state; and 
c.  Such rebuilding does not pose a serious health or safety threat to the public. 
(2) - Continuation of existing nonconforming development. 
a.  Nonconforming lot of record. A legal nonconforming lot of record in any district may be used for development, provided all required setbacks can be met. 
b.  Nonconforming uses. 
1.  A lawful use of a building or land existing on February 28, 2011, may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this Code, and such use may be extended throughout the building. If such a use is discontinued for a continuous period of not less than six months (180 days), every future use of such building or land shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Code. 
2.  For the purpose of this chapter, a use shall be deemed discontinued if all activities related to such use have ceased for a continuous period of not less than six months (180 days). The determination that a used has ceased shall be made by the community development director, who shall consider, among other things, the consumption of utility services at the property, the existence and maintenance of any required business licenses, and advertising to the public of any activities on the property. 
3.  Such nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures shall not be enlarged, expanded, moved or otherwise altered in any manner except in conformance with this Code. 
c.  Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
1.  No nonconforming building shall be enlarged, expanded, moved or otherwise altered in any manner except in conformance with this Code. 
2.  A nonconforming building destroyed by more than 50 percent of its assessed value shall not be reconstructed except in accordance with the provisions of this Code. A nonconforming building destroyed by a declared natural disaster to less than 50 percent of its assessed value may be reconstructed as originally constructed. 
3.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the community development director. 
d.  Buildings and structures under construction. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Code shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building or structure for which a development or building permit was lawfully applied and issued, or a preliminary or final subdivision plat or site plan was approved, prior to the effective date of this Code, or amendment hereto, unless: 
1.  Such permit or approval has not on its own terms expired prior to this effective date. 
2.  Actual building construction commenced prior to the expiration of such permit or approval. 
3.  Actual building construction is carried on pursuant to such permit or approval. 
e.  Prior variances. Variances lawfully authorized and granted prior to the effective date of this Code shall continue to be utilized provided the terms and conditions of that authorization are followed. 
f.  Reversions and changes. 
1.  Any nonconforming use, structure, building or nonconforming lot of record that is changed to a conforming state shall not be permitted to revert back to a nonconforming situation. 
2.  Any nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(3) - Variances. 
a.  Authority. The board of appeals may grant a variance from the strict applications of the dimensional requirements of chapter 5, table 5.1 of this Code, as well as dimensional requirements as described in chapter 7, supplemental standards, of this Code. Use variances are not eligible under this Code. 
b.  Applicability. Any person desiring to undertake a development activity not in conformance with this Code may apply for a variance in conjunction with the application for development review. Such variance must be approved by the board of appeals prior to any further development approvals. In granting the variance, the board of appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards. 
c.  Standards for granting variances. The board of appeals shall have the power to authorize upon application in specific cases such variances from the provisions as described in 10.3 (1), where, in each case, the board made specific findings of fact based directly upon the particular evidence presented supporting the written findings that: 
1.  The variance requested arises from a condition that is unique and peculiar to the land, structures and buildings involved; that the particular physical surroundings, the shape, or topographical condition of the specific property involved would result in unnecessary hardship for the owner, lessee or occupant, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the provisions of this Code are literally enforced; that it is a condition not ordinarily found in the same zoning district, and the condition is created by the regulations of this Code, and not by an action or actions of the property owner or the applicant; and 
2.  The granting of the variance will not impair or injure other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the subject property is located, nor impair an adequate supply of light or air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, create a hazard to air navigation, endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; and 
3.  The granted variance is the minimum variance necessary that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, buildings or structures; and 
4.  The variance is not opposed to the general spirit and intent of this Code or the Comprehensive Plan. 
(4) - Review by the board of appeals. 
a.  Responsibility. The board of appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals of allege error in a decision of the community development director made in the enforcement of the provisions of this Code. 
b.  Hearings, appeals, notice. 
Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by a person aggrieved or by an officer or department of the city affected by a written decision of the community development director in the interpretation of the city regulations covered in this Code. 
Any such appeal shall be taken not more than 30 days from the date of mailing or hand delivery of the written decision by the community development director by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director and the secretary to the board of appeals. Every written notice of appeal shall refer specifically to the provision of the city's regulation and the interpretation claimed by the appellant which contradicts that of the community development director. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the community development director shall transmit to the secretary of the board of appeals any and all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is filed. A public hearing shall be set within 30 days of the date of receipt of notice. 
(5) - Appeals from the board of appeals. 
a.  General. Any person who appeared before the board of appeals who is aggrieved by any decision of the board, may present to the court of competent jurisdiction a petition of issuance of a writ of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that such a decision is illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition may also be filed by the city commission upon a finding that the decision of the board is illegal. A petition for a writ of certiorari shall be filed in the manner and within the time provided by the Georgia Appellate Rules. 
b.  Petition for rehearing by the city commission. 
1.  Any person who appeared before the board of appeals and who is aggrieved by the issuance of a variance by the board of appeals may, prior to filing a petition of writ of certiorari in the court of competent jurisdiction, present a petition to the city commission for a rehearing of the case. The petition of rehearing shall be filed with the city clerk within 30 days of the decision of the board of appeals. The petition shall be accompanied by the filing fee as required by law. The filing of the petition shall stay all proceedings in relation to the variance including the issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy by the city and construction of improvements to the subject property by the owner. 
2.  The city commission shall rehear the matter at a quasi-judicial hearing within 30 days of the filing of the petition. Notice of the time, place and subject matter of the rehearing shall be provided by the community development director by regular mail to all persons to whom notice of the hearing before the board of appeals was sent. The notices shall be mailed not less than 15 days prior to the hearing scheduled before the city commission. 
3.  The rehearing shall be conducted in accordance with the quasi-judicial procedures set forth in chapter 12 of this Code. The applicant for the variance shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that competent substantial evidence exists to support each of the required findings set forth in chapter 10.3 of this Code. Based upon evidence presented at the hearing, the city commission shall decide, whether or not competent substantial evidence exists to grant the variance. 
4.  Any person who appeared before the city commission who is aggrieved by the decision of the city commission may present to the court of competent jurisdiction a petition for issuance of a writ of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. A petition of a writ of certiorari shall be filed in the manner and within the time provided by the Georgia Appellate Rules. 
(6) - Notice of variance hearings. 
A variance hearing scheduled before the board of appeals shall be preceded by a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the City of Douglas at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. A sign containing this information must also be placed in a conspicuous location of the property not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(7) - Administrative variance. 
The community development director is hereby granted the power and authority to vary the Land Development Code for the city, only as provided in this section. Generally, this procedure is to provide for an efficient and effective review and approval process for certain minor aspects of development in the city. Pursuant to the following, the community development director may review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny: 
a.  Yard setbacks. Any yard setback variance request which does not exceed 110 percent of the code requirement (for example: where a rear yard setback is 15 feet and the variance request does not exceed 1.5 feet of relief for a reduction to a 13.5 foot setback). 
b.  Fences, walls and hedges. Any variance request for a fence, wall or hedge height or location, or other buffer screening matter. 
c.  Other minor code variances and minor site plan amendments. Any other minor technical or land use code variance or any minor site plan revision or amendment for items including, but not limited to, signage, landscape, lighting, parking, driveways; and a change of use from one permitted use to another permitted use. 
A minor code variance or site plan revision is one in which the requested change: 
1.  Does not increase or enlarge the density, intensity of use, foot print, or any dimension of the overall plan by more than five percent; and 
2.  Does not increase or enlarge the exterior foot print of commercial, industrial or multifamily residential buildings (five or more units) by more than 1,000 square feet of building; or more than 1,000 square feet of additional impervious area is requested; or 
3.  Does not increase or enlarge the foot print of single-family or small multifamily (four or fewer dwelling units) buildings by more than 360 square foot of building, or nor more than 360 square foot of additional impervious area is requested; and 
4.  Where the scope and intent of any variance approved by the board of appeals, or scope and intent of any site plan previously approved by the city commission is not violated. 
d.  City commission intent. By adopting this section, the city commission intends that the community development director shall use the provisions of this chapter of this Code as a guide. Because the nature of the variances permitted are minor, the strict adherence to the hardship requirements shall not pertain to a variance granted by the community development director. The community development director shall be free to use reasonableness, as well as an awareness of community needs and aesthetics as a basis for all decisions. 
CHAPTER 12. - ADMINISTRATION, PROCEDURE AND ENFORCEMENT 

(1) - Purpose. 
This chapter sets forth the application and review procedures for obtaining development permits, and certain types of permits. This chapter also specifies the procedures for the enforcement of code provisions. 
(2) - Withdrawal of applications. 
An application for development review may be withdrawn at any time. There shall be no refund of any applicable fees unless such refund is approved by the city manager. 
(3) - Planning commission. 
a.  Membership/residency. The City of Douglas-Coffee County Planning Commission shall consist of seven regular members. Four of the members shall be residents or business owners of the city, appointed by the city commission and three of the members shall be residents of the County, appointed by the Coffee County Board of County Commission. The terms of the members shall be for four years. Any vacancy in city-appointed membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city commission which shall also have the authority to remove any city-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
All members shall have been continuous residents, property owners or business owners within the city for not less than six months prior to appointment. 
b.  Authority, officers, and meetings. 
1.  The planning commission shall be an advisory board to the city commission and to the city administration in performing the duties and responsibilities as described in section c. below. 
2.  The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chair from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the planning commission and other meetings and public hearings called by the commission. The chairperson shall call special meetings when required, transmit reports, plans and recommendations to the appropriate governing authority, and in general act as spokesperson for the planning commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall act as chair. 
3.  Community development staff shall serve as secretary to the planning commission and assist the chairperson in the preparation of the agenda for the meetings, send out notices for regular and special called meetings, prepare and distribute minutes of the meetings and maintain files for the commission. 
4.  The regular meeting shall be held on the third Thursday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at a place designated by the planning commission. 
5.  A quorum shall consist of four members. 
6.  The order of business at all meetings shall be as follows: 
i.  Call to order. 
ii.  Invocation. 
iii.  Roll call. 
iv.  Approve minutes of previous meetings. 
v.  Reports of committees and staff. 
vi.  Old business. 
vii.  New business. 
viii.  Adjournment. 
7.  All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public in compliance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act of 1988 and all records of the planning commission shall be public records. 
c.  Duties and responsibilities. The planning commission shall: 
1.  Make recommendations to the city commission regarding proposed amendments to the Joint Coffee County-City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Make recommendations to the city commission regarding proposed amendments to the text of the City of Douglas Unified Land Development Code; 
3.  Make recommendations to the city commission regarding proposed amendments to the character area maps of the Joint Coffee County-City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan; 
4.  Make recommendations to the city commission regarding proposed amendments to the City of Douglas Zoning Map in the form of zoning and rezoning; 
5.  Make recommendations to the city regarding proposed annexations into the city; 
6.  Consider and make recommendations regarding the proposed consistency of proposed developments with the various elements of the Joint Coffee County-City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan and the City of Douglas ULDC. Properly submitted requests to the planning commission which have not received an official action from the planning commission within 60 days of the planning commission meeting at which the application was heard, shall be considered forwarded to the city commission with a recommendation of approval. 
7.  Conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the preparation, establishment and maintenance of the comprehensive plan; 
8.  Make other recommendations to the city commission and city administrative staff upon the request of either regarding zoning in the city and the regulation thereof by the city. 
9.  Conduct such hearings as may be necessary to perform the foregoing duties and responsibilities. 
10.  Attend and complete the required planning commission training within one year from appointment. 
11.  Have no more than three unexcused absences within a year. The chair and community development staff shall be notified of the cause of absence. Failure to comply will result in a recommendation by the planning commission to the proper governing authority that the seat be vacated. 
12.  Changes may be made to the by-laws by the affirmative vote of a majority of four members. 
(4) - Zoning board of appeals. 
a.  Membership/residency. The zoning board of appeals shall consist of three regular members, and two alternate members, appointed by the mayor. The members shall serve for overlapping terms of three years. The chair shall be elected by the board from its membership. The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance for the conduct of its affairs. 
Members shall have been continuous residents, property owners or business owners within the city for not less than six months prior to appointment. 
b.  Appeals, hearings, and notice. It is the intention of this chapter that all questions arising in connection with the interpretation and enforcement of this Code shall first be presented to the city manager, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of zoning appeals only on appeal from the decision of the city manager, and that from the decision of the board of zoning appeals, recourse shall be to the courts as provided by the law. 
Appeals to these regulations may be taken to the board of zoning appeals by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of zoning appeals' notice of said appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city manager shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
An appeal stays all legal proceeding in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the officer, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notices to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
The zoning board of appeals shall be a quasi-judicial board of the city and shall accordingly perform the duties and responsibilities in section c. below. 
c.  Duties and responsibilities. The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city manager in the enforcement of this Code; 
2.  To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases a variance from the terms of this Code as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, vowing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Code will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this Code shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of zoning appeals that; 
3.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
4.  The application of this Code to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
5.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
6.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this Code, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by this Code. 
7.  To decide on other matters where a decision of the board of zoning appeals may be specifically required by the provisions of this Code. In exercising these powers, the board of zoning appeals may be reversed or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The board, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt may certify such fact to the Superior Court. 
d.  Certiorari from decisions. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning of appeals shall have the right of certiorari to the Superior Court within 30 days after the decision of the board is rendered. 
(5) - Design review committee. 
Areas of the City of Douglas designated as "Historic Overlay Districts", but not designated as "Local Historic Properties" or "Local Historic Districts" specifically by Local Historic Property or District Designation Ordinances under the jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission, fall under the jurisdiction of the Design Review Committee (DRC). The DRC shall review and approve or disapprove development as set forth in chapter 3. 
a.  Membership/residency. The DRC shall consist of three regular members who shall have been continuous residents, property owners, business owners or employed within the city limits for not less than six months. Desirable special qualifications of the members include an understanding of skills in architectural design, landscape architecture, urban planning, real estate, and urban development. Members of the DRC may be city and county staff or any other volunteer person with the desired qualifications. 
b.  Duties and responsibilities. Regular meetings of the DRC shall be held once a month and at such other times as the DRC may determine. Meetings may be suspended if there is no business. All meetings shall be open to the public. The DRC shall review and recommend to the community development director, planning commission and city commission approval, approval with conditions, or denial development as set forth in chapter 3. 
(6) - Historic Preservation Commission (HPC). 
Areas of the City of Douglas designated as "Local Historic Properties" or "Local Historic Districts" specifically by Local Historic Property or District Designation Ordinances are under the jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC). The HPC shall review and approve or disapprove Certificates of Appropriateness as set forth in chapter 4. 
a.  Membership/residency. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the commission. All members shall be residents of the City of Douglas and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
To the extent available, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions; one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal; and one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. 
Members shall serve three-year terms and may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year, two members for two years and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
b.  Authority. There is hereby created a council whose title is "Douglas Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "Commission"). 
c.  Duties/responsibilities. The preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Douglas. The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
1.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Douglas having the potential for designation as historic property; 
2.  Recommend to the city commission specific districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
3.  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance; 
4.  Recommend to the city commission that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
5.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Douglas; 
6.  Promote the acquisition by the City of Douglas of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Façade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976" (O.C.G.A. § 44-10.1—5, as amended); 
7.  Conduct educational programs related to historic properties located within the City of Douglas and on general historic preservation activities; 
8.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, that the city commission or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
9.  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city commission concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
10.  Submit to the Historic Preservation section of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
11.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Douglas Historic Preservation Program; 
12.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
13.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the City of Douglas without prior consent; 
14.  Review and make comments to the Historic Preservation section of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
15.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city commission enter into agreements to do the same. 
16.  The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, land design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to the ordinance. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
d.  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City of Douglas Code of Ordinances and Code of Ethics, the provisions of which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
e.  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall insure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
f.  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and land actions. 
g.  Enforcement. Violations of any provision of the Historic Preservation Ordinance(s) cited shall be punished in the same manner as provided for in the punishment of violations of validly-enacted ordinances of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
(7) - Development review required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
a.  Generally. No development activity may be undertaken unless the activity is authorized by a development permit. 
b.  Prerequisites to issuance of a development permit. Except as provided in section 16.c. below, a development permit may not be issued unless the proposed development activity is authorized pursuant to a development review. 
c.  Exceptions. A development permit may be issued for the following development activities in the absence of a development review: 
1.  Development activity necessary to implement a valid site plan/planned development plan on which the start of construction took place prior to the adoption of this Code and has continued in good faith. Compliance with the development standards in this Code is not required if in conflict with the previously approved plan. 
2.  The construction or alteration of a one or two family dwelling on a lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this Code. Compliance with the development standards in this Code is not required if in conflict with the previously approved plat. 
3.  The alteration of an existing building or structure so long as no change is made to its gross floor area, its use, or the amount of impervious surface on the site. 
4.  The resurfacing of a vehicle use area that conforms to all requirements of this Code. 
d.  Post permit/development order changes. After a permit or final site development approval has been issued, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the permit without first obtaining a modification to the permit. A modification may be applied to in the same manner as the original permit. A written record shall be entered upon the original permit/approval and maintained in the files of the community development department. 
(8) - Procedures for review of development plans. 
a.  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing for a major development review, the developer shall meet with the community development director and city staff to discuss the development review process. No person may rely upon any comment concerning a proposed major development, or any expression of any nature about the proposal made by any participant at the pre-application conference as a presentation or implication that the proposal will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. No pre-application conference is required for minor development plans. 
b.  Designation of plans as minor or major development site plans. For purposes of these review procedures, all development plans, including planned developments, shall be designated by the community development director as either minor or major site plans according to the criteria below. 
1.  Exempt development. A single-family or duplex project of not more than four units for single-family residences, not more than five units for multifamily residences and up to 5,999 square feet of nonresidential development, and which is not part of a residential, mixed use, or nonresidential subdivision are specifically excluded from being designated either minor or major development. 
2.  Minor site development. A plan shall be designated as a minor site development if it is: 
i.  A single-family residential project of between five and ten lots; 
ii.  A duplex or multifamily residential project of between six and 24 units; 
iii.  A nonresidential development of between 6,000 and 14,999 square feet; 
iv.  A lodging project (hotel/motel/inn) of five units or less. 
3.  Major site development. A plan shall be designated as a major site development if it is not an exempt development or a minor site development. 
(9) - Review of exempt development. 
a.  General procedures. 
1.  The applicant shall submit a residential development plan or building permit application and applicable supporting documentation pursuant to section ____________ to the community development department. 
2.  After receipt of the above, the department shall have five working days to: 
i.  Determine if the application is complete and proceed with the review; or 
ii.  Determine that the application is incomplete and notify the applicant of the deficiencies. 
3.  The community development department shall review the residential development plan/building permit within 14 days and shall determine whether the application complies with the requirements of this Code and the current edition of any applicable Georgia State minimum standard codes as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act. 
4.  Within five days of completion of review, the community development director shall either: 
i)  Issue a development/building permit, with conditions as may be necessary; or 
ii)  Deny the application for failure to meet requirements of this Code. 
5.  Expiration of development permit for exempt development. A development permit/building permit for a residential development shall be valid for a period of six months. 
(10) - Review of minor site development plans. 
a.  General procedures. 
1.  The applicant shall submit a minor site development plan and applicable supporting documentation pursuant to this chapter to the community development department along with the applicable fee as established by the city commission. 
2.  After receipt of the above, the community development department shall have ten working days to: 
i.  Determine that the application is complete and proceed with the review; or 
ii.  Determine that the application is incomplete and inform the applicant of the deficiencies. The applicant must submit a revised application, correcting the deficiencies, within 45 days, to proceed with the review. 
3.  The community development department shall then review the minor development plan for compliance with this Code within ten working days. This preliminary development review shall consist of land use and zoning compliance. 
4.  Upon completion of this preliminary development review, a copy of the minor development plan and supporting documentation shall be submitted to each reviewing department including, but not limited to: Engineering, fire, building, utilities. Notice may also be sent to other agencies including the health department for intergovernmental review. Each departmental reviewer shall then submit written comments to the community development department within 15 working days of receipt. 
5.  The community development department shall then commence final development review of the minor site development. Comments from reviewing departments and agencies shall be used to formulate a recommendation to the city commission whether or not the application complies with the requirements and with the site design standards of this Code. The department shall have five working days to complete compliance review. 
6.  The community development department shall recommend that the development plan is either in compliance or not in compliance. If not in compliance, the community development director shall specify in writing to the applicant the reasons therefore and the manner whereby the development plan may be brought into compliance. 
7.  Within 30 days of the completion of the compliance review by the community development department, the applicant may submit an amended application to comply with the requirements and the site design standards of this Code. In this event the compliance review recommendation of the community development department shall be amended accordingly. 
8.  If the department determines that the minor site development plan conforms to the requirements of this Code, it shall place the plan on the next available consent agenda of the city commission, allowing for required notice. If it does not conform, the community development director shall explain the deficiency in the plan to the developer and inform him that a corrected plan may be submitted for approval. 
b.  Expiration of minor site development plan approval. A development permit for a minor site development plan shall be valid for a period of one year and shall not be renewed. 
(11) - Review of major site development plans. 
a.  General procedures. 
1.  The applicant shall submit a major site development plan and applicable supporting documentation to the community development department. 
2.  After receipt of the above, the department shall have ten working days to: 
i.  Determine that the application is complete and proceed with the review; or 
ii.  Determine that the application is incomplete and inform the applicant of the deficiencies. The applicant must submit a revised application, correcting the deficiencies, within 45 days, to proceed with the review. 
3.  The community development director shall review the major site development plan within ten working days for compliance with this Code. This preliminary development review shall consist of land use and zoning compliance. 
4.  Upon completion of this preliminary development review, a copy of the minor development plan and supporting documentation shall be submitted to each reviewing department including, but not limited to: Engineering, fire, building, utilities. Notice may also be sent to other agencies including the health department for intergovernmental review. Each departmental reviewer shall then submit written comments to the community development department within 15 working days of receipt. 
5.  The community development department shall then commence final development review of the major development. Comments from reviewing departments and agencies shall be used to formulate a recommendation to the city commission whether or not the application complies with the requirements and with the site design standards of this Code. The department shall have ten working days to complete compliance review. 
6.  The community development department shall recommend that the development plan is either incompliance or not in compliance. If not in compliance, the community development director shall specify in writing to the applicant the reasons therefore and the manner whereby the development plan may be brought into compliance. 
7.  Within 30 days of the completion of the compliance review by the community development department, the applicant may submit an amended application to comply with the requirements and the site design standards of this Code. In this event the compliance review recommendation of the community development department shall be amended accordingly. 
8.  Upon completion of the compliance review by the community development department, the community development director shall notify the planning commission and city commission of the compliance recommendation of the Department and shall set a time and place for a public hearing to consider whether the development plan complies with the requirement and with the site design standards of this Code. 
9.  Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in the following format: 
i.  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, the notice of the hearing shall be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the boundaries of the City of Douglas. 
ii.  The subject property shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property not less than 15 days prior to the date of hearing. 
iii.  The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
10.  At the hearing, the city commission shall hear from all interested parties, whether the major site development plan complies with the requirements and site design standards of this Code. The city commission shall consider the application, the written comments of each responding department, the recommendation of the community development department, the recommendation of the planning commission, and the comments presented to the city commission during the course of the public hearing. 
11.  During the public hearing, the city commission may decide that additional information is necessary to complete its review and may continue the public hearing for this purpose. A continuance shall be to a date and time certain, shall not exceed 60 days and shall be announced at the public hearing. Not more than one continuance shall be granted for this purpose. 
12.  At the conclusion of the public hearing or within 30 days thereafter, the city commission shall determine whether the application is in compliance with the requirements and with the site design standards of this Code. The city commission shall adopt a resolution setting forth its determination. 
13.  The determination of the city commission shall be to either find the application: 
i.  In compliance; 
ii.  In compliance subject to stated conditions or modifications; or 
iii.  Not in compliance. 
14.  In the event of a determination of compliance, the plan shall be deemed approved and other necessary development permits may be issued. 
15.  In the event of a determination of in compliance subject to stated conditions or modifications, the applicant may submit a revised major site development plan with supporting documentation within 45 days which complies with those conditions and modifications. 
16.  In the event of a determination of not in compliance, the application shall be rejected and the specific reasons for such determination with reference to the requirements or site design standards of this Code shall be stated in the resolution. The applicant may resubmit a revised major site development plan to the department within 45 days without fee or charge to recommence major site development plan review. 
b.  Expiration of major site development plan approval. A development approval for a major site development plan shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed by the city commission for one additional year. 
(12) - Project phasing. 
A conceptual master plan for the entire development site must be approved for all developments that are to be developed in phases. The master plan shall be submitted simultaneously with an application for review of the site development plan for the first phase of the development and shall, at a minimum, clearly show the land use, density and general access to the site. The conceptual master plan must be approved as a condition of approval of the development plan for the first phase. A detailed site development plan must be approved for each phase of the development under the procedures for development review as described above. 
(13) - Submittal standards for site development plans. 
a.  Application. Applications for site development plan review shall be available from the community development department. A completed application shall be signed by all owners, or their agent, of the property subject of the application. Signatures by other parties will be accepted only with notarized proof of authorization by the owners. 
b.  Submittal requirements based on site development plan designation. A tiered approach will be used to determine the information which must be submitted at the time of application. The greater the intensity of a project, based on its designation as exempt, minor or major, the greater the amount of information required. The following list describes the applicable submittal requirements for each specific category: 
1.  General plan requirements: Mandatory for all development plans. 
2.  Minor review requirements: Mandatory for minor and major site development plans. 
3.  Major review requirements: Mandatory only for major site development plans. 
4.  Optional review requirements: These may be required for the review of any development plan on a case by case basis at the discretion of the community development director or the city engineer when additional data is needed. 
c.  General plan requirements. 
1.  All plans shall be drawn to scale of one inch equals 100 feet, unless the director determines that a different scale is sufficient or necessary for proper review of the proposal. 
2.  The plans shall be 24 x 36 inches in size. 
3.  If multiple sheets are used, the sheet number and total number of sheets must be clearly marked on each. 
4.  The front cover of each plan shall include: 
i.  A general location map drawn to scale showing the location of the proposed development together with principal roads, city limits and/or other pertinent information. 
ii.  A complete legal description of the property. 
iii.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner(s) of the property. Where a corporation or company is the owner of the property, the name and address of the president and secretary of the entity shall be known. 
iv.  Name, business address and telephone number of those individuals responsible for the preparation of the drawing. 
v.  Each sheet shall contain a title block with the name of the development, stated and graphic scale, a north arrow and date. 
vi.  The area of the property shown in square feet and acres. 
vii.  The total number and type of residential units categorized according to number of bedrooms. The total number of residential units per acre (gross density), and also the total floor coverage calculations shall be given. 
5.  Unless a format is specifically called for below, the information required may be presented as text, graphically, on a map, plan, aerial photograph, or by other means which most clearly conveys the required information. It is the responsibility of the developer to submit the information in a form that allows ready determination of whether the requirements of this Code have been met. 
6.  Restrictions pertaining to the type and use of existing or proposed improvements, open spaces, building lines, buffer strips and walls, and other restrictions of similar nature, shall require the establishments of restrictive covenants and such covenants shall be submitted with the final development plan. 
7.  A digital site plan and digital boundary survey are required to be submitted with the site plan application. The required digital file format for the site plan and boundary survey shall be specified by the community development director. The digital version of the site plan and boundary survey must batch the hard copy of the version as submitted. Updated digital site plan files shall be submitted by the applicant as they occur during the development review process. The survey shall be prepared and sealed by a licensed Georgia professional surveyor. 
8.  For fire prevention review, a floor plan that includes all pertinent fire protection features must be submitted in hardcopy and digitally on a separate disc in the required format specified by the fire chief. The digital plans submitted must match the hard copy version. 
9.  Hand drawings or raster images, including scanned documents, are not permitted as a substitute for the digital site plan and boundary survey requirement. 
10.  Screening and buffering. Fences, walls and vegetative screening shall be provided where needed to protect the occupants of the site from undesirable views, lighting, noise, and other adverse effects of nearby property, and to protect the occupants of nearby property from like adverse effects produced by the development of the site. 
11.  Emergency access. Buildings, walls, landscaping and other site features shall be arranged and constructed to permit access by emergency vehicles to all buildings. 
12.  Location and design of entrances. Entrances to the site shall be located and designed to maximize public safety and convenience and to minimize negative traffic impacts on the property and surrounding areas. Access and lane improvements located both on and off-site shall be provided if necessary for public safety. Entrances shall also be coordinated with the existing and planned street pattern of off-site public and private roads. 
13.  Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall not produce glare on nearby property or otherwise interfere with the quiet enjoyment of nearby property or with public safety and convenience. 
14.  Other documentation as necessary to permit satisfactory review under the requirements of this Code and other applicable law as required by special circumstances in the determination of the community development director. 
d.  Minor site development plan review requirements. In addition to general development review requirements, additional requirements are: 
1.  Location, names and widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements, building lines, alleys, parks, green spaces and other public spaces. 
2.  Proposed development activities and design. 
i.  Area and percentage of total site area to be covered by impervious surface. 
ii.  Grading plans specifically including perimeter grading. 
iii.  Construction phase lines (if applicable), including total acreage in each phase and gross intensity (square feet) for nonresidential and gross density (units) for residential in each phase. 
3.  Buildings and other structures. 
i.  Building plan showing the location, dimensions, gross floor area and proposed use of buildings. 
ii.  Architectural elevations of all sides of all buildings. 
iii.  Building setback distances from property lines, abutting right-of-way centerlines, and adjacent buildings and structures. 
iv.  Minimum floor elevations of buildings. 
v.  Number, height and type of residential units. 
vi.  Floor area, height and types of office, commercial, industrial or other proposed uses. 
4.  Location of the nearest available public water supply and wastewater system and the proposed tie-in points, or an explanation of alternative systems to be used. 
5.  Exact locations of on-site and nearby existing and proposed fire hydrants. 
6.  Streets and parking. 
i.  The layout of all streets, sidewalks, bike paths, and driveways with paving and drainage plans and profiles showing existing and proposed elevations and grades of all public and private paved areas. 
ii.  A parking and loading plan showing the total number and dimensions of proposed parking spaces, spaces reserved for handicapped parking, loading areas, proposed ingress and egress and projected on-site traffic flow. 
iii.  The location of all exterior lighting. 
iv.  The location and specifications of any proposed garbage dumpsters. 
7.  Tree removal and protection. 
i.  A map of vegetative cover including the location and identity by common name of all protected trees. Groups of trees may be shown as clusters. 
ii.  All protected trees to be removed and a statement of why they are to be removed. 
iii.  Proposed changes in the natural grade and any other development activities directly affecting trees to be retained. 
iv.  A statement of the measures to be taken to protect the trees to be retained. 
v.  A statement of tree relocations and replacements proposed. 
8.  Landscaping. 
i.  Location and dimensions of proposed buffer strips and landscaped areas. 
ii.  Description of plant materials existing and to be planted in buffer strips and landscaped areas. 
9.  Signs. 
i.  A blue print or ink drawing showing the specifications of regulated signs, method of their construction and attachment to the building or ground. The plan shall show all pertinent structural details, wind pressure requirements, and display materials in accordance with the requirements of this Code, including building and electrical codes. The plan shall clearly illustrate the type of sign or sign structure as defined in the Code, the design of the sign, including dimensions, colors and materials; the total sign area, the dollar value of the sign; maximum and minimum heights of the sign; and sources of illumination. 
ii.  For ground signs and building signs, a plan, sketch, blueprint or similar presentation drawn to scale which clearly shows the location of the sign relative to property lines, rights-of-way, streets, alleys, sidewalks, vehicular access and parking areas and other existing ground signs on the parcel. 
iii.  For building signs, the number, size, type and location of existing signs on the same parcel, except a single business unit in a multiple occupancy complex shall not be required to delineate the signs of other business units. 
10.  Location of all land to be dedicated or reserved for all public and private uses including rights-of-way, easements, special reservations and the like. 
11.  Location of any on-site wells, and wells within 1,500 feet of any property line. 
e.  Major site development plan review requirements. In addition to general and minor site development plan review requirements, additional requirements are: 
1.  Every development shall be given a name by which it is legally known. 
2.  A master plan is required for a major development which is to be developed in phases. A master plan shall provide the following information for the entire development: 
i.  A development plan for the first phases or phases for which current approval is sought. 
ii.  A phasing schedule including the sequence of each phase, approximate size of the area in each phase; and proposed phasing of construction of public recreation and common open space areas and facilities. 
iii.  Total land area, and approximate location and amount of open space included in each residential, office, commercial and industrial area. 
iv.  Approximate location of proposed and existing streets, sidewalks, bike paths as well as points of ingress and egress. 
v.  A vicinity map of the area within 300 feet surrounding the site showing: 
v.1.  Land use designations and boundaries. 
v.2.  Traffic circulation systems. 
v.3.  Major public facilities. 
v.4.  Municipal boundary lines. 
3.  A topographic survey of the site clearly showing the location, identification and elevation of benchmarks, including the 100-year flood elevation and drainage or watershed boundaries. 
4.  An erosion and sedimentation control plan that describes the type and location of control measures, the stage of development at which they will be put into place or used, and maintenance provisions. 
5.  Stormwater drainage shall be accommodated on site or shall be removed from the site in a manner which does not adversely affect nearby property or the public storm drainage system. 
A description of the proposed stormwater management system, including: 
i.  Channel, direction, flow rate, and volume of stormwater that will be conveyed from the site, with a comparison to existing or natural conditions. 
ii.  Detention and retention areas, including plans for the discharge of contained waters, maintenance plans, and predictions of surface water quality changes. 
iii.  Area of the site to be used or reserved for percolation including an assessment of the impact on groundwater quality. 
iv.  Location of all water bodies to be included in the surface water management system (natural and artificial) with details of hydrography, side slopes, depths, and water-surface elevations or hydrographs. 
v.  Linkages with existing or planned stormwater management systems. 
vi.  On- and off-site right-of-ways and easements for the system including locations and a statement of the nature of the reservation of all areas to be reserved as part of the stormwater management system. 
vii.  The entity or agency responsible for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system. 
6.  The location of off-site water resource facilities such as works, surface water management systems, wells, or well fields that will be incorporated into or used by the proposed project, showing the names and addresses of the owners of the facilities. 
7.  Run-off calculations. 
(14) - Platting. 
a.  Generally. Where a proposed minor development includes the subdivision of land, the issuance of a development shall be made contingent upon approval by the community development director of a plat conforming to the site development plan. 
Where a proposed major development includes the subdivision of land, the issuance of a development shall be made contingent upon approval by the city commission of a plat conforming to the site development plan. 
b.  Filing. After receiving plat-contingent site development plan approval, the developer shall submit to the community development department a plat conforming to the plan. Alternatively, the developer may submit a plat at any point during the development review to be processed concurrently. Six copies of the preliminary plat and any required supplementary material shall be submitted to the community development department with a written request for preliminary approval. 
c.  Data for preliminary and final approval. Preliminary and final plats shall contain the following information: 
1.  Boundary lines, bearings and distances; a legal description of the tract proposed to be subdivided according to the records in the Clerk of Superior Court of Coffee County. 
2.  Easements—Location, width and purpose. 
3.  Streets on and adjacent to the tract name; right-of-way width; location type, width and elevation of surfacing; any legally established centerline elevations, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc. 
4.  Utilities on and adjacent to the tract—Location, size and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers: location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street lights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the street, indicate the direction and distance to and size of nearest ones, showing invert elevation of sewers. 
5.  One soil percolation test hole per acre where the subdivision is not to be served by a public sewerage and, if required by the community development department, other subsurface and soil conditions studies of the tract as specified by the Coffee County Health Department or the city engineer. 
6.  Other conditions on the tract-watercourses, marshes wooded areas, tree masses, major rock outcroppings, houses, barns, shacks and other significant features. 
7.  Other conditions on adjacent land—Character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name recordation data and number. 
8.  Proposed public improvements; highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract. 
9.  Topography of the area to be subdivided with a contour interval of five feet or less, based on sea level datum plane. 
10.  A vicinity map showing location of the tract with distances to intersections or to other obvious geographical locations. 
11.  Present tract designation according to official records, title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded with names and addresses of owners and any mortgagor or holder of an encumbrance on the property to be subdivided, name and address of subdivision designer, notation stating acreage, scale, north arrow, datum, benchmarks, certification of registered land surveyor, date of survey. 
d.  Preliminary plat. 
1.  The subdivision plat shall be at a minimum scale of 200 feet to one inch. It shall show all existing conditions required above in B-1, and shall show all proposals including the following: 
i.  Streets: Names, right-of-way and roadway widths; similar data for alleys, if any. 
ii.  Other rights-of-way or easements; location, width and purpose. 
iii.  Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits. 
iv.  Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers. 
v.  Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for playgrounds or other public use, together with their purpose and the limitations or conditions of such dedications, if any. 
vi.  Sites, if any, for multiple-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
vii.  Minimum building setback lines. 
viii.  Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size and areas in parks, etc. 
ix.  Title, numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, indicating both magnetic and true north, date. 
2.  Other preliminary plans. When required by the city engineer, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross sections of the proposed grading, roadway and sidewalk; and preliminary plan of the proposed sanitary and stormwater sewers with grades and sizes indicated. All elevations shall be based on sea level datum plane approved by the city engineer. 
3.  Draft of protective covenants, whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
4.  Spaces shall be provided for approval of all agencies listed herein, with wording the same or similar to the following: 
APPROVAL BY HEALTH DEPT. 
CITY ENGINEER 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR 
I hereby certify that this subdivision will meet all requirements of the Coffee County Health Dept. if installed in accordance with this plan and other written agreements. 
e.  Final plat. 
1.  The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or other acceptable material, on sheets 18 inches wide by 24 inches long and shall be drawn to a minimum scale of 200 feet to one inch. Where necessary, the plat may be drawn on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The final plat shall show the following: 
a.  Primary control points and benchmarks with necessary descriptions and locations of such control points, including all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data necessary for proper location. 
b.  Track boundary lines, rights-of-way lines of streets, easements and property lines of residential lots and other sites with sufficient data to determine readily and to reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line and building line, whether curved or straight. This shall include, but not be limited to, the radius; length of arc; internal angles; bearings of the tangents and tangent distances for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and all angles shall be given to the nearest minute. 
c.  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
d.  Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements. 
e.  Number or letter to identify each lot and block. 
f.  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots are dedicated or reserved. 
g.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
h.  Location and description of monuments and markers. 
i.  Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land. 
j.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record, name, date and number. 
k.  Title, numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow and date. 
l.  Location map showing site in relation to city. 
m.  Certification by surveyor or engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, certifying to accuracy of survey and plat. 
n.  Certification of title showing that applicant is land owner and that he dedicates streets, right-of- way and any sites for public uses, similar to the following: 
"The undersigned hereby acknowledge(s) this plat and allotment to be ____________ free act and deed and hereby dedicate(s) to public use as streets, alleys, easements, parks, and open spaces forever, all areas so shown or indicated on said plat." 
Signed ____________ 
2.  Restrictive covenants in form for recording. 
3.  A complete listing of the deviations from the approved preliminary plans by the subdivider. 
4.  Other data: Certificates of approval from the Coffee County Health Department and the city engineer. The city engineer's certificate shall also indicate that all required improvements and installations required by these regulations have been completed in accordance with these standards; or a performance bond or certified check has been provided by the developer to satisfy the requirements of this Code. 
5.  After all other approvals and certifications have been met, the city commission shall execute the following certificates, indicating final plat approval: 
"APPROVAL BY CITY COMMISSION 
We hereby approve this plat to be recorded by the Clerk of Superior Court of Coffee County 
Chairman, Douglas city commission". 
f.  Review by the community development department. The community development department shall, within 30 days of receiving the plat, determine whether the plat conforms to the approved site plan. The plat shall be forwarded to the city engineer, the Coffee County Health Department and the Coffee County Board of Education for comment during that time frame. If the department determines that the plat so conforms, it shall place the plat on the next available consent agenda of the city commission, allowing for required notice. If it does not conform, the community development director shall explain the deficiency in the plat to the developer and inform him that a corrected plat may be submitted for approval. 
The original shall be drawn on sheets of cloth to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet as a minimum and shall correspond to plat book dimensions. (Where possible, a scale of one inch equals 100 feet is still desirable.) When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with sheets lettered in alphabetical order as a key. A two-inch margin shall be provided on the left side of the drawings and a one-half-inch margin shall be left on the other three sides. 
g.  Review by the city commission. Review of the plat by the city commission shall be strictly limited to whether the plat conforms to the requirements of the Code. The community development department shall make a recommendation regarding the plat to the city commission. A conforming plat shall be approved and the community development department shall issue the development order allowing the development to proceed. The city commission shall return nonconforming plats to the developer with an explanation of the deficiencies and a notice that a corrected plat may be resubmitted for approval. 
h.  Relief from platting requirements due to hardship. 
1.  Where the city commission finds that because of topographic or other conditions peculiar to the site, literal enforcement of a provision of this ordinance may result, in an individual case, in unnecessary hardship to the developer, it may vary the regulations where, in the opinion of the city commission, such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. Any relief from the platting requirements shall be recorded in the minutes of the city commission meeting together with the reasoning used to justify it. 
i.  Conditions. In granting relief from and modifications to the platting requirements, the city commission may require such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
j.  Recordation. Plats approved by the city commission shall be submitted to the Clerk of Superior Court of Coffee County along with the appropriate filing fee within 45 days for recordation into the public records of Coffee County and the City of Douglas, Georgia. If the applicant fails to comply, the plat approval is rendered invalid. 
When the plat has been approved by the city commission, the original will be returned to the developer with the approval of the governing authorities certified thereon for filing with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coffee County, the original and one copy will be returned to the developer for his records, the reproducible will be forwarded to the city engineer, one copy will be forwarded to the Coffee County Health Department and one copy will be retained in the records of the community development department. 
In lieu of the completion of all improvements prior to submission of the final plat, the developer may post a bond, certified check, letter of credit, or other surety with the city, providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a period specified by the planning commission and stated in the surety. The surety shall be with a company entered and licensed to do business in Georgia and it shall contain a provision for the maintenance of installations and improvements required by these regulations in the subdivision for a period of one year following the date of final acceptance. Said surety shall be approved by the city attorney prior to its acceptance. Said surety shall be made payable to the city and be in an amount equal to no less than 110 percent of the improvement and installation cost. 
k.  Enforcement. 
1.  The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the City of Douglas who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat to subdivide such land before such plat has been approved by the city commission and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coffee County, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Douglas, Georgia; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city, through its attorney or other official designated by the city commission may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
2.  No plat or plan of subdivision within the City of Douglas shall be filed or recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coffee County until it has been approved by the city commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman of the city commission. The clerk of the superior court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision which does not have the written approval of the city commission thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without such approval shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
3.  Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Douglas, Georgia. 
4.  No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the City of Douglas unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of, a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and line with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the city commission or with a street located and accepted by the city. Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the Building Inspector, city attorney or other official designated by the city commission may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
(15) - Procedures for obtaining miscellaneous permits. 
Applications for a development permit shall be made to the community development department on a form provided by the department and may be acted upon by the community development director without public hearing or notice. 
(16) - Building permits. 
a.  Generally. The erection, alteration, or reconstruction of any building or structure shall not be commenced without obtaining a building permit from the community development director. Work activities shall not proceed without obtaining all the inspections required by the community development department and the applicable Building Codes. 
b.  Need for survey. No building permit shall be issued for development unless the application for a building permit is accompanied by a copy of a survey of the property on which the requested activity is to be permitted. The survey shall show the following: 
1.  The location of the proposed development activity. 
2.  The relationship of the proposed activity to all adjacent property lines, and as may be required, to all adjacent structures, improvements and natural features. 
3.  A minimum of two elevations along each roadway on which the proposed activity borders, the existing ground elevation at the approximate center of the proposed structure, the existing ground elevation along the side property lines adjacent to the proposed structure, and the proposed finished floor elevation of the proposed structure. 
4.  The location of all protected trees of 20 inches DBH or greater, with the specific diameter and type of tree clearly identified. 
All surveys shall have been prepared, signed and sealed by a Georgia registered land surveyors. 
Exempt from the survey requirement are detached single family residential lots or parcels of land with an area of one acre or less, applications for interior modifications or construction, roof permits, and any other permit required activity that does not result in the expansion of any portion of the existing structure. 
Accessory structures with a building value of less than $10,000.00 shall also not be required to submit a survey, but shall instead be required to submit a scaled drawing indicating the location of the accessory structure and its compliance with minimum setback standards. 
Copies of original surveys meeting the above requirements may be submitted with any application for building permit, provided that the survey still depicts the accurate location of all structures and improvements on the property. 
c.  Time limitations of building permits. Building permits shall expire and become null and void if work authorized by such building permit is not commenced, having called for and received a satisfactory inspection within six months from the date of issuance of the permit, or if the work is not completed within 18 months from the date of issuance of the building permit, except that the time may be extended by the community development director if any of the following occur: 
1.  A time schedule has been submitted and approved by the community development director, predicated upon customary time for construction of similar buildings, prior to the issuance of the building permit, indicating a completion of construction in excess of 18 months; or 
2.  The developer furnishes the community development director satisfactory written evidence that the delay is due to the unavailability of construction supplies or materials, and every effort has been made to obtain substitute materials equal to those called for in the specifications; or 
3.  The delay is due in to delay in delivery of construction supplies or materials; or 
4.  The delay is due to fire, weather conditions, civil commotion or strike. 
d.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section (16)c.1. above, an owner builder building permit shall expire within 24 months from the date of issuance of the building permit if the work has not been completed. The time may be extended by the community development director for a period not to exceed 18 months if any of the conditions outlined in section (16)c.2—4 above occur. 
e.  If construction, having called for and received a satisfactory inspection, has commenced within six months from the date of issuance of the permit, and is subsequently abandoned or suspended, not having called for and received a satisfactory inspection within the last six months, for reasons other than those enumerated in [subsections] (16)c.2—4 above, the permit shall expire and become null and void unless the applicant demonstrates food cause at a hearing before the board of appeals as to reasons for the suspension or abandonment of the project. If the board finds that good cause has been shown for the suspension or abandonment of the project, the applicant shall be allowed to continue the construction under the original permit. The decision of the board shall be final. 
f.  If the building permit becomes null and void or expires, the community development director shall inspect the development and determine whether the development is unsafe and/or constitutes a nuisance. If the community development director determines that the development is unsafe and constitutes a nuisance, the community development director shall submit a report of this inspection to the city commission for action by the city commission. 
g.  In order to continue construction once a building permit becomes null and void or expires, the applicant shall reapply and obtain a new building permit covering the proposed construction before proceeding with construction. The applicant shall comply with all regulations in existence at the time application is made for a new building permit. 
(17) - Sign permit. 
The erection, alteration, reconstruction, or conversion of any sign shall not be commenced without obtaining a sign permit from the community development director. 
(18) - Driveway permit. 
Any person seeking to construct or reconstruct any curb cut or driveway on any county maintained public road in the City of Douglas shall submit a permit application to the city engineer accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as established by the city commission. 
a.  Application. Any person seeking a driveway permit shall submit the original and one copy of an application to the city engineer. The application shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the owner of the property on which the driveway is proposed to be located. 
2.  Except for one- and two-family residences, a set of detailed plans for the proposed driveway or curb cut. 
3.  Except for one- and two-family residences, estimated cost of construction/alteration. 
4.  Approval from Georgia Department of Transportation, if applicable. 
5.  All other information deemed necessary by the city engineer for the reasonable review of the proposed driveway connection. 
b.  Procedure for review. 
1.  Within ten working days after the application has been submitted, the city engineer shall review the application and determine if it is complete. 
2.  If the city engineer determines that the application is not complete, he shall notify the applicant in writing specifying the deficiencies. The applicant may resubmit the application correcting the deficiencies within 30 days of the notification without paying an additional application fee. 
3.  Within 15 working days after the city engineer has determined that an application is complete, the city engineer shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application based on the standards in chapter 8 of this Code. Notification of the decision shall be made to the applicant and filed in the office of the city engineer. 
c.  Approval. Following approval of an application, the city engineer shall issue a driveway permit which shall take effect on the date issued. 
d.  Curb cuts, driveways and culverts constructed without driveway permit. 
1.  The city engineer shall notify the community development director of the existence of any curb cut, driveway or culvert on any city maintained public road, which was constructed after date of adoption, without the approval of the city engineer and which the city engineer has specifically found to be detrimental or injurious to surrounding property, substantially increases traffic and/or endangers the public safety. 
2.  Upon receipt of such notification, the community development director shall notify the owner of the curb cut, driveway or culvert by certified mail of the engineer's finding of fact and that the curb cut, driveway or culvert must be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Code within 30 days of receipt of the notice. The notice shall specifically identify the nature of the violation. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be required. If the violation is not corrected within 30 days, the community development director may initiate code enforcement action. 
(19) - Excavation and fill permit. 
a.  No person in control of a lot, parcel or tract of land within the city shall alter, excavate, fill or remove any of the land on its surface without first obtaining a permit to do so from the community development department. A separate excavation and fill permit is not required if the excavation and/or fill is to be done in the course of a construction project for which a building permit is required and the details of such excavation and/or fill are clearly shown in the building permit application. 
b.  Application for an excavation and/or fill permit shall be submitted to the community development director and shall contain the following: 
1.  The name and address of the person seeking the permit. 
2.  The legal description of the property. 
3.  A map showing the location and boundaries of the tract of land in question. 
4.  Where a survey or other topographical information is not available to the city, the applicant shall submit a statement of the topography, including the location of water courses or water bodies, of the property proposed to be excavated or filled. 
5.  The location and means of vehicular ingress and egress to the proposed excavation/fill. 
6.  The application shall include a statement for the proposed reclamation of any of the property at the conclusion of the excavation/fill operation. 
7.  The plans shall be accompanied by a statement indicating the nature, purpose and method of the proposed excavation/fill. 
c.  Permits to alter, excavate, fill or remove land on its surface within the limits of the city, or building permit which include such work, shall not be issued by the community development director without first obtaining the approval of the city engineer. The city engineer shall not give his approval unless and until the applicant for such a permit shall have submitted to the community development director plans and specifications covering the project and a description of the intended result. The city engineer shall deny the application or permit if, in his judgment, the work will create a drainage problem. 
d.  No excavation of soil within the city shall be permitted except in the following specific cases: 
1.  Installation of utilities. 
2.  Foundations of any building or structure or other on-site leveling or excavation where approved under a valid building permit. 
3.  Excavations relating to the accessory use of land and designed to be filled upon completion such as septic tanks, burial sites, etc. 
4.  Swimming pools where a building permit has been issued for the construction of the pool. 
5.  Excavation in conjunction with agricultural use of lands, where no excavation materials are sold, whether directly or indirectly, or transferred from one parcel of land to a noncontiguous parcel. 
6.  Subdivisions complying with this Code. 
7.  Excavation or leveling for private drives to provide ingress or egress. 
e.  Mining for minerals, stone or soil shall be unlawful within the city limits. 
(20) - Satellite antenna permit. 
All ground mounted satellite television antenna systems shall be deemed accessory uses and structures and shall require a permit before construction. An application for the permit shall be made to the community development department accompanied by a site plan sketch showing the dimensions and location of the proposed satellite television antenna system in relation to the boundaries, setback lines and existing structures on the property. 
(21) - Temporary events permit. 
a.  The following outdoor uses and activities shall be permitted only with a special permit obtained from the community development department: 
1.  Temporary commercial sales activities; 
2.  Exhibitions, displays, performances; 
3.  Fairs, carnivals, bazaars, contests, rodeos; 
4.  Grand opening events for new businesses; 
5.  Any other activity tending to create or cause abnormally large or excessive crowds or traffic and posing a detrimental effect on the public health, safety and welfare. 
b.  An applicant shall provide the community development department with the following written information no less than 14 working days prior to the proposed event or activity in support of its application for a permit: 
1.  Name and business address of the applicant; 
2.  Specific location of activities for which the permit is sought; 
3.  Nature and purpose of activities for which the permit is sought; 
4.  Specific location and physical dimensions of any structure, vehicle, tent or apparatus sought to be used in conjunction with permitted activities; 
5.  Specific days and hours of activities sought to be permitted. 
6.  Letters of objections and/or no objections as to the activities as described under [subsections] i. through v. [below] signed by all tenants and/or owners of businesses located on the property for which the permit is sought; 
7.  No permit shall be issued for the requested activity unless the applicant reasonably establishes that the following concerns have been addressed in a manner that is consistent with the interests of the public health, safety, and welfare: 
i.  Traffic control. 
ii.  Sanitation and litter control. 
iii.  Restroom facilities. 
iv.  Parking. 
v.  Crowd control. 
vi.  Liability insurance. 
vii.  Signage. 
viii.  Noise levels and noise control. 
c.  Permits for temporary events within the limits of the city shall not be issued by the community development director without first obtaining the approval of the fire chief. The fire chief shall not give his approval unless and until the applicant for such a permit shall have submitted to the community development director plans and specifications covering [subsections] b.7.1—8 above. The city engineer shall deny the application or permit if, in his judgment, the work will create a fire hazard or hazard to public safety. 
d.  Not more than four temporary events in any 12-month period shall be held at the same location. Each event shall not exceed ten consecutive days. 
e.  Each application seeking a temporary event permit shall be accompanied by a $25.00 permit processing fee. 
(22) - Temporary construction trailers and containers permit. 
a.  Temporary construction trailers. 
1.  A temporary or portable structure may be erected, or a trailer used, for business occupancy purposed during the construction of a permanent main building, street, utility or other structure. A permit for the erection or use of any such temporary business office shall be obtained from the community development director, provided, that no such temporary permit shall be issued unless and until sufficient bond, as established by the city commission, to insure removal of the temporary structure, has been posted and a building permit for the construction of the permanent structure has previously been obtained. Every temporary business office permit issued, shall become invalid and the temporary structure shall be removed, within two weeks after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy on the permanent structure or within one year, whichever is earlier. A one six month extension of time may be allowed, and such extensions shall be in writing by the community development director. In addition, in the event of unavoidable circumstances such as acts of God, strikes or similar hardships, other than financial or inability to obtain financing, a second extension not to exceed six months may be granted by the city commission. 
2.  A temporary or portable structure, or trailer, may be used for a temporary construction office and for the housing of tools, equipment, and materials. Any of the above used may be combined to meet the requirements of a job site. Permits for the erection or use of such temporary construction offices shall be obtained from the community development director, provided that sufficient bond, as established by the city commission, to insure removal of the temporary structure, has been posted and a building permit for the construction of the permanent structure has previously been obtained. Every temporary construction office permit shall continue in force for a reasonable period so long as construction of the permanent structure is commenced and continued without delay. 
3.  Subdivision sales offices may be erected only after approval by the city commission as part of the site development plan approval, subject to such conditions as may be determined by the commission to be necessary to insure termination of the use after a reasonable period by removal or conversion to a conforming use. 
b.  Temporary construction storage or storage containers. 
1.  A temporary construction storage or storage container may be erected or placed at the site for the purpose of storage during the construction of a permanent building, street, utility, or other structure in any zoning district or during such special events as moving/relocation. Such a container shall only be used for the storage of tools, equipment, furniture or other materials during the construction of a permanent structure or for the duration of the moving event. 
2.  A temporary construction storage or storage container shall not be erected or placed at a site unless a permit has been issued by the community development director. No more than three containers shall be permitted at a single construction site and not more than one container at a moving location. 
3.  No permit shall be issued unless the container removal date has been posted at the site. A permit shall expire 15 days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the primary building or 15 days after the moving event and the container shall be removed at that time. 
4.  Only one temporary construction storage or storage container permit in any 12-month period shall be issued for a given site. 
5.  A temporary construction storage or storage container shall be placed either on a driveway, in an approved parking area, or in the buildable portion of a construction site. The location shall not be within ten feet of a public right-of-way and shall interfere with or jeopardize the safety of the public. 
6.  The name, current phone number and current address of the company providing the container, and the date the container was placed on site, shall be clearly posted on the exterior of the container. 
(23) - Tree removal permit. 
A tree removal permit must be issued by the community development department for work undertaken pursuant to chapter 5 of this Code. Application for such permit shall be on forms prescribed by the community development director. The fee for such permit shall be as established by the city commission. 
(24) - Walls and fences permit. 
a.  No fence or wall shall be built, constructed, substantially rebuilt or reconstructed in the city unless a building permit has been issued for the wall or fence. Normal repair and maintenance does not require a permit. Application for such permit shall be on forms prescribed by the community development director. The fee for such permit shall be the same as for a regular building permit for the same cost of construction. Such permits shall be subject to all provisions applicable to regular building permits. Temporary vegetable or flower garden fences not exceeding three feet in height shall not require a permit. 
b.  If the community development director shall determine that a wall or fence is unsightly or deteriorated, the owner or occupant of the property where the fence or wall is located shall be notified of that fact by certified mail. If the owner or occupant of the wall or fence is unknown and cannot be located, such notice may be posted on the wall or fence. If the wall or fence is not removed or repaired within 10 days of notice being given, then the community development director may cause such wall or fence removed or repaired and the city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of such removal and repair. 
c.  The mandatory fencing or walling provisions in chapter 6 shall only be applicable to property after application is made for the issuance of a building permit for a new principal building on the property, unless the city commission determines that, as to a building or buildings existing on the effective date of this Code, the lack of such fencing creates an unwarranted interference with the property use and enjoyment of neighboring properties and thus constitutes a public nuisance, which must be abated by the erection of the fence or wall mandated for new principal buildings in that zoning district. 
1.  Before the city commission may declare such a public nuisance, it shall hold a public hearing to consider the matter. 
2.  Notice of such public hearing shall be sent at least 15 days prior to the hearing, by certified mail, to the owner of the affected property, as shown on the most recent tax roll and the notice shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation no less than 15 and no more than 45 days prior to the public hearing. 
3.  If at such public hearing, the city commission determines that a public nuisance exists, it shall order the property owner or occupant to erect the required fence or wall within six months. 
4.  If such wall or fence is not built within six months, the city's remedies shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
i.  Appropriate legal action against the owner and/or occupant to compel compliance; 
ii.  Appropriate legal or administrative action against the owner and/or occupant for code violation. 
(25) - Procedures for annexations into the city. 
a.  Application by petition for voluntary annexation. An application for voluntary annexation of real property to be included within the corporate limits of the city shall be made by petition of the owner or owners of said real property. 
1.  A petition for voluntary annexation shall be filed with the community development director accompanied by satisfactory evidence of ownership. The petition for voluntary annexation shall not be further considered by the city until the city attorney has made a determination that all the owners of the subject property have appropriately signed the petition. 
2.  Upon a determination that the petition has been appropriately signed, the community development director may require additional information of the petitioner including but not limited to: 
i.  A development plan for the subject property and a list of anticipated uses; 
ii.  A schedule of development for the subject property; 
iii.  An estimate of the direct public costs to provide capital facilities for city utilities and other municipal services required by the development; 
iv.  An estimate of the ad valorem taxation revenues to be generated by the subject property at the current mileage rate both prior to and after development; 
v.  An estimate of the residential population increase of the city after development. 
b.  Involuntary annexation. The process and requirements for involuntary annexation are set forth in this Code. These provisions shall be followed in cases of involuntary annexation. 
c.  Review by the community development department. The community development director shall form an opinion as to whether or not it is in the best public interest of the city for the city to annex the subject property. In forming such opinion the community development director shall consider, among other things, the potential impact of development upon surrounding properties both within and outside the city, the cost to the city to provide municipal services to and within the subject property and the estimated ad valorem tax revenues and other revenues payable to the city to be generated by the subject property. The opinion of the director shall be reported to the planning commission for its consideration. 
d.  Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review the proposed annexation and shall make an advisory recommendation to the city commission as to the opinion of the community development director and the consistency of the proposed annexation with the city's comprehensive plan. The planning commission shall include in its recommendation to the city commission any information which it deems is relevant to issues relating to the proposed annexation including the opinion of the community development director and consistency with the city comprehensive plan. 
e.  Public hearing before the city commission. A public hearing shall be conducted by the city commission to review and consider a proposal for voluntary annexation. Such hearing may be scheduled on the agenda of a regular city commission meeting. 
f.  Annexation ordinance. 
1.  Notice of the annexation shall be published at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing by the commission, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. The notice shall give a brief general description of the subject property and shall include a map clearly showing the subject property. The notice shall also advise that the complete legal description of the property by metes and bounds and the draft ordinance itself may be obtained from the community development department. 
2.  The proposed annexation ordinance shall be adopted with or without amendment after two readings either by title or in full on two separate days. 
(26) - Procedures for amending the text of this Code. 
a.  Generally. 
1.  A proposal to amend the text of this Code, which does not change the actual zoning map designation of a parcel or parcels of land, shall be referred to the planning commission by the community development director as a text amendment. 
2.  Initiation of amendments. A proposed amendment to the development regulations may be initiated by the city commission, board of zoning appeals, the planning commission, the city manager or by application filed with the city manager by a developer or citizen. 
b.  Application procedure. Each request for amendment of this Code shall be submitted in a form as prescribed by the city manager along with such fee as shall be established by the city commission. 
c.  Notice of planning commission consideration. The planning commission shall consider the proposed ULDC text amendment at a meeting of the planning commission. The agenda of the meeting shall include a topical reference to the proposed amendment. 
For each amendment to this Code, notice of the nature of the proposed change and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the city commission shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city in which are carried the legal advertisements of the city at least 15 days prior to the meeting with the planning commission and not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing before the city commission. 
d.  Review by planning commission. 
1.  Upon the receipt of an application as noted above, the city manager shall submit, at the next following meeting of the planning commission, provided such application shall precede said meeting by a minimum of 25 days, any and all information submitted by the applicant. In addition, the city representative may submit any additional information deemed appropriate to the amendment. 
2.  Upon receipt of the required information, the planning commission shall consider the proposed amendment at a regular or special called meeting and shall determine at that time if the applicants request merits further consideration. 
3.  All applicants seeking amendments to this Code shall have an opportunity to present facts, reports and/or evidence to the planning commission at the time of either their regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting. The planning commission shall hold and conduct, as appropriate to the requirements of this resolution, public meetings in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act of 1988 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1). 
4.  Upon consideration of the request, the planning commission shall determine, by a majority vote, their recommendation to the Douglas City Commission and shall transmit that recommendation to the city commission forthwith. 
5.  The planning commission may determine that additional specific technical information is needed regarding any potential environmental, fiscal or public service impacts. If such determination is made, the planning commission shall have the discretion to defer its recommendations upon preparation of a special study intended to analyze the potential impacts or the specific areas of concern. Where preparation of a special study has been required, no recommendation will be forwarded to the city commission until such study has been received and reviewed by the planning commission. The cost of any special study shall be borne by the applicant, unless the city commission approves the participation of public funds, as necessary or as being in the public interest. 
6.  Where no special studies are required, the planning commission shall then have 30 days from the date of the scheduled regular or special meeting at which the review of an application for ordinance text changes were conducted to submit final recommendations on the technical merit of the application to the city commission for consideration. If the planning commission fails to render a final recommendation within the 30 day period, the application shall be forwarded to the city commission for a public hearing and subsequent final action as appropriate to the requirements of this resolution. 
e.  Public hearing before the city commission. The community development director shall prepare and submit a written report to the city commission, which includes the recommendation of the planning commission. The report may also include a draft ordinance, which, if adopted by the city commission, would effect the proposed amendment. 
1.  Notice of commission consideration. At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing of the ordinance, the ordinance shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall state: 
i.  The date, time and place of the public hearing; 
ii.  The title of the proposed ordinance; 
iii.  The place within the city where the proposed ordinance may be inspected; 
iv.  Interested persons may appear at the public hearing and will be heard with respect to the ordinance; 
v.  Any person who decides to appeal the determination may need to insure that a verbatim record of the proceedings is made which includes the testimony and evidence upon which the appeal is based; 
vi.  The necessary arrangements will be made by the city for any handicapped person to attend the public hearing provided notice of the need to do so, is provided to the city not less than 48 hours prior to the public hearing; 
2.  Following review and recommendation from the planning commission, the city commission, after conduct of a public hearing with public notice as is required by this chapter, shall vote to: 
i.  Approve the proposed amendment; or 
ii.  Approve the proposed amendment with conditions; or 
iii.  Deny the proposed amendment; or 
iv.  Defer the proposed amendment to a certain time; or 
v.  Refer the decision or application back to the planning commission for further investigation. 
If the city commission shall vote to refer the amendment back to the planning commission for further investigation, the city manager shall re-advertise the dates of the public hearings before the planning commission and the city commission in accordance with Section 1202 (C), above. No proposed amendment to these Regulations shall be approved except by the majority vote of the members of the city commission. 
3.  Public hearings. Public hearings held by the city commission for consideration of proposed amendments shall be accomplished with the policies and procedures listed below: 
i.  The chairman shall indicate that a public hearing has been called for the consideration of the proposed amendment. Thereupon each application shall be considered on an individual basis. 
ii.  When an application comes up for review, the chairman may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen so that the entire presentation of the positions of those in support of/opposition to the petition shall not exceed 30 minutes. 
iii.  The city manager shall present a report on the application and present the recommendations. 
iv.  The applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time in which to present evidence to support the proposed amendment. 
v.  Those in favor of the proposed amendment shall be allowed a minimum of ten minutes, or the amount of time as prescribed by State of Georgia law, to speak in favor of the proposed amendment. 
vi.  Those who oppose the proposed amendment shall be allowed a minimum of ten minutes, or the amount of time as prescribed by State of Georgia law, in which to speak in opposition to the proposed amendment. 
vii.  The applicant may be allowed a reasonable amount of time in which to respond to any issues raised. 
viii.  The city manager may make additional comments. 
ix.  The city attorney may be asked to discuss any legal issues that have been raised. 
x.  The city commission may then propound questions to any party present and may discuss the proposed amendment. 
xi.  After the above procedures have been completed, the chairman will indicate that the public hearing is formally closed. 
xii.  Each speaker at the public hearing shall speak only to the merits of the proposed amendment under consideration and shall address remarks only to the city commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning decision under consideration. The chairman may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
xiii.  Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the chairman from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
f.  Clerk of the city commission. The clerk of the city commission shall, within ten days from action of the city commission on each proposed amendment to these regulations provide to the city manager a signed and certified copy of each such ordinance. 
(27) - Procedures for zoning map changes (rezoning). 
The term rezoning as used herein means the initial zoning of a parcel or parcels of land within the city as well as a change in the zoning classification of a parcel or parcels indicated on the city's zoning map. 
a.  Application for a rezoning. 
1.  An application filed by or on behalf of the owner of land which proposes a rezoning of the parcel of land shall be filed with the community development director accompanied by the required application fee as established by the city commission. Such application may not be filed if the city commission has denied a similar application for rezoning on the subject property within the previous 12 months. 
2.  The applicant shall provide to the community development department the following submittal information: 
i.  Legal names of each of the owners of the subject property including their contact addresses (no P.O. Boxes) and telephone numbers; 
ii.  If any owner is a business entity such as a partnership, corporation or joint venture, the names and addresses of all partners and officers, as appropriate and their phone numbers; 
iii.  The legal description of the subject property; 
iv.  A copy of the deed or deeds conveying the subject property to the current owner; 
v.  A current survey of the property or portion of the property prepared by a Georgia registered professional surveyor; 
vi.  If the applicant for a rezoning is a representative of the owner, evidence of agency in the form of a letter, affidavit or other document satisfactory to the city attorney must be provided; and 
vii.  Any other information required by the community development director. 
3.  A submittal deemed complete by the community development director shall be forwarded to the planning commission for consideration. 
b.  Review by planning commission. 
1.  Upon the receipt of an application as noted above, the community development director shall submit, at the next following meeting of the planning commission, provided such application shall precede said meeting by a minimum of 25 days, any and all information submitted by the applicant. In addition, the city representative may submit any additional information deemed appropriate to the amendment. 
2.  Upon receipt of the required information, the planning commission shall consider the proposed amendment at a regular or special called meeting and shall determine at that time if the applicants request merits further consideration. 
3.  All applicants seeking amendments to this Code shall have an opportunity to present facts, reports and/or evidence to the planning commission at the time of either their regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting. The planning commission shall hold and conduct, as appropriate to the requirements of this resolution, public meetings in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act of 1988 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1). 
4.  Upon consideration of the request, the planning commission shall determine, by a majority vote, their recommendation to the Douglas city commission and shall transmit that recommendation to the city commission forthwith. 
5.  The planning commission may determine that additional specific technical information is needed regarding any potential environmental, fiscal or public service impacts. If such determination is made, the planning commission shall have the discretion to defer its recommendations upon preparation of a special study intended to analyze the potential impacts or the specific areas of concern. Where preparation of a special study has been required, no recommendation will be forwarded to the city commission until such study has been received and reviewed by the planning commission. The cost of any special study shall be borne by the applicant, unless the city commission approves the participation of public funds, as necessary or as being in the public interest. 
6.  Where no special studies are required, the planning commission shall then have 30 days from the date of the scheduled regular or special meeting at which the review of an application for ordinance text changes were conducted to submit final recommendations on the technical merit of the application to the city commission for consideration. If the planning commission fails to render a final recommendation within the 30 day period, the application shall be forwarded to the city commission for a public hearing and subsequent final action as appropriate to the requirements of this resolution. 
The following zoning standards and criteria shall be utilized in making this recommendation: 
A.  Whether the proposed rezoning request will permit a use that is suitable, in view of the existing land use pattern of adjacent and nearby property. 
B.  Whether the proposed rezoning would result in the possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts. 
C.  Whether the proposed development would affect the existing population density pattern and lead to the possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities. 
D.  Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment reasonable. 
E.  Whether the proposed change will adversely influence existing conditions in the neighborhood or the county at large. 
F.  Whether the proposed amendment would result in potential impacts on the environment, including but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity. 
G.  Whether the costs required of the public in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety necessities would be reasonable when considering the proposed change. 
H.  Whether the proposed change will be detrimental to the value or improvement of the development of adjacent or nearby property in accordance with existing requirements. 
I.  Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to the individual owner as contrasted with the adjacent or nearby neighborhood or with the general public. 
J.  The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with the Coffee County/City of Douglas Comprehensive Plan as currently adopted. 
The planning commission shall include in the recommendation to the city commission any information which it deems is relevant to issues relating to the proposed rezoning. 
c.  Notice of planning commission consideration. The planning commission shall consider the proposed rezoning at a meeting of the planning commission. The agenda of the meeting shall include a topical reference to the proposed amendment. 
For each amendment to this Code, notice of the nature of the proposed change and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the city commission shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city in which are carried the legal advertisements of the city at least seven days prior to the meeting with the planning commission and not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing before the city commission. 
d.  Review and consideration by city commission. A proposal for rezoning shall be reviewed and considered by the city commission. The community development director shall prepare a written report to submit to the city commission which includes the recommendation of the planning commission. The report may include a draft ordinance which, if adopted by the city commission, would effect the proposed rezoning. 
e.  Notice of city commission consideration. Notice of consideration of a proposed rezoning by the city commission shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this section: 
1.  Notice of commission consideration. At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing of the ordinance, the ordinance shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall state: 
i.  The time, purpose and location of the public hearing; 
ii.  The location of the subject property; 
iii.  The present zoning classification of the property; 
iv.  The proposed zoning classification of the property. 
2.  Posting. Notice of the proposed rezoning shall be posted not less than 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing in a conspicuous location of the property. 
f.  Public hearing before the city commission. One public hearing shall be conducted by the city commission to consider the proposed rezoning. Such hearing may be scheduled on the agenda of a regular city commission meeting. The public hearing held by the planning commission and city commission for consideration of proposed amendments shall be accomplished with the policies and procedures listed below: 
1.  The chair shall indicate that a public hearing has been called for the consideration of zoning decisions. Thereupon each application shall be considered on an individual basis. 
2.  When an application comes up for review, the chair may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen so that the entire presentation of the positions of those in support of/opposition to the petition shall not exceed 30 minutes. 
3.  The community development director shall present a report on the application and present the recommendations. 
4.  The applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time in which to present evidence to support the proposed zoning amendment. 
5.  Those in favor of the proposed amendment shall be allowed a minimum of ten minutes, or the amount of time as prescribed by State of Georgia law, to speak in favor of the proposed amendment. 
6.  Those who oppose the proposed amendment shall be allowed a minimum of ten minutes, or the amount of time as prescribed by State of Georgia law, in which to speak in opposition to the proposed amendment. 
7.  The applicant may be allowed a reasonable amount of time in which to respond to any issues raised. 
8.  The community development director may make additional comments. 
9.  The city attorney may be asked to discuss any legal issues that have been raised. 
10.  The city commission may then propound questions to any party present and may discuss the proposed amendment or conditional use permit. 
11.  After the above procedures have been completed, the chair will indicate that the public hearing is formally closed. 
12.  Each speaker at the public hearing shall speak only to the merits of the proposed amendment under consideration and shall address remarks only to members of the city commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning decision under consideration. The chair may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
13.  Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the chair from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
g.  Rezoning in conjunction with annexation. If the rezoning is for property to be annexed into the city, then: 
1.  The city shall complete the rezoning procedures as required by this section, except for the final vote of the city commission, prior to adoption of the annexation ordinance, but no sooner than the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the Coffee County Commission; 
2.  The rezoning public hearing shall be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the city; 
3.  In addition to the other notice requirements of this Code Section, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the county wherein the property to be annexed is located, a notice of the hearing and as required shall place a sign on the property as required. 
4.  The zoning classification approved by the city following the hearing required by this Code shall become effective on the later of: 
i.  The date the zoning is approved by the city; 
ii.  The date that the annexation becomes effective; or 
iii.  Where a county has interposed an objection, the date provided for in the resolution of the objection. 
h.  Rezoning consideration for a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. 
1.  When a proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a public hearing shall be held on the proposed action. Such public hearing shall be held at least six months and not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on the zoning decision. This hearing shall be in addition to any other hearing required by this Code. The city shall give notice of such hearing by: 
i.  Posting notice on the affected premises in the manner prescribed by Georgia Code; and 
ii.  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of the hearing at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
iii.  Both the posted notice and the published notice shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified section of the newspaper. 
(28) - Public notice requirements. 
a.  Notice by mail. 
1.  Method of mailing. Where notice of a hearing or of a public hearing is required to be provided by mail, such notice shall be mailed by regular U.S. Mail. Notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing regardless of whether or not the notice was actually received by the addressee. 
2.  Property owners to receive mailed notice. The city shall mail notices to property owners within 400 feet of the subject property, whose names and addresses appear on the latest ad valorem tax rolls maintained by the Coffee County Tax Assessor. For property in condominium ownership, both the property owners association and the owners of the individual dwelling units located within the prescribed distance must be notified. 
3.  Content of notice. The notice shall advise the addressee of the time, place and purpose of the hearing or public hearing and shall state the substance of the proposed action as it affects the addressee. 
4.  Proof of mailing. The community development director shall maintain a file including a copy of the mailed notice, the date of mailing, and the list of the addressees and their addresses. 
b.  Notice by posting. 
1.  Manner of posting. Where a notice of a hearing or of a public hearing is required to be provided by posting, city staff shall cause the subject property to be posted with a sign, clearly visible from the nearest public street. The sign shall not be less than 24 x 24 inches in dimension. 
2.  Content of public notice. The sign shall advise of the time, place and purpose of the hearing or public hearing, the substance of the proposed action and the address, telephone number and business hours of the community development department to which questions regarding the subject matter of the hearing or public hearing may be addressed. 
3.  Duration of posting. Failure to provide posted notice continuously from the time posted notice is to begin until the public hearing or the hearing which is the subject of the notice shall not be deemed as failure to give notice required by this Code and action taken by the city commission subsequent to such notice shall not be deemed void for lack of public notice. Lost signs or signs which become illegible for any reason shall be replaced by the applicant or petitioner as reasonably as soon as possible upon notification to do so by the city. Signs shall be removed within five days of the conclusion of the noticed public hearing or hearing. 
4.  Proof of posting. The community development director shall maintain a file including a photograph of the posted notice and the date the posted notice commenced. 
c.  Notice by publication. 
1.  Manner of publication. Where notice of a hearing or public hearing is required to be provided by publication, city staff shall cause an advertisement to be published in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
2.  Proof of publication. The affidavit of the publisher is appropriate for this purpose. Alternatively a copy of the published notice and the date the notice was published may be used as evidence. 
3.  Costs. All costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant or petitioner, and the costs so incurred by the city shall be included in the application fee to be charged upon submittal of the application. 
(29) - Enforcement of code provisions. 
The city commission shall enforce this Code according to the procedures set forth herein. 
(30) - Other penalties and remedies. 
a.  Generally. If the community development department determines that the code enforcement process would be an inadequate response to a given violation, it may pursue the following penalties and remedies: 
b.  Penalties for violation of this Code. Any person or entity, including the contractor, who knowingly and willfully performs, or causes to be performed, any construction or development activity, without a permit as required by the City's Code, shall be subject to the following penalties: 
1.  A fine of $500.00 for any first violation of the city's adopted building code. 
2.  A fine of $1,000.00 for any second violation of the city's adopted building code. 
3.  Upon the commission of three or more violations of the city's adopted building code by the same person or entity, the city commission shall revoke the business license of said contractor and forward the matter to all appropriate state agencies for disciplinary action. 
Notwithstanding the above, all other remedies available to the city shall be preserved, and the filing of appropriate legal actions in the appropriate court of local jurisdiction to abate a nuisance. 
(31) - Appeals from decisions of administrative departments. 
a.  Applicability. A developer or adversely affected person may appeal a final decision of any administrative department. Appeals are made to the city commission by filing a notice of appeal with the department within 30 days of the decision. 
b.  Contents of notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain: 
1.  A statement of the decision to be reviewed, and the date of the decision. 
2.  A statement of the interest of the person seeking review. 
3.  The specific error alleged as the grounds of the appeal. 
c.  General rules and procedures for appeals. 
1.  All appeals shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the city and accompanied by fees as established by the city commission. 
2.  The appealing party assumes the responsibility of all required notification procedures. 
3.  The city commission shall hear the appeal and shall have 30 days from the date of the hearing to render a decision. 
4.  The city commission may affirm, reverse or modify in whole or in part a determination or requirement of the decision that is under review. 
5.  Action shall be decided by a majority vote of the city commission. 
6.  A notice of the decision on appeal shall be submitted to the appellant and to the department director of the administrative department involved in the appeal. 
7.  The decision by the city commission shall be final and binding to all parties. 
(32) - Quasi-judicial proceedings. 
The intent of this section is to provide an efficient and equitable procedure for the consideration by the city commission, the zoning board of appeals and the planning commission of quasi-judicial matters in the course of quasi-judicial proceedings. 
a.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: 
Affected person is the owner, resident or other occupant of the real property which is the subject of a quasi-judicial proceeding, or an "aggrieved or adversely affected party" as defined by state law. 
Board is the city commission, the zoning board of appeals and the planning commission, all of the City of Douglas. 
Ex-parte communication is a private communication made to a member of a board which pertains to a quasi-judicial matter then pending before that board. 
Party is the petitioner, the city and any affected person who files a notice of intent to be a party as provided in this section. 
Petition is an application made by a petitioner to initiate a quasi-judicial proceeding. 
Petitioner is the individual, corporation or other entity which files a petition. 
Quasi-judicial matter is a matter which involves the application of a land use standard established by local law to specific real property and its impact upon the owners, residents and other occupants thereof and upon other affected persons, and includes, but is not limited to, a site specific land use amendment or rezoning, a major development site development plan review, a variance, and a plat review. 
Quasi-judicial proceeding is the process which comports with constitutional due process requirements whereby a board adjudicates the private rights of the parties thereto in a quasi-judicial matter. 
Secretary of the board is the city clerk for the city commission and, for the planning commission and the zoning board of appeals, is the employee appointed by the city manager to act in such capacity. 
Subject property is the real property which is the subject matter of a quasi-judicial proceeding. 
b.  Ex-parte communications. Any person not otherwise prohibited by statue, charter provision, or ordinance may discuss with any city official the merits of any quasi-judicial matter on which action may be taken by a city board on which the city official is a member. Further, a city official may conduct investigations and site visits and may receive expert opinions regarding a quasi-judicial matter pending before the board on which the city official is a member. 
The written ex-parte communication shall be a public record of the city and shall be made a part of the record of the pending quasi-judicial proceeding. An ex-parte communication, investigation, site visit or expert opinion shall be disclosed by the city official who is a party thereto at the commencement of the hearing and shall include the substance of the communication, investigation, site visit or expert opinion as well as the identity of the person, group, or entity with whom any communication took place. Persons with opinions contrary thereto shall be given a reasonable opportunity to refute or otherwise respond to the information acquired by the communication, investigation, site visit or expert opinion. 
c.  Commencement of quasi-judicial proceedings. A quasi-judicial proceeding shall commence at such time as the community development department certifies that it has received a complete petition. A complete petition shall include the appropriate filing fee and shall be date stamped by the department when properly filed. Each proceeding shall be given a case number and each case file shall be separately maintained by the community development department as a public record of the city. 
The petition shall identify the subject property by legal description and by street address, if available. The petition shall also identify the owner of the subject property, and all known residents and other occupants thereof at the time of application, by name, address and telephone number. 
The petitioner shall be identified by name, address and telephone number. If the petitioner is not an individual, the petition shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the corporation or other entity in whose behalf the petition is filed and of the authorized representative of the petitioner. 
If the petitioner is not the sole owner of the subject property, the petition shall be accompanied by a letter or other written notarized authorization from each owner that the applicant is authorized to file the specific petition. 
d.  Notice of quasi-judicial hearings. Notice of the date, time and place of a quasi-judicial hearing shall be given as required by this Code for the type of quasi-judicial proceeding being commenced. 
Mailed notice, if required, and published notice shall also advise that any affected person may become a party to such proceeding entitled to present evidence at the hearing including the sworn testimony of witnesses and relevant exhibits and other documentary evidence and to cross-examine all witnesses by filing a notice of intent to be a party with the secretary of the appropriate board not less than five days prior to the hearing. 
e.  Parties. The parties to a quasi-judicial proceeding shall be the petitioner, the city, and any affected person who files a notice of intent to be a party with the community development department not less than five days prior to commencement of the hearing. Forms for a notice of intent shall be provided by the department upon request. 
A party shall be entitled to participate at the hearing and may present evidence to the board. A party may call witnesses, present relevant exhibits and other documentary evidence, cross-examine witnesses, make motions and objections, and present a summary statement to the board at the conclusion of the evidence. 
Any person who files a notice of intent to be a party shall be presumed to be an affected person unless the status of that person is challenged by another party. In this event, the board shall determine whether or not the person who claims to be an affected person is an affected person as defined herein. 
f.  Quasi-judicial hearings. 
1.  Generally. A party in any quasi-judicial proceeding may be represented by legal counsel. Statements of counsel presented as argument during a quasi-judicial hearing shall not be considered as evidence. Counsel for a party shall not be subject to cross-examination. 
The city attorney shall act as attorney to the board. Any motions or objections made by a party may be referred to the city attorney for advisory ruling. The presiding officer shall act on behalf of the board and shall respond to motions and other matters with the assistance of the city attorney. 
All testimony presented to the board shall be under oath administered by the city attorney or other person authorized to administer oaths. All parties shall have the opportunity to present evidence to the board and to call and cross-examine witnesses. A member of the board may question a witness at any time during the testimony of that witness. 
Any person may present personal testimony to the board. Evidence relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their daily affairs shall be admissible in a court of law. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded by the presiding officer. 
2.  Order of presentation. A quasi-judicial hearing shall begin with a statement by the city attorney which shall include a summary of the petition, the standards to be applied to the evidence by the board, the burden of proof, and the identity of all parties and the order of their presentations. The city attorney also shall read any ex-parte communication reports filed with the secretary of the board into the record of the hearing. 
The first party to present evidence to the board shall be the city. The city shall begin the hearing with an analysis of the petition which includes a consistency determination with regard to the city comprehensive plan and a determination of compliance with the procedural requirements of law. The city shall advise the Board specifically as to whether the petition meets all applicable standards of local law and any conditions which should be imposed in order to meet those standards. The city shall conclude its presentation with a specific recommendation to the board to approve, to approve with conditions, or to deny the petition. 
Following the presentation of the city, the petitioner shall make a presentation to include evidence relating to the applicable standards for review of the petition. The petitioner may include a description of the nature of the petition if there is additional information that has not been previously provided. 
Other parties shall follow the petitioner in the order of their filed notices. Thereafter, persons who are not parties may testify. Last, the city and the petitioner shall be permitted to provide additional evidence to rebut the evidence presented by any other party or person. 
At the conclusion of the evidence, each party shall be permitted to make a brief summary statement in the order of their appearance. Considering the complexity of the issues presented, the presiding officer may limit the time of summary statements. 
g.  Burden of proof; conditions; rezoning. The petitioner shall have the burden of proof at the hearing to show by the greater weight of the evidence that the petition is consistent with the city comprehensive plan and complies with all procedural requirements of law. Conditions may be suggested by the petitioner, the city or any party, or may be imposed by the board, which are intended to assure consistency and compliance. 
If the quasi-judicial matter petitioned is a rezoning of land, once the petitioner satisfies the burden of proof at the hearing, the burden shall shift to the city or other party to show by the greater weight of the evidence that maintaining the existing zoning classification accomplishes a legitimate public purpose. In such event, the rezoning petition shall be denied. 
h.  Continuances. A continuance of a quasi-judicial proceeding may be requested by any party at any time prior to the conclusion of the hearing. Such request may be granted by the board in the interests of justice and fairness. If granted, the hearing shall be continued by the board to a specific date and time considering the reason for the continuance. 
i.  Cross-examination. After each witness testifies directly, each party shall be permitted to question the witness on cross-examination. The order of cross-examination shall be the same as the order of presentation established for the hearing. Cross-examination may include matters and issues which are not related to the direct testimony of the witness. 
j.  Deliberation by the board. The board shall publicly deliberate on the evidence and shall limit its deliberation to the evidence presented at the hearing. During deliberation, no further testimony shall be taken and the board members shall not ask for additional information of parties or witnesses. 
The board shall determine whether the petitioner has met the burden of proof by a showing that the petition is consistent with the city comprehensive plan and complies with all other applicable standards of review and procedural requirements of law. The board shall also consider any lawful conditions which may be imposed necessary to meet the applicable standards of review. Deliberations shall conclude with a determination by the board to approve, to approve with conditions, or to deny the petition. 
k.  Order. The determination of the board shall be reduced to a written order in the form of an ordinance, resolution or other appropriate document. At the discretion of the board, the order may be recorded in the public records of Coffee County, City of Douglas, Georgia. The costs of recording shall be paid by the petitioner. 
The order shall be prepared by the city attorney to conform exactly to the evidence presented at the hearing and to the determination of the board. The order shall contain a clear statement of approval or denial, and shall include any and all conditions of approval necessary to assure consistency with the city comprehensive plan and compliance with other applicable standards of review and all procedural requirements of law. 
l.  Record of proceedings. A quasi-judicial hearing shall be tape recorded by the secretary of the board. The tape recording shall be preserved by the secretary as a public record of the city. All evidence presented at the hearing in the form of documents, photographs, maps and other written documents shall be preserved with the tape of the hearing. Large exhibits may be preserved by the city in a place and manner convenient for preservation of the document. 
m.  Judicial review. A final determination of the board is subject to judicial review in the appropriate court of local jurisdiction. The record of the quasi-judicial proceedings conducted by the city shall be available to any person who seeks review of a final decision of a board until the expiration of the appeal period. 
The time for appeal shall commence on the date the written order of the board which sets forth its final determination is filed with the city clerk. 
Table 12-1 Responsibilities for Recommending (X) and Final (XX) Action 

 
CHAPTER 13. - SOLAR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05312018 , adopted May 31, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 13, §§ (1)—(6), and enacted a new Ch. 13 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 12282015 , § 1, 12-28-15. 

(1) - Definitions. 
Ordinance means this solar ordinance. 
Permit means any permit required by federal, state, or local law or regulation, including this ordinance. 
Solar energy system (SES) means a device or structural design feature that provides for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation. For purposes of this ordinance, SES refers only to (1) photovoltaic SESs that convert solar energy directly into electricity through a semiconductor device or (2) solar thermal systems that use collectors to convert the sun's rays into useful forms of energy for water heating, space heating, or space cooling. SES as used in this ordinance excludes concentrated solar systems that use mirrors to focus the energy from the sun to create thermal energy that can be used to produce electricity. 
1.  Building-integrated solar energy system means an SES where solar materials are used in place of traditional building components such that the SES is structurally an integral part of a house, building, or other structure, for example as a building facade, skylight, or shingles. 
2.  Rooftop solar energy system means an SES that is structurally mounted to the roof of a house, building, or other structure. 
3.  Ground mounted solar energy system means an SES that is structurally mounted to the ground. For purposes of this ordinance, the acreage of land occupied by a ground mounted solar energy system is calculated by drawing a perimeter around the outermost SES solar panels and auxiliary structures. Substations and transmission lines outside this perimeter shall not be included in the calculation. 
4.  Small scale ground mounted solar energy system (small scale SES) means a ground mounted SES that occupies less than three acres. 
5.  Intermediate scale ground mounted solar energy system (intermediate scale SES) means a ground mounted SES that occupies between three and 15 acres. 
6.  Large scale ground mounted solar energy system (large scale SES) means a ground mounted SES that occupies more than 15 acres. 
Visual buffer means natural vegetation, plantings, earth berms, and/or decorative fencing that provide a visual and lighting barrier between an SES and a residential property. The visual buffer is not part of the SES and shall not be included when (1) calculating the acreage of land occupied by the SES, or (2) determining whether the SES adheres to applicable setback requirements. 
Zoning authority means the applicable county or city land use decision-making body as determined by local ordinance and appeal procedures. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(2) - Requirements—Types of solar energy systems. 
(a)  Building-integrated solar energy systems. 
(b)  Rooftop solar energy systems. 
(c)  Ground mounted solar energy systems. 
1.  Small scale solar energy systems—Occupies less than three acres. 
2.  Intermediate scale solar energy systems—Occupies three to 15 acres. 
3.  Large scale solar energy systems—Occupies more than 15 acres. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(3) - Permissible zoning districts. 

 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(4) - Requirements for building-integrated solar energy systems. 
(a)  Allowed use. A building-integrated SES is an allowed accessory use, regardless of whether the SES is visible from a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Solar access. A property owner may obtain a solar easement from another property owner for the purpose of ensuring the building-integrated SES adequate exposure to sunlight. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(5) - Requirements for rooftop solar energy systems. 
(a)  Allowed use. A rooftop SES is an allowed accessory use, regardless of whether the SES is visible from a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Solar access. A property owner may obtain a solar easement from another property owner for the purpose of ensuring the rooftop SES adequate exposure to sunlight. 
(c)  Safety. A rooftop SES shall have a clear perimeter between the SES and the roofline to ensure emergency access and egress on the roof and to provide smoke ventilation opportunities. A rooftop SES shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the building, unless the SES is explicitly engineered to do so. 
(d)  Height. A rooftop SES mounted on a flat roof shall be given an equivalent exemption to the underlying zoning district's height standards as roof-mounted mechanical devices or equipment. A rooftop SES mounted on a sloped roof shall not vertically exceed the highest point of the roof to which it is attached. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(6) - General requirements for ground mounted solar energy systems. 
The following requirements apply to all small, intermediate, and large scale ground mounted SESs, in addition to the specific requirements in this ordinance that apply to each SES size respectively: 
(a)  Solar access. A property owner may obtain a solar easement from another property owner for the purpose of ensuring the ground mounted SES adequate exposure to sunlight. 
(b)  Visual buffer. A ground mounted SES shall require a visual buffer where the SES is visible from residential property. If the visual buffer utilizes natural vegetation or plantings, it shall be of a size and thickness sufficient to provide a visual and lighting barrier between the SES and the residential property within 12 months from the completion of construction of the SES. All other visual buffers shall be in place at the time the SES commences operation. 
(c)  Impervious surface. An SES shall comply with federal, state, and local stormwater management, erosion, and sediment control provisions and impervious surface coverage requirements. For purposes of compliance with such regulations, an SES shall be considered pervious if it maintains sheet flow and allows for water to infiltrate under and around the panels through a pervious surface and into the subsoil. 
(d)  Lighting. To reduce light pollution, lighting of a ground mounted SES shall: 
1.  Be limited to the minimum reasonably necessary for its safe operation; 
2.  Be directed downward where reasonably feasible; 
3.  Incorporate full cut-off fixtures; and 
4.  Reasonably utilize motion sensors. 
(e)  Tree removal. The removal or destruction of trees or natural vegetation for an SES shall comply with the requirements of the underlying zoning ordinance. If a ground mounted SES is built on a lot with more than XX% tree coverage, then no more than XX% of the existing tree coverage may be removed and replaced. 
(f)  Maintenance. A ground mounted SES shall be maintained in good working order. 
(g)  Abandonment. A ground mounted SES shall be considered abandoned if it ceases to produce energy on a continuous basis for more than 12 months without prior approval from the zoning authority. 
(h)  Decommissioning. If a ground mounted SES has reached the end of its reasonable life or it is abandoned, then: 
1.  A small scale SES and all structures associated with it shall be removed and all materials shall be recycled or otherwise reused to the extent reasonably practicable; and 
2.  An intermediate or large scale SES shall be decommissioned in accordance with decommissioning plan in the permit application (see section 10-E). 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(7) - Specific requirements for small scale solar energy systems. 
(a)  Allowed use. A small scale SES is an allowed primary or accessory use. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(8) - Specific requirements for intermediate scale solar energy systems. 
(a)  Permitted use. An intermediate scale SES is a permitted primary or accessory use in any residential zoning district if the applicant obtains a special use permit from the zoning authority. In any other zoning district, an intermediate scale SES is a permitted primary or accessory use if the applicant obtains a special administrative permit from the zoning authority. 
(b)  Setbacks. An intermediate scale SES shall comply with the following setback requirements: 
1.  The intermediate scale SES shall be located no closer than the lesser of (a) 15 feet from any property line or easement, or (b) the setback standards for the underlying zoning district, if any; 
2.  The intermediate scale SES shall be located no closer than the lesser of (a) 20 feet from any public right of way, or (b) the setback standards for the underlying zoning district, if any; and 
3.  The intermediate scale SES shall be located no closer than 50 feet from any residential dwelling unit. 
(c)  Signage. An intermediate scale SES: 
1.  Shall have warning signs (a) displaying the dangers associated with an intermediate scale SES, (b) identifying the owner or operator of the intermediate scale SES, and (c) providing a 24-hour emergency contact phone number; 
2.  May have signs that contain educational information about the intermediate scale SES; and 
3.  Shall not have signs used for displaying any advertisement except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the intermediate scale SES. 
(d)  Electrical connections. If the intermediate scale SES is connected to the public grid, then reasonable efforts shall be made to place underground all utility connections from the SES, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the property and any requirements of the utility provider. 
(e)  Safe installation. The intermediate scale SES shall be installed by a licensed engineer, a certified electrician shall inspect the electrical connections prior to operation, and the appropriate public utility shall inspect any operating connection to the grid. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(9) - Specific requirements for large scale solar energy systems. 
(a)  Permitted use. A large scale SES is a permitted primary or accessory use in any zoning district if the applicant obtains a special use permit from the zoning authority. 
(b)  Setbacks. A large scale SES shall comply with the following setback requirements: 
1.  The large scale SES shall be located no closer than the lesser of (a) 15 feet from any property line or easement, or (b) the setback standards for the underlying zoning district, if any; 
2.  The large scale SES shall be located no closer than the lesser of (a) 20 feet from any public right of way, or (b) the setback standards for the underlying zoning district, if any; and 
3.  The large scale SES shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any residential dwelling unit. 
(c)  Signage. A large scale SES: 
1.  Shall have warning signs (a) displaying the dangers associated with a large scale SES, (b) identifying the owner or operator of the large scale SES, and (c) providing a 24-hour emergency contact phone number; 
2.  May have signs that contain educational information about the large scale SES; and 
3.  Shall not have signs used for displaying any advertisement except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the large scale SES. 
(d)  Electrical connection. If the large scale SES is connected to the public grid, then reasonable efforts shall be made to place underground all utility connections from the large scale SES, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the property and any requirements of the utility provider. 
(e)  Safe installation. The large scale SES shall be installed by a licensed engineer, a certified electrician shall inspect the electrical connections prior to operation, and the appropriate public utility shall inspect any operating connection to the grid. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(10) - Plans and permits—Permit application. 
An application for a special administrative permit or a special use permit shall be submitted to the zoning authority containing the following: 
(a)  Basic information. The applicant shall submit a document that lists the following: 
1.  The address of the SES property; 
2.  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and email address; 
3.  The property owner's name, address, telephone number, and email address; 
4.  If known, the SES operator's name, address, telephone number, and email address; 
5.  If known, the installation company's name, address, telephone number, email address, and license number; and 
6.  Evidence of the applicant's control of the property, such as a deed, lease, option agreement with the landowner. 
(b)  Site plan. The applicant shall submit a site plan that contains the following: 
1.  A diagram of the property and directly adjacent properties showing the locations of all existing and proposed structures (including solar arrays, inverters, transformers, electrical substations, and buildings), property lines, rights-of-way, roads, required setbacks, required signage, and required visual buffers; 
2.  A one-line diagram of the SES that has been stamped and signed by a professional engineer licensed in Georgia that shows the configuration of the array, the wiring system, the overcurrent protection, the inverter, and the disconnects; 
3.  A topographical map from the U.S. Geological Survey, or equivalent, that depicts in detail any vegetative cover, watersheds, floodplains, or wetlands on the property; 
4.  A topographic drawing of the property that indicates how stormwater currently from the property, identifies the location of discharge points or areas, and identifies any conditions present on the property that may contribute to significant soil erosion; 
5.  A map from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources that identifies any habitat for state endangered, threatened, or candidate species on or adjacent to the property; 
6.  A map from the U.S. Department of Fish and Wildlife ("FWS") and/or the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ("NOAA") that identifies any habitat for federally endangered, threatened, or candidate species on or adjacent to the property; and 
7.  If the SES is located in an agricultural district, a map from U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service ("NRCS") identifying prime farmland and farmland of statewide importance on the property. 
(c)  Mitigation of impacts. The applicant shall submit a mitigation plan that contains the following: 
1.  A plan for the prevention and mitigation of stormwater runoff and soil erosion; 
2.  If the SES is located on prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance (as defined by NRCS), a plan to mitigate damage to the soil quality; 
3.  If the installation of the SES will result in potentially adverse changes to any state or federally endangered, threatened, or candidate species habitat, a mitigation plan, that includes (a) a process for minimizing changes to the species habitat, for example through habitat corridors, (b) a plan to relocate and monitor any impacted species, and (c) a plan to restore the original species habitat after the system is decommissioned; and 
4.  A map of five nautical miles around the property with the location of any airport in the shown space, and, if an airport is present in that area, a glare hazard analysis result by the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool or its equivalent. 
(d)  Certifications. The applicant shall submit an affidavit that provides: 
1.  Construction and operation of the SES will comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including the requirements of the underlying zoning ordinance, unless otherwise expressly stated in this ordinance; 
3.  Before operation, a fire safety and evacuation plan will be filed with the appropriate fire code and emergency management officials, and will be available in workplace for reference and review by employees working on the premises; and 
4.  General liability insurance will be maintained throughout the life of the SES project. If the underlying zoning ordinance does not specify the coverage, such general liability insurance will include, but not be limited to, commercial form, premises-operations, products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury. 
(e)  Decommissioning plan. The applicant shall submit a decommissioning plan that, based on the best available information at the time of the application, contains the following: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the person(s) or entity(ies) responsible for implementing the decommissioning plan; 
2.  A statement of conditions that require the decommissioning plan to be implemented; 
3.  As part of decommissioning, a removal plan that (a) identifies all structures, components, and non-utility owned equipment that shall be removed, and (b) includes a plan for recycling or otherwise reusing all materials to the extent reasonably practicable; and 
4.  As part of decommissioning, a restoration plan to return the property to its condition prior to the installation of the SES or to some other condition reasonably appropriate to the designated land use after the SES is removed, including a tree restoration plan to restore the original tree cover with similar tree types and numbers after the system is decommissioned. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(11) - Special administrative permit review. 
1.  Upon receiving an application for, the zoning authority shall review the permit application within [XX days] and either approve or deny the applicant. 
2.  A special administrative permit application maybe approved only if the zoning authority determines that the SES complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including the requirements of this ordinance. 
3.  The applicant's appeal rights are consistent with those rights expressed in the underlying zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
(12) - Special use permit review. 
1.  Upon receiving an application for an SES, the zoning authority shall: (a) provide public notice of the proposed project in accordance with the notice requirements in the Unified Land Development Code; (b) schedule and hold a public hearing in accordance with the hearing requirements in the underlying code; and (c) issue a determination within [XX days] of the public hearing on the permit application based on the application and public comments. 
2.  A special use permit application may be approved only if the zoning authority determines that the SES complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including the requirements of this ordinance. 
3.  The applicant's appeal rights are consistent with those rights expressed in the underlying Unified Development Code. 
( Ord. No. 05312018, 5-31-18 ) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1978 CODE to 1993 CODE 
This table gives the location within the 1993 Code of those sections of the 1978 Code, as updated through April 24, 1989. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1978 CODE TO 2018 CODE 
This table gives the location within the 2018 Code of those sections of the 1978 Code, as supplemented through April 24, 1989. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1993 CODE TO 2018 CODE 
This table gives the location within the 2018 Code of those sections of the 1993 Code, as supplemented through July 24, 2017. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES IN 1993 CODE 
This table gives the location of ordinances within the 1993 Code, as updated through July 24, 2017. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION—2018 CODE 
This table gives the location within 2018 Code of ordinances. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1978 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1978 Code, as updated through April 24, 1989, which are included herein. Sections of the 1978 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1978 Code, as updated through April 24, 1989, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1978 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since April 24, 1989, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 