CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF VIDALIA, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the City Council ____________ Adopted June 13, 1994 Effective June 13, 1994 ____________ OFFICIALS of the CITY OF VIDALIA, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION ____________ Ronnie A. Dixon Mayor ____________ Charles T. Clements, Mayor Pro Tem John C. (Chip) Matheson Buford Mobley E. K. Stafford, Jr. John Raymond Turner City Council ____________ William D. Torrance City Manager ____________ Kim Barnes City Clerk ____________ Reid A. Threlkeld City Attorney PREFACE     This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, of a general and permanent nature.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1968 Code, as supplemented through February 20, 1980, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1968 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Numbering System     The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the fifth section of Chapter 4 is 4-5. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-6 and 6-7 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 6-6.1, 6-6.2 and 6-6.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 8 and 9, it will be designated as Chapter 8.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. Index     The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger Merriam, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Tony Rojas, former City Manager, Ms. Vickie E. Fletcher, former City Clerk and City Attorney, and to Mr. Reid A. Threlkeld, current City Attorney for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION Tallahassee, Florida  ADOPTING ORDINANCE AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF VIDALIA, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF VIDALIA, AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE SAME, AS FOLLOWS:     Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Vidalia, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 20, each inclusive, and appendices A and B, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 15, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or work in the workgang on the public streets or on such public works as the authorities may employ the workgang for not more than ninety (90) days, or by any one (1) or more of these punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits.     Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 15, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective June 13, 1994.     Passed and adopted by the city council this 13th day of June, 1994. /s/ Ronnie A. Dixon       Mayor   /s/ Kim M. Barnes       City Clerk   Certificate of Adoption     I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, held on the 13th day of June, 1994.       Kim M. Barnes   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE     The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted."     By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. Ord. of Included/Omitted Supp. No. 11- 8-10 Included 26  2-15-11 Included 27  6-13-11 Included 27  8- 8-11 Omitted 27 10-10-11 Included 28 11-14-11 Included 28  1- 9-12 Included 28   1-12-12(1) Included 28   1-12-12(2) Included 28  5-14-12 Included 29  6-11-12 Included 29  7- 9-12 Included 29  7- 9-12(Res.) Omitted 29 11-12-12(1) Included 30 11-12-12(2) Included 30 11-12-12(3) Included 30 12-10-12 Included 31 12-10-12(1) Included 31  7- 8-13 Included 31  7- 8-13(1) Included 31  8-12-13 Included 32  8-12-13(1) Included 32 11- 5-13 Included 32 11- 5-13(1) Included 32 12- 9-13 Included 32 12- 9-13(1) Included 32 12-19-13 Included 32 12-19-13(1) Included 32  2-10-14 Included 32  2-20-14 Included 32   3-20-14(1) Included 33   3-20-14(2) Included 33   5-12-14 Included 33   6- 9-14 Included 33   7-14-14(1) Included 33   7-14-14(2) Included 33  6- 8-15(1) Included 34  6- 8-15(2) Included 34  6- 8-15(3) Included 34 12-14-15(1) Omitted 35 12-17-15 Included 35   6- 8-15 Included 36   4-11-16 Included 36   6-13-16 Included 36  6-11-18(1) Included 37  6-11-18(2) Included 37  7- 9-18(1) Included 37  
PART I - CHARTER[1] AN ACT     To provide a new Charter for the City of Vidalia; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, and suspension and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, meetings, quorum, voting, rules, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for a city manager, acting city manager, mayor, and mayor pro tempore and certain duties, powers, and other matters relative thereto; to provide for administrative affairs and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, a city accountant, and other personnel and matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof and other matters relative to those judges; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for elections; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments, to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for the conveyance of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for prior ordinances and rules, pending matters, and existing personnel; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for severability; to provide for preservation of legislation relative to the public school system of the city; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act and amendatory Acts thereto; to provide for effective dates; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes.     BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Vidalia as adopted by the city on Feb. 14, 1994, and approved by the Georgia General Assembly, H.B. No. 2012. Absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [] has been added for clarity. 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 
Section 1.10. - Name.     The City of Vidalia, in Toombs County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style the "City of Vidalia" and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. (a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the earliest effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official map of the corporate limits of the City of Vidalia, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. (b)  The boundaries existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter are more specifically shown by that plat of survey prepared by Charles M. Zeigler and Associates, Inc., Registered Surveyors, dated January 14, 1993, showing an area of eleven thousand three hundred forty and eighty-seven hundredths (11,340.87) acres, the same being recorded in Toombs County Plat Book 26, Page 63, and incorporated in this Charter by reference and made a part and parcel of this description. (c)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. (a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. (b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.13. - Examples of powers.     The powers of the city shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  Air and water pollution: To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams or bodies of water within the corporate limits of the city; (2)  Animal regulations: To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this Charter; (3)  Appropriations and expenditures: To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the Laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; (4)  Building regulation: To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; (5)  Business regulation and taxation: To levy and to provide for collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; (6)  Condemnation: To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter by enacted; (7)  Contracts: To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; (8)  Emergencies: To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; (9)  Fire regulations: To fix and establish fire districts and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; (10)  Garbage fees: To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; (11)  General health, safety, and welfare: To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (12)  Gifts: To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; (13)  Health and sanitation: To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (14)  Jail sentences: To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares or other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; (15)  Motor vehicles: To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; (16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power: To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; (17)  Municipal debts: To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the Laws of the State of Georgia; (18)  Municipal property ownership: To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; (19)  Municipal property protection: To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; (20)  Municipal utilities: To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; (21)  Nuisance: To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; (22)  Penalties: To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the Laws of the State of Georgia; (23)  Planning and zoning: To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; (24)  Police and fire protection: To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and firefighting agency; (25)  Public hazards; removal: To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; (26)  Public improvements: To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; (27)  Public peace: To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; (28)  Public transportation: To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; (29)  Public utilities and services: To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; (30)  Regulation of roadside areas: To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; (31)  Retirement: To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; (32)  Roadways: To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; (33)  Water or sewer fees: To levy a fee, charge, or water or sewer tax, or both, as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of wells, storage tanks, sewage disposal plants, and a water or sewerage system, or both, and to levy on those to whom water or sewerage services are made available a water or sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the water or sewer system; to provide for manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a water or sewer connection fee or fees; (34)  Solid waste disposal: To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; (35)  Special areas of public regulation: To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; (36)  Special assessments: To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; (37)  Taxes, ad valorem: To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; (38)  Taxes, other: To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; (39)  Taxicabs: To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; (40)  Urban redevelopment: To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and (41)  Other powers: To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to execute all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other Laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable Laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.14. - Exercise of powers.     All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent Laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 
Section 2.10. - City council creation; number; election.     The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five (5) councilmembers. The city council established in this Charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. 
Section 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office.     The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been qualified and registered to vote in the city immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. Should a councilmember remove his or her residence from the ward from which he or she was elected or should a councilmember at large remove his or her residence from the city, such removal shall effect an automatic vacancy in the office held by the person so moving. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. (a)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general Laws of the State of Georgia. (b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in section 5.19 of this Charter. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses.     The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Voting when personally interested. (a)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which that person is personally interested. 
Section 2.15. - Conflicts of interest. (a)  Generally: No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: (1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; (2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; (3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; (4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; (5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or (6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has a financial interest. (b)  Disclosure: Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. (c)  Use of public property: No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. (d)  Contracts voidable and rescindable: Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. (e)  Ineligibility of elected official: Except where authorized by law, no councilmember nor the mayor shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by the government or any agency thereof during the term for which that person was elected. No former councilmember and no former mayor shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which that person was elected. (f)  Political activities of certain officers and employees: No appointed officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office within the City of Vidalia. (g)  Penalties for violation: (1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. (2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit that person's office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three (3) years thereafter. (Amend. of 4-8-02) 
Section 2.16. - Inquiries and investigations.     The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.17. - General power and authority of the city council.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided in Article I of this Charter. 
Section 2.18. - Eminent domain.     The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Section 2.19. - Oath of office.     The mayor and city council shall, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, each take and subscribe before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths the following oath:     "I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and Laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
Section 2.20. - Regular and special meetings. (a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. (b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three (3) members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. (c)  All meeting of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Section 2.21. - Rules of procedure. (a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. (b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 2.22. - Quorum; voting. (a)  Three (3) councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three (3) councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. (b)  The mayor shall cast the deciding vote in case of a tie. 
Section 2.23. - Ordinance form; procedures. (a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The City Council of the City of Vidalia hereby ordains …" and every ordinance shall so begin. (b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish and in accordance with code section 36-35-3 of the O.C.G.A. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Section 2.24. - Action requiring an ordinance.     Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.25. - Emergencies.     To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three (3) councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorized the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within thirty (30) days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three (3) councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed thirty (30) days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.26. - Codes of technical regulations. (a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of section 2.23 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to section 2.27 of this Charter. (b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 2.27. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. (a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. (b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Vidalia, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. (c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed as soon as practicable following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Section 2.28. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation.     The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications. 
Section 2.29. - Removal of city manager. (a)  The city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: (1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; (2)  Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, that person may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five (5) days before the hearing; (3)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. (b)  The city manager shall continue to receive the city manager's salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Section 2.30. - Acting city manager.     By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the city manager's disability shall cease. 
Section 2.31. - Powers and duties of the city manager.     The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this Charter. The city manager: (1)  Shall appoint, subject to the confirmation of the city council, the heads of such departments as the city council shall from time to time establish. In addition, he or she shall appoint, without the confirmation of the city council and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; (2)  Shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; (3)  Shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion, but the city manager may not vote; (4)  Shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; (5)  Shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; (6)  Shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; (7)  Shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject toe the city manager's direction and supervision; (8)  Shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; (9)  Shall perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city council; (10)  The city manager shall be the purchasing agent for the city and shall make all purchases for the various departments of the city and shall approve all vouchers for the same; provided, however, that the city council, at its first meeting after the approval of this Charter and at its first meeting of each calendar year thereafter, shall fix a maximum monetary limit which the city manager, as such purchasing agent for the city, shall not exceed in any single purchase without the prior approval of the city council. During said calendar year for which such annual monetary limit is adopted, the city council may from time to time amend this maximum monetary limit either upwards or downwards. Further, the city council may, by resolution, require competitive bids on purchases under such rules and regulations as the city council may from time to time prescribe; and (11)  The city manager, before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, shall give bond, conditioned in such manner, as the city council shall require and the city manager shall have authority to require of any employee under his or her jurisdiction such bond, under such conditions, as he or she shall require, and all of such bonds shall be payable to the City of Vidalia, and its successors, for the benefit of the city and all premiums on all such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
Section 2.32. - Council's interference with administration.     Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.16 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Section 2.33. - Selection of mayor pro tempore.     The mayor shall appoint a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote and otherwise participate fully as a councilmember. 
Section 2.34. - Powers and duties of mayor.     The mayor shall: (1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; (2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokes person for the city and the chief advocate of policy; (3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; and (4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
Section 2.35. - Mayor pro tempore.     During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in such person's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
Section 2.36. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. (a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor. (b)  The mayor, within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of an ordinance or resolution, shall return it to the city clerk with or without the mayor's approval or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become effective at 12:00 noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. (c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at its next meeting. If the city council then or at its next general meeting adopts the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four (4) members, it shall become effective. (d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or times of appropriation in any ordinance or resolution. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become effective, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become effective unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the city council as though disapproved and shall not become effective unless overridden by the city council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 
Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. (b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. (c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. (d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. (e)  All directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The city manager may suspend or remove directors under the city manager's supervision. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the city manager's action by a majority vote. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. (a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasijudicial, or quasilegislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. (b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. (c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. (d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. (e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this Charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. (f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. (g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three (3) members of the city council. (h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one (1) of its members as chairperson and one (1) member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one (1) of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Section 3.12. - City attorney.     The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for managing all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of the city attorney by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk.     The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal; maintain city council records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Section 3.14. - City accountant.     The city council shall appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Section 3.15. - Position classification and pay plans.     The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Section 3.16. - Personnel policies.     The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: (1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; (2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; (3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; (4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and (5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
Section 4.10. - Creation; name.     There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Vidalia. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. (a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. (b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. (c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. (d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of three (3) members of the city council. (e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered in the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.21 of this Charter. 
Section 4.12. - Convening.     The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. (a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. (b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or ten (10) days in jail. (c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. (d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operations and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. (e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. (f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. (g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. (h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. (i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Section 4.14. - Certiorari.     The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Toombs County under the Laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court.     With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 
Section 5.10. - Applicability of general law.     All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Division of city into wards. First ward: The first ward shall be bounded on the north by the north east corner of the city limits extending west to the eastern right of way of Cecil Anderson Road; thence south by eastern right of way of Cecil Anderson to the centerline of North Street; thence west by the centerline of North Street to Broadfoot Boulevard; thence south by the center line of Broadfoot Boulevard to First Street (U. S. Highway 280); thence west by the center line of First Street to Winona Street; thence south by the center line of Winona Street to Smith Street; thence north by the center line of Smith Street to Fifth Street; thence east by the centerline of Fifth Street to Aimwell Road; thence south by the center line of Aimwell Road to the city limits. The south and east boundary shall be bounded by the city limits from Aimwell Road east to Beginning point at north east city limit boundary. Second ward: The second ward shall be bounded on the east by the center line of Aimwell Road from the city limits north to Fifth Street; thence west by the center line of Fifth Street to Smith Street; thence south by the center line of Smith Street to Winona Street; thence north by the center line of Winona Street to First Street (U.S. Highway 280); thence east by the centerline of First Street to Broadfoot Boulevard; thence north by the centerline of Broadfoot Boulevard to North Main Street; thence west by the center line of North Main St. to Brinson Road; thence south by the center line of Brinson Road to First Street; thence east by the center line of First Street to Kenworth Street; thence south by the center line of Kenworth Street to Fourth St; thence east by the centerline of Fourth Street to Adams Street; The west boundary shall be bounded by the centerline of Adams Street to the south property boundary of land having a map and parcel number of C14 001KPA. The south boundary shall be bounded by the city limits from the southern border of C14 001KPA to Aimwell Road. Third ward: The third ward shall be bounded to the south by the centerline of North Street from the western right of way of Cecil Anderson Road to Broadfoot Boulevard; thence south by the centerline of Broadfoot Boulevard to Main Street; thence west by the centerline of Main Street to Brinson Road. The west boundary shall be bounded by the centerline of Brinson Road to Donavan Street; thence north by centerline of Lowery Place to North Street (State Highway No. 292). The north boundary shall be bounded by the centerline of North Street from Lowery Place east to City of Vidalia Industrial Railway; thence north by the centerline of City of Vidalia Industrial Railway to McIntosh Street (Georgia Highway No. 297); thence south along the centerline of McIntosh Street, to Brantley Road; thence east along the centerline of Brantley Road to the centerline of Franklin Street; thence east by the centerline of Franklin Street to Jungle Road; thence east by centerline of Jungle Road to the centerline of Calhoun Street. The east boundary shall be bounded by the centerline of Loop Road (State Highway 130 E) north to the city limits; thence east by the city limits to the western right of way of Cecil Anderson Road; thence south by the western right-of-way of Cecil Anderson Road to North Street (State Highway No. 292). Fourth ward: The fourth ward shall be bounded to the east by the centerline of Loop Road (State Highway 130 E) from the city limits along Loop Road (State Highway 130) to Calhoun Street; thence north by the centerline of Calhoun Street Jungle Road; thence west by the centerline of Jungle Road to Franklin Street; thence north by the centerline of Franklin Street to Brantley Road; thence west by the centerline of Brantley Road to McIntosh Street (State Highway 297); thence north by the centerline of McIntosh Street to the City of Vidalia Industrial Railway; thence west by the centerline of City of Vidalia Industrial Railway to North Street (State Highway 292); thence west by the centerline of North Street to Lowery Place; thence south by the centerline of Lowery Place to Donovan Street, thence south by centerline of Brinson Road to First Street (U S Highway 280); thence east by the centerline of First Street to Kenworth Street; thence south by the centerline of Kenworth Street to Fourth Street; thence east by the centerline of Fourth Street to Adams Street (State Highway 130 W); thence south by the centerline of Adams Street to the southern property line of map and parcel number C14 001KPA; thence east along property boundary of said property C14 001KPA to the city limits. The south, north and west boundary shall be bounded by the city limits from eastern boundary of C14 001KPA to Loop Road (State Highway 130 E). (Ord. of 10-10-11) 
Section 5.12. - Selection of councilmembers by ward.     One (1) councilmember shall be elected from each of the four (4) wards described in section 5.11 of this Charter. The councilmember from each respective ward shall be elected by the voters of that particular ward in which they reside as described in section 5.11 of this Charter. 
Section 5.13. - Councilmember at large and mayor.     The mayor and councilmember at large shall be elected by the voters of the entire city. 
Section 5.14. - Residence requirements of candidates for councilmember, mayor.     In order to be eligible to be elected as a councilmember from a ward, the candidate therefor must be a resident of such ward on the date he or she qualifies to run for office and at the time of election thereto. In order to be eligible to be elected as councilmember at large or to be elected mayor, the candidates therefor may reside in any ward. 
Section 5.15. - Candidates for councilmember to indicate type of candidacy.     All candidates for the office of councilmember shall designate whether they are offering as a candidate from a ward or as a candidate from the city at large. 
Section 5.16. - Time of election of councilmembers, mayor. (a)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 1995, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, a councilmember at large, a councilmember from the third ward, and a councilmember from the fourth ward shall be elected to serve a four-year term in office. (b)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 1997, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, a mayor, councilmember from the first ward, and a councilmember from the second ward shall be elected to serve a four-year term in office. (c)  Terms of office for mayor and councilmembers shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in section 2.19 of this Charter and on the first Monday in January following the election. 
Section 5.17. - Nonpartisan elections.     Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Section 5.18. - Election by majority vote.     The mayor and members of the city council shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position. 
Section 5.19. - Special elections; vacancies.     In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.20. - Other provisions.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.21. - Removal of officers.     The mayor or any councilmember may be removed or suspended from office in the manner provided by general law. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
Section 6.10. - Property tax.     The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods.     The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes.     The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses, permits; fees.     The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises.     The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of thirty-five (35) years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges.     The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments.     The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes.     The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.     The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under section 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds.     The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds.     Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans.     The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Fiscal year.     The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.23. - Preparation of budget.     The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall also comply with the budgeting and auditing provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 6.24. - Submission of operating budget to city council.     On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the city manager may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.25. - Action by city council on budget. (a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. (b)  The city council shall by ordinance adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 31 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.23 of this Charter. (c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.26. - Tax levies.     Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. the taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.27. - Changes in appropriations.     The city council by resolution may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 6.28. - Capital improvements budget. (a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with the city manager's recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.25 of this Charter. (b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 31 of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by the city manager's recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by resolution. 
Section 6.29. - Independent audit.     There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.30. - Contracting procedures.     No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: (1)  It is in writing; (2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney; and (3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.22 of this Charter. 
Section 6.31. - Centralized purchasing.     The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.32. - Sale of city property. (a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. (b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. (c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials.     The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances.     All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 7.12. - Preservation of legislation pertaining to public school system.     The special legislation on the subject of the public school system of the city and the funds belonging to said public school system and the various matters connected therewith shall not be repealed or modified by the enactment of this Charter but shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 7.13. - First election under this Charter.     The first municipal election shall be held November 7, 1995, at which the councilmember at large, the councilmember from the third ward, and the councilmember from the fourth ward positions shall be filled. The city council seat presently held by Buford Mobley shall be designated ward one. The city council seat presently held by E. Kay Stafford, Jr., shall be designated ward two. The city council seat presently held by John Raymond Turner shall be designated ward three. The city council seat presently held by John C. Matheson shall be designated ward four. The city council seat presently held by Charles Clements shall be designated at large. All persons giving notice of candidacy for a city council seat shall designate the ward being sought. Wards three and four and at large shall be filled at this first election for an initial term of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified such that a continuing body is created. Each councilmember shall serve a full term as provided in section 2.11 of this Charter. 
Section 7.14. - Existing personnel and officers.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of this city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days before or during which time the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Section 7.15. - Pending matters.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.16. - Construction. (a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. (b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. (c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. (d)  The term "council" or "city council" includes the mayor when such officer is required to vote pursuant to subsection (b) of section 2.22 of this Charter. 
Section 7.17. - Severability.     If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Section 7.18. - Effective date.     This Act shall become effective on July 1, 1994. 
Section 7.19. - Specific repealer.     An Act incorporating the City of Vidalia in the County of Toombs, approved April 8, 1968 (Ga. L. 1968, p. 3136), as amended, is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Section 7.20. - General repealer.     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. Amendment  Date Section   Section this Charter  4- 8-02 2.15(f) 10-10-11 5.11  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited.     The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Vidalia, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. (a)  In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body:     City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Vidalia, Georgia" followed it.     Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, as amended, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3).     Council, city council, mayor and council, governing body. Whenever the words "council," "city council," "mayor and council" or "governing body" are used, it shall mean the governing body of this city.     County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Toombs or the County of Montgomery, as the case may be.     Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer or head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the officer or head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.     Family unit. A family unit shall be the head of a household and any dependents living within that household.     Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where inappropriate.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater or more stringent restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.     Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.     Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include the persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.     Limits, corporation. The words "limits" or "corporation" shall mean the corporate limits of the city, the legal boundary of the city.     Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used it shall mean the mayor of this city.     Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.     Municipal court judge or recorder. The terms "municipal court judge" or "recorder" means the municipal court judge who presides over the municipal court of the city.     Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given in this Code or in any ordinance or code referred to or adopted in this Code, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Vidalia, Georgia" were added.     Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.     Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.     Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".     Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.     Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.     Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.     Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein defined.     Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.     Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.     Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available or accessible to the public.     Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.     Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as such person's place of habitation, and to which, whenever such person is absent, such person has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed such person's residence.     Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the city seal, the seal of the corporation.     Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.     Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write.     State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia.     Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city, and shall include the area between the right-of-way lines thereof.     Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.     Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.     Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week.     Written or in writing. The terms "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.     Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. (b)  The same rules shall be applied in construing ordinances of this city as are applied in construing the statutes of this state, which rules are found in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq., as amended, and the same meanings are to be given words found in the ordinances as are given similar words found in the statutes of this state. (Code 1968, §§ 1-2, 1-4; Ord. of 8-12-13 ) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections.     The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.     All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby.     Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Vidalia, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired.     In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Vidalia, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired.     In lieu of the foregoing paragraph, when the governing body desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, and to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the governing body, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Vidalia, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention."     All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. (b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances.     The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.     The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. (Code 1968, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code.     It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the governing body without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations.     Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any such ordinance or resolution shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or work in the workgang on the public streets or on such public works as the authorities may employ the workgang for not more than ninety (90) days, or by any one or more of these punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the charter of the city. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.     In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. (Code 1968, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-9. - Fine and bond schedule.     The fine and bond schedule for various offenses against the city shall be as established by the recorder. 
Sec. 1-10. - Remission of fines, sentences; parole—Authority of mayor. (a)  The mayor shall have power and authority to remit or reduce the fines and sentences imposed by the recorder of the city upon persons convicted for violating any of the laws or ordinances of the city, and to parole on good conduct persons convicted by the municipal court judge of violating any of the laws and ordinances of the city, under the rules and regulations prescribed in this section and section 1-11. (b)  Uncollectible fines shall be charged off with the understanding that cases will be reopened if the fines become collectible. (Code 1968, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-11. - Same—Petition required. (a)  Contents: Any person convicted by the recorder and desiring the benefits of section 1-10 shall make application in writing to the mayor in the following form: "To the Mayor of the City of Vidalia:     I, the undersigned petition your honor to remit or reduce the fine imposed on me, or grant me a parole on good conduct.     This the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . Signed _____ Petitioner."  (b)  Delivery: The petition shall be delivered to the mayor by the applicant or by any other person acting for the applicant. (c)  Action by mayor: Upon receipt of the petition the mayor may in the exercise of discretion refuse to entertain the same. (d)  Setting hearing: If the mayor exercises such discretion in favor of the petition, the petition shall be marked "approved" and the mayor shall set a time for hearing thereon and file the same with the city clerk. (e)  Place of hearing: All applications shall be tried and heard at the council chamber. (f)  Notice of hearing: Before any application shall be heard the city clerk shall cause written notice to be served on each member of the city council, the same to be prepared by the clerk and in such form as the city clerk may prescribe and to be served by the marshal of the city. (Code 1968, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-12. - Same—Vote required.     No finding of the mayor upon any application shall become of force unless concurred in by at least three (3) of the councilmen. (Code 1968, § 1-15) 
Sec. 1-13. - Suspension or probation of sentence.     The recorder shall have the authority, in such officers discretion, to suspend or probate all or any part of any fine, sentence or other penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of section 1-8, and to impose upon such suspension or probation, such terms and conditions as such officer may deem fit and proper. (Code 1968, § 1-16) 
Sec. 1-14. - Altering Code.     It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-15. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; (2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; (3)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; (4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of officials, officers or employees of the city; any personnel ordinance consistent with this Code; (5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax; (6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person; (7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; (8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; (9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; (10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same; (11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; (12)  Any zoning ordinance; any subdivision ordinance; (13)  Any ordinance enacted after October 24, 1989; all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-16. - Schedule of payment of assessments generated by "court fees".     It shall be the responsibility of the "clerk of municipal court" to generate the documentation for the payments of the "court fees" obtained through the operation of the City of Vidalia Municipal Court. The below listed schedule of payments will be followed for dispersing the "fines" and "court fees". Each payment scheduled will be paid in full prior to the payment of the next scheduled payment. (1)  City of Vidalia's amount of "fine". (2)  Failure to appear/contempt fee. (3)  Peace officer annuity and benefit fund (POAB). (4)  Peace officer, prosecutor training fund (POPT). (5)  Indigent defense fund (IDF). (6)  Law library (LL). (7)  Jail construction and staffing fund (JAIL). (8)  Crime victim's emergency fund (CVEF). (9)  Drug abuse treatment and education fund (DATE). (10)  Local victim's assistance program (LVAP). (11)  Brain and spinal injury trust fund (BSITF). (12)  Crime lab fee (CLF). Upon submission of the above listed documentation by the municipal court clerk, the accounts payable clerk of the city will issue a single check to the Toombs County Clerk of Superior Court. The check will be issued in the total amount of all of the assessments. The check and documentation will be sent to the clerk of superior court prior to the 15th of each month to be dispersed to each appropriate fund listed on the documentation. Any further added assessments shall be paid subsequent to the city fine payment. (Ord. of 6-22-04) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Legislative intent that city exercise common functions of local government, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1; authority to establish municipal offices, agencies, employments, regulate same, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 2-1. - Execution of papers in name of city—Mayor designated.     The mayor shall be empowered in the name of the city to execute all deeds, notes and contracts by and with the city, and every other paper in connection with the transaction of the city's business. (Code 1968, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Attestation.     All deeds, notes, contracts and other papers executed in the name of the city by the mayor shall be attested by the clerk of council, and when so executed, shall have full force and effect and become binding upon the city. (Code 1968, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Mayor, mayor pro tem to sign checks.     The mayor or the mayor pro tem shall sign all checks in behalf of the city, and such signature may be affixed by facsimile. (Code 1968, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-4. - Same—Signing checks in absence of mayor and mayor pro tem.     In the event both the mayor and mayor pro tem are absent and unavailable, the city clerk or other designated city employee shall be authorized to sign checks in behalf of the city. Such designation may be made by resolution of the council. (Code 1968, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-5. - Same—Facsimile signatures; city depository authorized to accept.     The official depositories of this city are hereby requested, authorized and directed to honor checks, drafts and other orders for the payment of money drawn in this city's name, including those drawn to the individual order of any person whose name thereon appears as signer thereof, when bearing or purporting to bear the facsimile signature of any one of the following: Mayor, mayor pro tem, city clerk, and assistant city clerk. City depositories shall be entitled to honor and to charge this city for all such checks, drafts and other orders, regardless of by whom or by what means the facsimile signatures thereon may have been affixed thereto. (Res. of 9-12-88) 
Sec. 2-6. - City marshal.     The office of city marshal is hereby created. Duties of the city marshal shall be such as prescribed by the city manager. (Code 1968, § 2-39) Cross reference— Designation of chief of police as city marshal for purposes of property taxes, § 18-11. 
Sec. 2-7. - Elections. (a)  The purpose of this ordinance is to authorize the Toombs County Board of Elections to assist, on behalf of the City of Vidalia, the municipal elections in accordance with the Georgia Election Code; to provide an effective date; and for other purposes. (b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45(c), the Toombs County Board of Elections is hereby authorized to assist, on behalf of the City of Vidalia, the Municipal Elections, in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in the contract to be entered into between the City of Vidalia and Toombs County, it being intended that such an arrangement shall be a permanent and recurrent practice with respect to any and all future municipal elections until such time as the city shall otherwise declare. (c)  All actions previously taken by the Toombs County Board of Elections on behalf of the City of Vidalia in connection with the aforementioned municipal elections are hereby approved and ratified in their entirety. (Ord. of 4-29-03) 
Secs. 2-8—2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
Sec. 2-20. - Time and place of council meetings—Days; times.     The second Monday in each month at 6:00 p.m. shall be the date and time of regular council meetings, effective May 12, 1997. (Code 1968, § 2-21; Ord. of 4-14-97) 
Sec. 2-21. - Same—Place.     Meetings of the city council shall be held in the municipal annex. However, the council may designate another place for regular or special meetings provided appropriate notice is given. (Code 1968, §§ 2-22, 2-23; Ord. of 6-9-14 ) 
Sec. 2-22. - Calling special meetings—Upon request of council.     In the event a majority of the members of the council shall request it in writing, the mayor shall call a special meeting of the members of the council at such time as may be stated in the request. (Code 1968, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-23. - Same—Upon initiative of mayor.     A special meeting may be called by the mayor upon notice to the members of the council at any time that may be stated in the notice. (Code 1968, § 2-25) 
Sec. 2-24. - Duty to attend meetings.     It shall be the duty of the mayor and each member of the city council to attend all regular and special meetings. (Code 1968, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-25. - City attorney to attend council meetings.     The city attorney shall attend every regular meeting of the city council, and any special meeting of the city council as requested. (Code 1968, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-26. - Presiding officer of council.     All meetings shall be presided over by the mayor except when the mayor is absent from the meeting, or refuses to preside according to these rules and order of business, in which event the mayor pro tem shall preside. (Code 1968, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-27. - Appointment of mayor pro tem.     A mayor pro tem shall be appointed by the mayor immediately upon the mayor assuming the office of mayor, or as soon thereafter as practicable. (Code 1968, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-28. - Order of business at council meetings.     The order of business of regular meetings as designated on an agenda as prepared by the city manager shall be followed. (Code 1968, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-29. - Applicability of Robert's Rules of Order.     "Robert's Rules of Order Revised for Deliberative Assemblies," is hereby adopted as the standard order of rules governing the council of the city; and the rules of order of such body shall be governed by the same insofar as they are applicable to such body, and are not in conflict with the rules herein set out. (Code 1968, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-30. - Certain affairs to be transacted by committees.     The ministerial and business affairs of the city shall be transacted by committees appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council and through the city manager. (Code 1968, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-31. - Committees of council. (a)  The following are committees of the council: (1)  Finance and personnel. (2)  Water and sewage. (3)  Police and fire. (4)  Streets and sanitation. (5)  Licenses, taxes and permits. (6)  Airports. (7)  Such other committees as the mayor deems necessary. (b)  Committee members shall serve for terms of one year unless sooner removed by the mayor. Regular appointments shall be made at the first meeting in each year. (Code 1968, §§ 2-33—2-37) Cross reference— Airport committee, § 3-21. 
Sec. 2-32. - Effective date of ordinances.     Ordinances which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time, shall take effect immediately after their passage, without reference to their publication. (Code 1968, § 1-5) 
Sec. 2-33. - Vote required to adjourn, to recess.     No meeting shall be adjourned or recessed except upon motion made, seconded, voted upon and carried by a majority of the members of the council. (Code 1968, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-34. - Salaries of mayor and members of the council.     The mayor shall be paid an annual salary of ten thousand eight hundred dollars ($10,800.00). Each member of the council shall be paid an annual salary of five thousand four hundred dollars ($5,400.00). These salaries are effective January 1, 2002. (Ord. of 2-24-98; Ord. of 3-20-14(1) ) 
Sec. 2-35. - Expenses of mayor and members of the council.     The mayor and members of the council can be reimbursed for receipted expenses and mileage provided they are for official business only. Mileage will be reimbursed at the federally approved rate. ( Ord. of 3-20-14(2) ) State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4 (c). 
Secs. 2-36—2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY CLERK 
Sec. 2-40. - Oath of office.     The city clerk shall take and subscribe the following oath of office:     "Georgia, Toombs County:     I, ____________ , City Clerk of the City of Vidalia, do hereby swear or affirm, that I will faithfully perform all the duties and responsibilities of the office of the city clerk as designated and prescribed by the charter of the City of Vidalia and the laws and ordinances as passed by the mayor and council, and all other such further duties and responsibilities as may be requested and required of me from time to time by the mayor and council of the City of Vidalia; that I will make a true and accurate accounting of all monies and funds that may come into my hands belonging to the City of Vidalia, either in my official position as city clerk or otherwise; and I will also do any and all other things and assume all other official responsibilities faithfully, truly, and in accordance with the charter of the City of Vidalia, and the laws and ordinances of the mayor and council of the City of Vidalia.     Sworn to and subscribed to by me on this the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . ____________ City Clerk        Sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths."     This oath shall be taken and made by the city clerk before entering upon official duties in this capacity, and shall be in writing and duly filed in the minutes of the governing body. (Code 1968, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-41. - Bond required; amount, conditions.     The city clerk shall enter into a bond with good and ample security in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), payable to the governing body, the condition of the bond to be that the city clerk of the city shall faithfully perform all the duties imposed upon the city clerk as prescribed by the laws and ordinances of the city and by the governing body thereof, and make a true and accurate accounting of all funds and monies that may come into the hands of the city clerk that may belong to the city. The bond shall extend to and cover all personnel employed in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1968, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-42. - Compensation.     The city clerk shall receive compensation in an amount fixed and determined from time to time by resolution of the governing body. (Code 1968, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-43. - Duties, responsibilities enumerated.     The city clerk shall perform duties as described in the City Charter. (Code 1968, § 2-52; Ord. of 2-12-07(1)) Cross reference— Social security, § 15-100 et seq. 
Sec. 2-44. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 12, 2007(1), repealed § 2-44, which pertained to duties as city treasurer and derived from Code 1968, § 2-53. 
Sec. 2-45. - Deputy city clerk.     There is established the position of deputy city clerk. The deputy city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager with approval of the council. 
Secs. 2-46—2-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE DIRECTOR[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 12, 2007(1), amended the title of Art. IV to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV was entitled, "City Treasurer." 
Sec. 2-50. - Scope of provisions.     The provisions of this article shall apply to the finance director when such office is filled by appointment, and to the office of city manager when acting as finance director. (Code 1968, § 2-64; Ord. of 2-12-07(1)) 
Sec. 2-51. - Oath of office.     The finance director shall subscribe to and take the following oath of office: "Georgia, Toombs County:     I, ____________ , Finance Director of the City of Vidalia, do hereby swear or affirm, that I will faithfully perform all the duties and responsibilities of the office of finance director as designated and prescribed by the charter of the City of Vidalia and the laws and ordinances passed by the mayor and council, and all other such further duties and responsibilities as may be required of me from time to time by said mayor and council of the City of Vidalia; that I will make a true and accurate accounting of all monies and funds that may come into my hands belonging to the City of Vidalia, either in my official position as finance director or otherwise; and I will also do any and all other things and assume all other official responsibilities faithfully, truly, and in accordance with the charter and the laws and ordinances of the mayor and council of the City of Vidalia.     Sworn to and subscribed to by me on this the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . ____________ Finance Director       Sworn to before an officer authorized to administer paths."     This oath shall be taken and made by the finance director before entering upon his official duties in this capacity, and shall be in writing and duly filed in the minutes of the governing body. (Code 1968, § 2-65; Ord. of 2-12-07(1)) 
Sec. 2-52. - Bond required; amount, conditions.     The finance director shall enter into a bond with good and ample security in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), payable to the governing body, the condition of the bond to be that the finance director shall faithfully perform all the duties imposed upon the finance director as prescribed by the city charter and as further prescribed and provided for by the laws and ordinances of the city and the governing body thereof, and make a true and accurate accounting of all funds and monies that may come into the hands of the finance director that may belong to the city. The bond shall extend to and cover all personnel employed in the office of the finance director. (Code 1968, § 2-66; Ord. of 2-12-07(1)) 
Sec. 2-53. - Compensation.     The finance director shall receive compensation in an amount fixed and determined from time to time by resolution of the governing body. (Code 1968, § 2-67; Ord. of 2-12-07(1)) 
Sec. 2-54. - Duties, responsibilities enumerated.     In addition to the other duties of the finance director as designated and prescribed in the charter, the finance director shall perform the following duties and assume the following official responsibilities: (1)  To receive all money and funds collected from all sources of revenue of said city and to collect, handle and account for all other funds that the finance director may collect personally or as may be collected through any other source whatsoever, to keep an accurate and complete record thereof and deposit the same in the depository designated by the governing body; (2)  To assist in receiving all tax returns; to accept and receive from the city clerk all past due water bills and all ad valorem taxes more than thirty (30) days past due, and all business licenses, of every kind and nature, due the city, and give therefor to the city clerk a receipt showing that these past due water bills and ad valorem taxes and business licenses have been delivered to such officer; (3)  To collect all past due water bills and past due ad valorem taxes and business licenses, as turned over to such officer by the city clerk; (4)  To assist in council meetings whenever so requested by the council; (5)  To assist in the municipal court when so requested by the council; (6)  To perform and carry out all such orders and directives of the mayor and council that may be given in connection with the assessing of property for taxes, the receiving of tax returns, and the collection of taxes due the city and/or any other revenue that may be due the city; (7)  To make a true and accurate accounting of all the funds of the city and keep true and accurate records thereof; (8)  To be in charge of, and responsible for, all funds and/or monies of the city; to be in charge of the checkbooks of the city, and to sign all checks, vouchers, orders for payment of any funds, etc.; (9)  To receive the payrolls of the city weekly, monthly or otherwise, and to issue and execute checks, vouchers and payments therefor, keeping an accurate, true and complete record of such payments and deductions, advances, etc., as to truly and accurately reflect this disbursement of funds; (10)  To perform all other and further duties as the mayor and council may direct as may pertain to any of the affairs of the city, and as may be authorized for the finance director to so perform, by provisions expressed or implied therein. (Code 1968, § 2-68; Ord. of 2-12-07(1)) 
Secs. 2-55—2-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 2-60—2-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 12, 1996, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of substantive provisions of said ordinance as §§ 2-70—2-74 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-70. - Creation purposes.     There shall be a commission for the city which shall be named and designated as the "Vidalia Beautification Commission." The general purpose of said commission shall be to promote the beauty of the city in general, and to do all things not contrary to the laws of the State of Georgia which result in a more attractive community, including but in no way being limited to, the planting of trees, shrubbery and flowers within the city limits, both on public property and on private property upon which a lease is held by the city or for which authorization is given by the owners thereof to the commission permitting said commission to beautify property. (Ord. of 2-12-96) 
Sec. 2-71. - Election; terms; compensation of members.     The initial commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be elected by the mayor and council of the city with the following terms of expiration: MemberExpiration of Term (1)  Charles H. Andrew, Jr. 12/31/98* (2)  Lucy Pierson 12/31/98* (3)  Jeanne Green 12/31/96 (4)  Flossie Hayes 12/31/96 (5)  Jack McMillen 12/31/96 (6)  George C. Daniel 12/31/97 (7)  John L. Kea 12/31/97 *Reappointment from previous terms     By January of 1998 the board shall be reduced in size to five (5) members while maintaining diversity ensuring broad representatives of the community. The mayor and council at its first meeting in January of each year commencing in 1996, shall elect members as necessary, such members to serve a term of two (2) years. All members shall serve until their successors are duly elected and qualified, and shall serve at all times without compensation. Any members shall be eligible to succeed himself/herself; however, it is the policy of the city that no committee member shall succeed himself/herself more than one (1) term. (Ord. of 2-12-96) 
Sec. 2-72. - Organization.     Members of the commission on the first Monday in February of each year shall elect from its membership a person to serve as chairman of such commission for a term of office of one (1) year. (Ord. of 2-12-96) 
Sec. 2-73. - Finances.     The commission shall have the right to receive grants, gifts and donations and administer trusts for the purposes and powers set out herein. The mayor and council may appropriate funds for the commission, the amount of such appropriated funds, if any, to be decided by the mayor and council. (Ord. of 2-12-96) 
Sec. 2-74. - Reports.     The commission shall be responsible to the mayor and council of the city and shall, in December of each year, make a report to the mayor and council and account for all funds received from the city in the preceding year. (Ord. of 2-12-96) 
Secs. 2-75—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DE-ANNEXATIONS AND ANNEXATIONS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Corporate boundaries, § 1.11; zoning generally, § 2511. 
Sec. 2-91. - De-annexations.     [The following list consist of de-annexation(s):] (1)  All that certain tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in the 1536th G.M. District of Toombs County, City of Vidalia, Georgia, and containing one hundred twenty-five (125) acres be and is hereby de-annexed from the City of Vidalia. Said property being bounded, now or formerly as follows: On the North by other lands of Robert Garbutt; East by lands of Mrs. F.L. Garbutt; South by other lands of Robert Garbutt and West by James Wilkes' Estate. Said property being more particularly set out as Tract No. 8 being owned by G.A. Garbutt and on that plat of survey recorded in Toombs County Plat Book 16, Page 1, Slide 176, the same being incorporated herein by reference and made a part and parcel of this description. It is the intention of this section that said property shall be de-annexed from the City of Vidalia and become only a part of and under the jurisdiction of Toombs County and not the incorporated area of the city. All other property owned by Robert L. Garbutt, Sr. shall remain within the city limits. (Ord. of 4-12-99) 
Sec. 2-92. - Annexations.     [The following list consist of annexation(s):] (1)  The corporate limits for the City of Vidalia shall include all that tract or parcel of land located in the 1823rd G.M. District of Toombs County, Georgia being known as 3.40 acres, more or less, and being more specifically shown as Parcel "A," "B" and "C" on that plat of survey prepared by Leland H. Moss, Registered Surveyor, dated June 3, 1999, the same being attached hereto and made a part of this application and incorporated herein by reference. (2)  The following area contiguous to the City of Vidalia is hereby annexed into and is made a part of said city: All that tract or parcel of land located in the 1823rd G. M. District of Toombs County, Georgia and being known as and designated as that area on Forrest Lake Drive, Map 14A, Parcel 81A, 81B, and 81E; Bob Sharpe Road area Map 14B, Parcel 1A, 1B, 1C, 1F, 1H, 14A, 14E, 14B, 14D, 15, 16, 17, 17B, and 18; Julie Drive Area, Lots 161, 162, 163, 164, and 165. As more particularly set out on those maps attached hereto and marked as Exhibit "A" and "B". (3)  The corporate limits for the City of Vidalia shall include all tracts or parcels of land located in the 1823rd G.M.D. and 51st G.M.D. of Toombs County Georgia, shown on attached Exhibits "A," "B," "C" and "D" the same being made a part of and incorporated herein by reference. (4)  The corporate limits for the City of Vidalia shall include all that tract or parcel of land located in the 1536th G. M. District of Toombs County, Georgia being known as 442.998 acres, more or less, and being more specifically described on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part of this application and incorporated herein by reference. (5)  The corporate limits for the City of Vidalia shall include all that tract or parcel of land located in the 1823rd G.M. District of Toombs County, Georgia being known as 3.567 acres, more or less, and being more specifically shown as Lots A, B and C on that plat of survey prepared by R. Kim Dolan, registered surveyor, dated March 19, 2010, the same being attached hereto and made a part of this application and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. of 7-12-99; Ord. of 10-14-02, § 1; Ord. of 4-14-08; Ord. of 1-12-12(1), § 1; Ord. of 1-12-12(2), § 1) 
Secs. 2-93—2-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS 
Sec. 2-126. - Intent.     It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the City of Vidalia that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-127. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the term: (1)  "Complaint" means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro-tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within sixty (60) days of discovery of the alleged misconduct. (2)  "Interest" means a pecuniary benefit accruing to a governing authority or any member of his/her family as a direct result of any payment received from the city. A governing authority or member of his/her immediate family shall be deemed to have directly benefited from any payment from the city if any such person shall own at least ten (10) percent of the entity receiving such payment. (3)  "Governing authority" or "member of the governing authority" means the mayor or any council member of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. (4)  "Immediate family members" are the council member's spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-128. - Prohibitions.     No member of the governing authority shall: (1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; (2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; (3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; (4)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; (5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; (6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; (7)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: a.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; b.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and c.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; (8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; (9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him/her or persons having an interest. Prohibition (2) of this section shall not apply in the case of: a.  An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; b.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; c.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; d.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. Prohibition (5) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-129 are made to the board or commission chairperson thirty (30) days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-129. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest.     An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement ten (10) days prior to, if possible, but always before the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statement shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-130. - Disqualification.     A member of the governing authority shall disqualify him/her from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-131. - Prohibited contracts.     The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to contracts entered into: (1)  After sealed competitive bids, together with a disclosure of the nature of the members of the governing authority's interest. (2)  For emergency situations, provided that the city manager discloses the contract and explains the emergency at the next regular meeting of the governing authority. (3)  In accordance with applicable Georgia law, including O.C.G.A. 16-10-6. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-132. - Complaints.     Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three (3) members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-133. - Board of ethics. (a)  Composition of the board of ethics: (1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five (5) residents of the city to be appointed as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one (1) year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. (2)  The mayor and council members shall each designate two (2) qualified citizens to provide a pool of twelve (12) individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two (2) years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. (3)  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these twelve (12) qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five (5) members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. (4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. (b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: (1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; (2)  To hold a hearing within fifteen (15) business days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent re-filing if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six (6) months; (3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; (4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; (5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article. (6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; (7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action on as the governing authority deems appropriate. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-134. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints.     The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) business days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the mayor and council within five (5) business days after completion of the hearing. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-135. - Penalty and member rights. (a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. (b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten (10) business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-136. - Appeals. (a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. (b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a write of certiorari in the Superior Court of Toombs County within fifteen (15) business days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Sec. 2-137. - Repeal of conflicting provisions.     All ordinances and resolutions or parts thereof previously adopted by the mayor and council establishing a Code of Ethics for the Governing Authority of the City of Vidalia in conflict with this article and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. (Ord. of 5-8-06) 
Secs. 2-138—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFICE OF PROSECUTING ATTORNEY OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted July 9, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as art. VIII, §§ 8-1—8-9. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. VIII, §§ 2-151—2-159. 
Sec. 2-151. - Short title.     This article shall be known as the Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court Ordinance. (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Sec. 2-152. - Findings and intent.     This ordinance [article] is adopted to address requirements made under Georgia law for the city to pass an ordinance or resolution creating the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court should the city choose to hire or have a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass this ordinance or resolution and provide to the Prosecuting Attorneys' Council of the State of Georgia a copy of the same. The city is also required to submit the name of the person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court within thirty (30) days of such appointment in order to maintain the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with Georgia law, particularly Article 5 of Chapter 18 of Title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, and to enact this article. (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Sec. 2-153. - Establishment of office.     The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Vidalia in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Sec. 2-154. - Qualifications.     Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court of the City of Vidalia shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Sec. 2-155. - Oath.     The prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Vidalia shall take and subscribe to the following oath: "I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully and impartially, and without fear, favor or affection, discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Vidalia." (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Sec. 2-156. - Term of office.     Unless otherwise provided by the Charter for the City of Vidalia, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of January 1 through December 31. (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Sec. 2-157. - Jurisdiction, duties and authority.     The Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Vidalia shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the City Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Sec. 2-158. - Assistant prosecuting attorney.     The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one (1) or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Sec. 2-159. - Ratification.     This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and his council. (Ord. of 7-9-12, § 1) 
Chapter 3 - AIRPORT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Aviation generally, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1; acquiring property therefor, O.C.G.A. §§ 6-3-20 et seq., 36-34-3. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 3-1. - Airport rules and regulations.     The Vidalia Municipal Airport rules and regulations are on file in the office of the city clerk. Such rules and regulations are hereby incorporated in this Code by reference as fully as if set out at length herein. 
Secs. 3-2—3-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT ZONING 
Sec. 3-20. - Definitions.     As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:     Airport: The Vidalia Municipal Airport.     Airport hazard: Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport or which is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.     Airport zoning map: The airport zoning map described in section 3-22.     Committee: The airport committee of the council, established as the administrative agency to administer and enforce this article.     Landing area: The area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff, or taxiing of aircraft.     Nonconforming use: Any structure, tree or use of land which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in this article as of the effective date of the regulation.     Structure: Any object constructed or installed by humans, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines.     Tree: Any object of natural growth. (Code 1968, § 3-12) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-21. - Airport committee constituted administrative agency.     The airport committee of the council is hereby designated the administrative agency charged with the duty of administering and enforcing the regulations herein prescribed; the duties of the committee shall include that of hearing, deciding and granting all permits under sections 3-30 and 3-31, but the committee shall not have or exercise any of the powers or duties herein delegated to the board of adjustment. (Code 1968, § 3-13) Cross reference— Committees of the council, § 2-31. 
Sec. 3-22. - Airport zoning map adopted, incorporated by reference.     In order to outline definitely the horizontal and vertical limits beyond which the projection of any structure or tree will constitute an airport hazard, the airport zoning map of the airport, made by Marcus C. Long, revised October 26, 1959, and January 8, 1960, and which is recorded in plat book 3, page 10, in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Toombs County, Georgia, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein, and made a part hereof, as fully as if the same were set forth at length. (Code 1968, § 3-14) 
Sec. 3-23. - Established elevation of airport.     The established elevation of the airport is two hundred seventy-five (275) feet above mean sea level. (Code 1968, § 3-15) 
Sec. 3-24. - Airport reference point fixed.     The airport reference point is established at a location described as follows: From the intersection of the center lines of the northwest-southeast and the north-south runways, measure thence in a southerly direction, along the center line of the north-south runway, a distance of one thousand, eight hundred fifty (1,850) feet to a point; thence ninety (90) degrees in an easterly direction, a distance of nine hundred (900) feet to the airport reference point. (Code 1968, § 3-16) 
Sec. 3-25. - Approach surface, conical surface, horizontal surface, transitional surface zones; established; defined.     In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, airport approach surface zones, horizontal surface zones, conical surface zones and transitional surface zones are hereby established as shown on the airport zoning map and as defined in this section:     Approach surface zones: The approach surface zone is an inclined plane located directly above the approach area. The dimensions of the approach area are measured horizontally. The approach areas for each particular runway are symmetrically located with respect to the extended runway center lines and have lengths and widths as shown on the airport zoning map, which also shows the slopes of the respective approach surface zones.     Conical surface zone: The conical surface zone extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface zone with a slope of 20:1 measured in a vertical plane passing through the airport reference point. Measuring radially outward, from the periphery of the horizontal surface zone, the conical surface extends for a horizontal distance as shown on the airport zoning map.     Horizontal surface zone: The horizontal surface zone is a plane, circular in shape, and with its height one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation and having a radius from the airport reference point as indicated on the airport zoning map adopted in section 3-22.     Transitional surface zones: The transitional surface zones are inclined planes with a slope of 7:1 measured upward and outward in a vertical plane at right angles to the center line of the runway. The transitional surface zones, symmetrically located on either side of the runway, extend upward and outward from a line on either side of the runway which is parallel to and level with the runway center line. These parallel lines are at a horizontal distance from the runway center line equal to one-half of the minimum width of each approach area as shown on the airport zoning map. (Code 1968, § 3-17) 
Sec. 3-26. - Height limits for structures, trees established.     Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or maintained in any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for such zone. For purposes of this regulation, height limits shown on the airport zoning map are hereby established for each of the zones in question. (Code 1968, § 3-18) 
Sec. 3-27. - Minimum height limit prescribed.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article to the contrary, the height limits prescribed by this article shall not establish for any particular parcel of land at any particular point within such parcel, a height limit of less than fifty (50) feet above the surface elevation of the land at that point. (Code 1968, § 3-19) 
Sec. 3-28. - Use restrictions established.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land within any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone, in such manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, or to make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, or to result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, or to impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise to endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. (Code 1968, § 3-20) 
Sec. 3-29. - Nonconforming structures, trees, uses.     The regulations prescribed in sections 3-26 and 3-28 shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any existing structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of March 15, 1960, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to March 15, 1960 and which was diligently prosecuted and completed within two (2) years thereof. (Code 1968, § 3-21) 
Sec. 3-30. - Variances.     Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use such person's property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply for a variance therefrom. Such variance shall be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations of this article would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. (Code 1968, § 3-22) 
Sec. 3-31. - Permits. (a)  Future uses: No material change shall be made in the use of land, and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established, in any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone, unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each such application shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform with the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit applied for shall be granted. (b)  Existing uses: Before any existing use, structure or tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or replanted within any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone, a permit must be secured authorizing such replacement, change or repair. No such permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on March 15, 1960, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for a permit for replacement, change or repair of an existing use, structure or tree shall be granted. (Code 1968, § 3-23) 
Sec. 3-32. - Hazard marking and lighting.     Any permit or variance granted under section 3-30 or section 3-31 may, if such action is deemed advisable to effect the purposes of this article and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the city, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. (Code 1968, § 3-24) 
Sec. 3-33. - Board of adjustment—Creation; powers.     There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: (1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the committee in the enforcement of this article; (2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board may be required to pass by subsequent ordinances; (3)  To hear and decide specific variances under section 3-31. (Code 1968, § 3-25) 
Sec. 3-34. - Same—Appointment, term of members.     The board of adjustment shall consist of a committee of council appointed by the mayor. 
Sec. 3-35. - Same—Organization.     The board of adjustment shall elect one (1) of its members chairman, and shall elect a secretary who need not be a member of the board. (Code 1968, § 3-27) 
Sec. 3-36. - Same—Adoption of rules.     The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article. (Code 1968, § 3-28) 
Sec. 3-37. - Same—Proceedings before board.     Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board shall be public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. (Code 1968, § 3-29) 
Sec. 3-38. - Appeals to board of adjustment. (a)  Right of appeal: Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the committee made in its administration of this article, if such person or taxpayer is of the opinion that a decision of the committee is an improper application of this article, may appeal to the board of adjustment for which provision is made in sections 3-33 through 3-37. (b)  Filing appeal: All appeals taken under this section must be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the committee and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The committee shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. (c)  Appeal as stay of proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the committee certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by order of the board on notice to the committee and on due cause shown. (d)  Hearing on appeal: The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice and due notice to the parties interested, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. (e)  Authority of board: The board may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the committee. (f)  Findings and conclusions of board: The board shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. (g)  Vote of board required: The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the committee, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article or to affect any variation in this article. (Code 1968, § 3-30) 
Sec. 3-39. - Appeal from decision of board of adjustment.     Any person aggrieved, or taxpayers affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to the council. (Code 1968, § 3-31) 
Sec. 3-40. - Effect of conflict of provisions.     Where this article imposes a greater or more stringent restriction upon the use of land than is imposed or required by any other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this article shall govern. (Code 1968, § 3-32) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Licenses generally, ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 13; tax delinquency interest, § 18-17. State Law reference— Municipal authority as to licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions.     As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them, unless the context otherwise requires:     Alcoholic beverage: All alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine and fortified wine as defined in this section.     Beer and malt beverage: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.     Distilled spirits: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wine.     Fixed salary: The amount of compensation paid to any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for such person by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body of the club out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages.     Fortified wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy.     Licensee: The individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of partnership or corporation, all partners, officers and directors of the partnership or corporation.     Liter: Metric measurement currently used by the United States.     Manufacturer: Any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. "Manufacturer" also means: (1) in the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits; and (2) in the case of malt beverages, any brewer.     Package: A bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container.     Premises: The definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop, building, restaurant or club, wherein activities permitted by this chapter are conducted.     Private club: Any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: (i) has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; (ii) has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; and (iii) owns, hires or leases a building space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: (1)  Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; (2)  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and (3)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary.     Retailer or retail dealer: Except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, "retailer" or "retail dealer" means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     Wholesaler or wholesale dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers.     Wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. (Code 1968, §§ 4-50, 4-61) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-2, 3-3-7, 3-3-20, 3-4-1, 3-5-1, 3-6-1, 3-7-1. 
Sec. 4-2. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance of Feb. 26, 2002, repealed § 4-2 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to noncriminal treatment of alcoholism and intoxication as adopted by Code 1968, § 4-55. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 4-3. - Drinking in streets, other public places.     No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages in any street, alley, park, motor vehicle or any publicly owned place or place where the public is invited. (Code 1968, § 4-54) State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 4-4. - Drunks frequenting certain premises.     It shall be unlawful for any proprietor or manager of a bowling alley, poolroom or tenpin alley, beer or wine parlor, package beverage store, bar or similar establishment to allow a drunk person to enter or remain in the establishment. (Code 1968, § 4-1) 
Sec. 4-5. - Alcoholic beverage in taxicabs.     It shall be unlawful for any person operating a taxicab to have in his/her possession any alcoholic beverage, either opened or unopened. Any driver of a taxicab shall have such driver's permit revoked upon a violation of this provision in the event such driver shall possess any such beverage.Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit the driver to knowingly allow the passenger of a taxicab to possess any unopened containers of such beverages. (Code 1968, § 4-53; Ord. of 11-14-94) Cross reference— Taxicabs, § 20-20 et seq. 
Sec. 4-6. - Obscene, lewd or indecent entertainment on premises where alcoholic beverages are offered for sale. (a)  As used in this section, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:     Business establishment: A business within the city where liquor, beer or wine is offered for sale for consumption on the premises pursuant to a license issued by the city.     License: A license for sale for consumption on the premises of malt beverages, vinous liquors or spirituous liquors, or any combination thereof, issued by the city.     Licensee: Any person to whom a license for sale for consumption in the premises of malt beverages, vinous liquors or spirituous liquors, or any combination thereof, has been issued by the city, including the officers and agents of the licensee.     Person: As defined in section 1-2, including a human being, and where appropriate, a public or private corporation, an unincorporated association, a partnership, a government or a governmental authority.     Premises: The definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, including the sidewalk serving area or outside, open air or patio-type serving area on the private property of an establishment. (b)  It is unlawful for a person to perform any acts in a public place that are in violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8 regarding public indecency. (c)  A licensee is guilty of permitting obscene, lewd or indecent entertainment when having control of the business establishment's premises, which the licensee knows or has reasonable cause to know is being used by any person to appear on the premises in such manner or attire as to expose to view portion of the pubic area, anus, anal cleft, vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof, or used by any female to appear on the premises in such manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast at or below the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate that portion of the breast described herein, it permits such activity or fails to make reasonable and timely effort to halt or abate such activity or use. (d)  Performing acts constituting public indecency as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8 is a violation of state law and shall be punished as provided therein. (e)  Permitting obscene, lewd or indecent entertainment as set forth in subsection (c) is a violation and shall be punished in the municipal court as provided under section 1-8. (Code 1968, § 4-2; Ord. of 2-11-87, § 2) 
Sec. 4-7. - Proximity of premises to churches, schools. (a)  No retail alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond one hundred (100) yards from any church and beyond two hundred (200) yards from any school ground or college campus, distances to be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: (1)  From the front door of the structure from which malt beverages and wine are sold or offered for sale; (2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; (3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; (4)  To the front door of the building, or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable under the appropriate statute. (b)  Each application for retail liquor license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. (Code 1968, §§ 4-40, 4-64) State Law reference— Sales near churches, schools, etc., O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-8. - Soliciting purchase of drinks; removing beverages; assisting in violation. (a)  No person employed or working in any capacity in any licensed premises shall solicit or encourage patrons to purchase drinks to be consumed by or otherwise disposed of by any such person so employed or working. (b)  No licensee shall knowingly permit any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverage sold or dispensed for consumption on the licensed premises. (c)  No licensee shall employ, encourage, permit or assist any person to engage in any conduct or activity in violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 4-9. - Manufacture and sale regulated.     The manufacture, sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages is hereby authorized within the city subject to the provisions of state law authorizing municipal corporations to authorize the manufacture and sale; and subject to such regulations as have been or may be promulgated by the state and to such regulations as have been or may be promulgated by the city council. (Code 1968, § 4-51) State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 
Sec. 4-10. - Separate retail license required for each place of business.     A separate retail license shall be required for each alcoholic beverage place of business. (Code 1968, § 4-65) 
Sec. 4-11. - Sale subject to conditions; license constitutes privilege. (a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions hereafter provided. (b)  All licenses shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by city ordinances and state law. (c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted." State Law reference— Authority of city as to licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 4-12. - Sale or possession for purpose of sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license.     No person shall sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage unless such person has a license from the city to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
Sec. 4-13. - Display of license at place of business.     The city license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view at the place of business of the licensee. State Law reference— Display of license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 4-14. - Days and hours of closing.     No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage at any of the following times: (1)  On any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law; (2)  On Sundays except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m.; (3)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the council; (4)  On Monday through Friday after 2:00 a.m. or before 8:00 a.m.; on Saturday after 12:00 midnight or before 8:00 a.m.; (5)  At any time on Christmas Day; (6)  On-premises consumption on Thanksgiving Day after 2:00 a.m., or before 6:00 p.m.; (7)  Notwithstanding any provision otherwise contained in this article, no retail dealer shall sell or offer for sale any distilled spirits in violation of Department of Revenue Rule 560-2-3-.38. This subsection shall not contradict or supersede any such revenue department rule or regulation. (Code 1968, §§ 4-22, 4-23, 4-23.1, 4-70, 4-102(c); Ord. of 11-14-94; Ord. of 11-26-96; Ord. of 11-5-13, § 1 ) State Law reference— Regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; sale on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-15. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale.     A separate application shall be made for each location and a separate license shall be obtained. 
Sec. 4-16. - License applications. (a)  All persons, as owners, desiring to engage in activities permitted by this chapter, shall make written application to the council for the appropriate license on forms prescribed by the city clerk, and filed with the city clerk. All applications shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, plus fifty ($50.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded, but the fifty dollar ($50.00) investigative fee shall be retained. (b)  The application shall include but shall not be limited to: The name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers, the name and address of the agent for service of process, the name and address of the manager, and the names and addresses of all shareholders holding more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city clerk with the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten (10) days of such change. The applicant shall also disclose whether the applicant (its partners if a partnership; its officers, manager, and shareholders having more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock if a corporation) has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, or a violation of any municipal ordinance. (c)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. (d)  The city clerk or designee shall review the application and shall send a copy to all affected departments of city government to determine compliance with city regulations and laws and to the police department to investigate the character and reputation of the applicant. Each department notified shall submit a report within fifteen (15) days to the city clerk. If no report is received, it shall be concluded that there is no objection. (e)  Reserved. (f)  Reserved. (g)  The city clerk shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications. All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the city clerk and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. (h)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. (i)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one (1) year from the final date of such denial. (j)  Each applicant shall certify that applicant has read this chapter, and if a license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and shall require each of licensee's employees to be familiar with this chapter. (Ord. of 11-14-94) 
Sec. 4-17. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department.     Sworn officers of the city police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
Sec. 4-18. - Audits.     The city clerk or designee shall have the authority to conduct an audit of the books and records of any licensee to ensure licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In such event, the city clerk shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
Sec. 4-19. - Licensing qualifications. (a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. (b)  No retailer or consumption on premises license will be granted to any person who is not a resident of a county or municipality within the state where the sales of distilled spirits is authorized. (c)  Corporations and partnerships. (1)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of subsections (a), (b) and (h) of this section shall be waived for a corporation if the following shall be established: a.  All majority stockholders of the corporation shall meet all the provisions of this section other than those provided in subsections (a) and (b); b.  The corporation: 1.  Is qualified and registered to do business within the state; 2.  Has and continuously maintains a registered agent in the State of Georgia, and upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law under this chapter to be served upon licensees may be served; and 3.  Consents to being subject to the jurisdiction and venue of the courts in this county. The licensee shall file written proof of compliance with the foregoing, as well as its agent's written consent to serve as agent and its consent to be subject to the jurisdiction and venue of the courts in this county with the city clerk in such form as the city clerk may prescribe; and (2)  If the licensee shall be a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholders, if such stockholders are individuals; provided, however, that if stock in the corporation is traded on any of the national stock exchanges, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this section. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, then the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this section. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to one of the partners. (d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who, within twenty-four (24) months prior to the filing of the application for such license, has been convicted under any federal, state or local law, of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or of any felony or a violation of the guidelines set out by the City Council for the City of Vidalia pertaining to alcoholic beverages. (e)  [Reserved.] (f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any city license revoked within two (2) years prior to the filing of the application. (g)  The city clerk may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation or control of such establishment does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the licensee. (h)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk in such form as the clerk may prescribe. (i)  In determining whether or not any license shall be granted, in addition to the other provisions of this chapter, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: (1) If applicant holds or has previously held a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not such applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such license or the business conducted pursuant to such license; and (2) Whether applicant has previously had a license to sell alcoholic beverages suspended or revoked. (Ord. of 2-26-02; Ord. of 6-13-11; Ord. of 2-20-14 ) 
Sec. 4-20. - Compliance and fee payment prior to license issuance; term of license; proration of fees, no refund. (a)  Before a license shall be granted, the applicant shall comply with all city rules and regulations pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages, and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed, from time to time, by the council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (b)  All licenses shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July first shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July first shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. (c)  License fees are not refundable. 
Sec. 4-21. - Nonprofit civic organization's temporary license.     Any nonprofit civic organization may be issued a temporary permit for a period of not to exceed five (5) days in any one year. The nonprofit civic organization must make application and pay the fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such civic organizations shall be required to comply with all the general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption on the premises establishment, with the exception of having a full service kitchen requirement. (Ord. of 2-26-02) 
Sec. 4-22. - Excise tax—Malt beverages. (a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of malt beverages within the city, a specific excise tax as follows: (1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons; (2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces. (b)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages. Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city shall file a report with the city by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. (Code 1968, § 4-17.1) State Law reference— Local excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 4-23. - Same—Wine. (a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of wine within the city, a specific excise tax in the amount of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. (b)  The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to: (1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacrimental services only; (2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state under the Constitution of the United States; (3)  Wine sold to persons outside the state for resale or consumption outside the state; or (4)  Wine which contains less than one-half of one percent alcohol. (c)  Each person responsible for the payment of the excise tax under this section shall file a report with the clerk by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of wine, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each such person shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. (Code 1968, §§ 4-17.1, 4-35, 4-36) State Law reference— Local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-24. - Same—Distilled spirits sold by the package. (a)  There is hereby levied and imposed a specific excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package within the city, in the amount of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. (b)  The excise tax as provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in distilled spirits by the package. The payment and filing of returns requirements of such wholesale dealer shall be as provided in subsection (b) of section 4-22. (Code 1968, § 4-75) State Law reference— Local excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 4-25. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 13, 2007, repealed § 4-25, which pertained to excise tax—Distilled spirits sold by the drink and derived from Code 1968, § 4-75. 
Sec. 4-26. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 13, 2007, repealed § 4-26, which pertained to excise tax—Distilled spirits in private clubs. 
Sec. 4-27. - Condition of premises. (a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and shall be in full compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the city, county and state. (b)  The county health department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all city, county and state health rules and regulations and report any violation to the city clerk. (c)  The city fire department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all city, county and state fire regulations and report any violations to the city clerk. (d)  The city clerk or designee shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all technical codes of the city. (e)  The city police department shall have the authority to inspect periodically the licensed premises to determine if the licensed premises are in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and report any violation to the city clerk. 
Sec. 4-28. - Renewal of license.     All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December thirty-first of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file a renewal application accompanied by the requisite license fee with the city clerk upon forms prescribed by the city clerk on or before November fifteenth of each year without penalty, and not later than December fifteenth. Applications for renewal filed after November fifteenth and on or before December fifteenth shall be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the license fee. No renewal license shall be granted on applications filed after December fifteenth, but such applications shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been issued. 
Sec. 4-29. - Transfer of license. (a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. (b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of forty-five (45) days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur; provided, that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city clerk. (c)  In the event that a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs such person's association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of forty-five (45) days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined to be the date of severance; provided, that no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, such application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted herein. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. (d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing such person's stock holdings to a total of ten (10) percent or more of any class of stock. (e)  Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. (f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license issued hereunder automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. (g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine as provided in section 1-8. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. 
Sec. 4-30. - Prohibited sales. (a)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises the sale, barter, exchange, giving, providing or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication. (b)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be permitted on election days in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. (c)  No licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall sell or permit to be sold any single beer, wine cooler or similar alcoholic beverage that is customarily packaged for sale as part of a "4-pack," "6-pack," "12-pack," or similar package, unless such single beer, wine cooler or similar alcoholic beverage is displayed for sale in an enclosed case, cabinet or other structure located not closer than twenty (20) feet from the front door of the premises and not closer than twenty (20) feet from any cash register in the premises. The intent of this subsection is to prohibit sales of single beers, wine coolers or similar alcoholic beverage from open, cooled containers such as ice-filled buckets, tubs, or barrels and to prohibit such sales from other containers located within twenty (20) feet of the front door and cash registers of the premises. (d)  Furnishing to, purchase of or possession of (by) persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years, of alcoholic beverages shall be controlled by the state law, O.C.G.A. 3-3-23. (Ord. of 2-26-02) State Law reference— Local authorization as to Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; sale to intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22; furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 4-31. - Posting of sign prohibiting sales to underage persons.     The holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall post in the most conspicuous place in such establishment notices which shall contain the provisions of the laws of this state in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2. (Ord. of 2-10-97(1)) Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 10, 1997(1), deleted § 4-31 in its entirety. Formerly, § 4-31 pertained to posting of sign prohibiting sales to minors and derived from § 4-72 of the 1968 Code. Said ordinance added new provisions as herein set out. State Law reference— Furnishing, etc., to minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 4-32. - Employment of persons under 18 years of age prohibited. (a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. (b)  This Code section shall not prohibit persons under eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience store, breweries, or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off premises. (Code 1968, § 4-83; Ord. of 11-14-94) State Law reference— Dispensing, serving, selling, etc., of alcoholic beverage by persons under 18 years of age, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 4-33. - Failure to require and properly check identification. (a)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold or served, or does not have in such person's possession, alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. "Identification" in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent such person's age for the purpose of procuring alcoholic beverages. 
Sec. 4-34. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 13, 1998, deleted the provisions of former § 4-34, which pertained to advertising and derived from the 1994 Code. 
Sec. 4-35. - Required signs; posted information. (a)  All signs required herein or by law shall be posted in a prominent location on licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons and in accordance with provisions of state law. (b)  Reserved. (c)  All licensees shall indicate plainly the price of all alcoholic beverages exposed for sale by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below the space the containers are placed. (Ord. of 11-14-94) 
Sec. 4-36. - Contents of bottles.     Except during the initial bottling by the manufacturer, it shall be unlawful for any licensee to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
Sec. 4-37. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only.     No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person not a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
Sec. 4-38. - Suspension, revocation or forfeiture of license. (a)  All licensees must, within six (6) months after the approval of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the application and license, and begin the sale of the products authorized by the license. Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale as referred to above within the six (6) month's period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the license, and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. (b)  Any licensee who shall for a period of three (3) consecutive months cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in the license, shall, after such three (3) months' period automatically forfeit the license, which license shall be cancelled without the necessity of any further action, and without refund of the license fee to the license holder. (c)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or omits information required in the application for a license and for failure to pay any fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. (d)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The chief of police, upon notice of this revocation, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. (e)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of section 4-6, section 4-30 or section 4-50 shall be subject to immediate license revocation in addition to all other penalties provided for in this chapter. (f)  The city clerk shall revoke the licenses of any licensee whose license has been suspended three (3) or more times in any consecutive twelve-month period. (g)  The city clerk shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. (h)  The city clerk may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to such clerk. (i)  An act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than ten (10) percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of the license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter when the city clerk determines to such clerk's own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, in the case of an employee, the city clerk must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. (j)  Supervision, revocation, nonrenewal or probation. (1)  The city council may suspend, revoke, refuse to renew, or impose conditions of probation upon any license required under this chapter if: a.  The violation by the license holder or his employee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors or any ordinance of the city, other than traffic violations. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the hearing officer and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. b.  The failure of the license holder or his employee to report promptly to the police department any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, occurring on the premises. c.  Any conduct on the part of the owner of the business, the license holder or his employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. While not to be considered a comprehensive or exhaustive listing of prohibited behavior, specific instances of prohibited behavior by the owner, the license holder and/or his employee include, but are not limited to the following: 1.  Consumption or under the influence of alcoholic beverage while working or on duty; 2.  Breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence; 3.  The solicitation on the licensed premises by the owner, the license holder or by any employee of the license holder, for the license holder or employee or for any person other than a patron and guest of a patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic, or money with which to purchase the drink; the paying by a license holder of a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting the establishment of the license holder or to the agent, employee or manager of the license holder to solicit the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. For purposes of this subsection, neither the owner, the license holder nor any employee of such license holder shall be considered a guest of any patron; 4.  The conviction of the owner, license holder, or employee of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the license holder to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner; 5.  The violation of any state law or regulation governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or transportation of alcoholic beverages; 6.  The violation of any section of O.C.G.A. Tit. 10, Ch. 1, Art. 15, Pt. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.), the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, reasonably related to the operation of licensed establishments; 7.  Failure by the license holder to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the owner or license holder, including but not limited to parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. (2)  Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. Any combination totaling three (3) or more of the following occurrences within any thirty-day period shall constitute prima facie evidence that the license holder is operating or conducting an alcoholic beverage business in a manner which is contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance: Three (3) or more violations of law, violations of municipal ordinances, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, all occurring on the premises. The business license holder shall, upon suspension of violations of this section, have the burden of proving such occurrences were beyond his control and not related to the operation of his business. (3)  The violation of any state law or regulation or municipal ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages. (4)  The violation of any provision contained in this article. (5)  The selling or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person that the license holder or the license holder's employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. (6)  If a firearm is discharged, or any other weapon, such as, but not limited to, a knife, brass knuckles, a blade etc., are used around a bar, on its grounds or approaches, including parking areas, or by any customer or employee upon leaving the bar while within three hundred (300) feet of the entrance to the bar, the police chief or his/her designee may place on suspension the liquor license of any establishment for a period of three (3) days; provided however, that if a firearm is discharged, or any person attempts to discharge a firearm, or any other weapon, such as, but not limited to, a knife, brass knuckles, a blade etc., is used within a bar's building premises the liquor license of such establishment shall be automatically placed on suspension for a three-day period and such period may be extended by the city council as it sees fit for the process of a thorough investigation. Any such suspension of a liquor license for the discharge of a firearm, or other use or attempted use of a weapon, shall be accomplished by written notice to the licensee from the city clerk or his/her designee of such suspension and the length of such suspension. (Ord. of 1-9-12) 
Sec. 4-39. - Review of revocation, suspension. (a)  The city council shall have the duty of hearing appeals from decisions of the city clerk revoking or suspending a license. (b)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. (c)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of such clerk's order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the final order or action of the city clerk. (d)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing with the city clerk, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant. (e)  The findings of the city council shall be forwarded to the city clerk after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the city council. (f)  The findings of the city council shall not be set aside unless found to be: (1) contrary to law or ordinance; or (2) unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or (3) unreasonable. (g)  The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of the findings to the superior court of the county. (h)  For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
Sec. 4-40. - Brown bagging prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other commercial establishment to allow individuals to bring with them for consumption on said premises their own alcoholic beverages. (Ord. of 8-29-06) 
Secs. 4-41—4-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Sec. 4-50. - Locations where prohibited.     No alcoholic beverage may be sold by the drink for consumption on premises where sold except in establishments which are licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine and which derive at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. A commercial eating establishment shall have an area specifically designed, set aside, set up and operating to serve meals and food on premises and shall have a fully equipped commercial kitchen to include an appropriate stove, refrigerator, food preparation area, sink and other items required by the county health department and inspections department for the preparation of foods. An eating establishment shall have a printed and posted menu from which selections of prepared foods can be made. The intent of this Sunday sales ordinance is to allow those full service restaurants that serve the public as part of the community's tourism business to sell alcoholic beverages with the meals on Sunday. It is not the intent of this article to encourage neighborhood taverns and bars to serve alcoholic beverages on Sunday via the mechanism of serving incidental meals on Sunday. (Ord. of 11-14-94; Ord. of 2-26-02; Ord. of 12-9-13 ) 
Sec. 4-51. - Consumption sales only.     Persons holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not sell alcoholic beverages by the package. 
Sec. 4-52. - Regulations as to employees; permit.     The following regulations regarding employees shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: (1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general requirements for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. [(2)  Reserved.] (Code 1968, § 4-83; Ord. of 11-14-94) 
Sec. 4-53. - Open area and patio sales.     The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas and patios provided that such open areas and patios are not visible from the exterior of the premises, and further provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment, including but not limited to regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
Sec. 4-54. - Lighting of premises; sanitary facilities. (a)  Each building in which the licensee's place of business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and all access points to the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located, so as to reveal all of the outside premises of the building. (b)  All premises for which a license for consumption on the premises shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. (Code 1968, § 4-102(d); Ord. of 2-26-02) 
Sec. 4-55. - Sales restricted to premises.     No licensee shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in the licensee's place of business. (Code 1968, § 4-102(e)) 
Sec. 4-56. - Purchases from city-licensed wholesaler.     No liquor shall be possessed or sold or held for sale for consumption on the premises except liquor purchased from a wholesaler licensed to make sales in the city. (Code 1968, § 4-102(f)) 
Sec. 4-57. - Gambling; disorderly conduct.     No gambling, slot machines, or boisterous or disorderly conduct shall be permitted in the licensee's place of business. (Code 1968, § 4-102(g); Ord. of 11-14-94) 
Sec. 4-58. - "Happy hour" promotions prohibited.     No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: (a) advertising "Happy Hour" through any form of media, including, but not limited to, electronics, radio, television, internet, etc.; (b) outdoor advertising or signs promoting "Happy Hour" on the exterior of any licensed premises or on the windows or elsewhere in the premises that may be viewed from the outside. (Ord. of 2-26-02) 
Sec. 4-59. - Grandfather clause.     This amendment (of September 29, 1998) shall become effective immediately upon approval by the mayor and city council for the city and shall not revoke any duly and legally existing license as of (September 29, 1998) the effective date; however, no new license shall be granted for any business located within an area zoned residential (R1, R1A, R2, R3, RM3, R4 or OR) or upon the expiration and nonrenewal of any existing license. (Ord. of 11-14-94; Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 4-60. - Proximity of premises to churches, schools. (a)  No on-premises consumption license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond one hundred (100) yards from any church and beyond one hundred (100) yards from any school ground or college campus, distances to be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: (1)  From the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; (2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; (3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; (4)  To the front door of the building, or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable under the appropriate statute. (b)  Each application for on-premises consumption license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. (c)  Notwithstanding the general distance provisions of section 4-7 and subsection 4-60(a), pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(b)(3), licensee for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for the consumption on premises only, shall be subject to regulation as to distances from churches, schools and colleges as follows: (1)  In the following designated commercial downtown business district, there shall be no minimum distance requirement. The commercial downtown business district shall start at Highway 280 East and Leader Street north to Pine Street; from Pine Street east to Morris Street; from Morris Street south to Highway 280 West; from Highway 280 West in an easterly direction to Durden Street; from Durden Street south to Highway 280 East; from Highway 280 East in a westerly direction to Leader Street (see attached map). (2)  In all other districts in which retail sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises is allowed, subsection 4-60(a) shall apply. (d)  (1)  In the designated commercial downtown business district and all other districts in the city identified herein, no more than fifty (50) percent of the gross revenue for any licensed business may be derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages licensed herein. Gross revenue shall be determined by the sale of alcohol and food and no other sources. (2)  At the time each license is renewed, the establishment shall file with its application a report of the previous calendar year's operations with the city verifying compliance with the above provision. The report shall be filed on forms approved by the city and used to report excise taxes on sales of distilled spirits by the drink. Any licenses establishment that fails to meet the appropriate percentage requirements shall be subject to nonrenewal and/or revocation. An audit may be required at anytime to ensure compliance with these provisions. (e)  Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary contained in this section, the location of any church, school ground or college campus within an area or location subsequent to the effective date of this amendment shall not preclude the issuance of a license for premises that would otherwise have complied with the provision of subsection 4-60(a). (Ord. of 8-25-98(1); Ord. of 1-4-10; Ord. of 12-9-13(1) ) 
Sec. 4-61. - Hours of sale. (a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law. (b)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday and on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold on Thanksgiving Day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or at any time on Christmas Day. (Ord. of 11-8-99; Ord. of 11-5-13(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 4-62. - Closing, clearing of premises.     All owners, managers, operators, representatives, agents or employees of a holder of an alcoholic beverage license shall cease the sales, offer to sell, give, dispense, or distribute any alcoholic beverages on or from the premises for which a license has been issued by the city and/or the state as of 2:00 a.m. each week day and 12:00 a.m. on Sunday, except those days and hours noted in section 4-61, and shall require all patrons or parties to vacate the premises from which a license has been issued by 2:30 a.m. each week day and 12:30 a.m. on Sunday. (Ord. of 11-8-99) 
Secs. 4-63—4-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE CLUBS 
Sec. 4-70. - Conditions to selling.     Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city governing the sale of such beverages (except as expressly exempted therein) and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
Sec. 4-71. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance of Feb. 26, 2002, repealed § 4-71 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to private clubs exempt from percentage sales of food requirements. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 4-72. - Hours of sale.     Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold on Sunday after 12:00 a.m., on Thanksgiving Day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or on Christmas Day. (Ord. of 11-14-94; Ord. of 11-26-96; Ord. of 11-8-99) 
Sec. 4-73. - Regulations as to employees.     The employee regulations set forth in section 4-52 pertaining to establishments holding a license for consumption on the premises shall also apply to private clubs licensed for consumption on the premises. 
Sec. 4-74. - Closing, clearing of premises.     All owners, managers, operators, representatives, agents or employees of a holder of an alcoholic beverage license shall cease the sales, offer to sell, give, dispense, or distribute any alcoholic beverages on or from the premises for which a license has been issued by the city and/or the state as of 2:00 a.m. each week day and 12:00 a.m. on Sunday, except those days and hours noted in section 4-72, and shall require all patrons or parties to vacate the premises from which a license has been issued by 2:30 a.m. each week day and 12:30 a.m. on Sunday. (Ord. of 11-8-99) 
Secs. 4-75—4-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PACKAGE LIQUOR 
Sec. 4-80. - Types of establishments where retail sale permitted. (a)  No distilled spirits by the package shall be sold at retail except in: (1) retail establishments devoted exclusively to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package; (2) retail establishments in which space has been set aside devoted exclusively to the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package, with ingress and egress provided directly to and only to the exterior of the building in which the facility is located and not to any other enclosed part of the building in which the facility is located, except as provided in item (3) of this subsection; or (3) in hotels, motels and highrise office buildings where every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure. (b)  All retail liquor stores shall be located only in the appropriate zoning districts. (c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the retail sale within these establishments of liquid commodities and mixes normally used in the preparation and serving of distilled spirits. 
Sec. 4-81. - Coin-operated or amusement machines prohibited; exception.     No retail dealer in liquors shall permit on such person's premises any slot machines of any kind or character or any coin-operated machines or any machine operated for amusement purposes. However, cigarette vending machines may be permitted. 
Sec. 4-82. - Regulations as to employees.     The following regulations as to employees shall apply to all establishments holding a license for package liquor: (1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general requirements for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. [(2)  Reserved.] (Ord. of 11-14-94) 
Secs. 4-83—4-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PACKAGE BEER AND WINE 
Sec. 4-90. - Type of retail establishment.     No beer or wine shall be sold at retail except in: (1)  Establishments duly licensed by the city to sell liquor by the package, or (2)  Establishments maintaining fifty (50) percent of the floor space and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other products and located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use. (Ord. of 2-26-02) 
Sec. 4-91. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices.     Retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
Secs. 4-92—4-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WHOLESALER 
Sec. 4-100. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale license. (a)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirit license. (b)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any distilled spirits to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. (c)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesaler distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
Sec. 4-101. - Hours of sale.     Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
Secs. 4-102—4-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VIOLATIONS 
Sec. 4-111. - Violations. (a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in this Code, which may include a fine or imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation provided in this chapter. (b)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for fines, suspension, or revocation of any retail or wholesale license issued hereunder. (1)  For the first violation there shall be a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine. (2)  For the second violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any twenty-four (24) month period of the first violation, there shall be a two thousand dollar ($2,000.00) fine and a thirty (30) day suspension of the license privileges. (3)  For the third and any subsequent violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any twenty-four (24) month period of the first violation, there shall be a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) fine and a thirty (30) day suspension of license privileges. (4)  For any violation beyond the third, the date of occurrence of which is within any twenty-four (24) month period of the first violation, the license may be revoked at the discretion of the city clerk. (5)  Any suspension or revocation of a license shall be subject to provisions set out in section 4-39 herein. (6)  A license holder who receives a suspension or revocation of his license may not be an officer, director or shareholder of any succeeding entity that holds a license from the city during his period of suspension. (Ord. of 2-26-02) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Distance of animal show from residence, § 10-31. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 5-1. - Bird sanctuary. (a)  The city is hereby declared to be a bird sanctuary. (b)  The civic, service and garden clubs of the city are hereby authorized to place at the city limits of the highways leading into the city suitable plaques, markers, or other types of visual publicity mediums of reasonable size designating that the city is a bird sanctuary. (c)  It shall be unlawful to molest, intimidate, wound or slaughter wild birds by shooting, throwing, trapping or robbing the nests of wild birds in the city. (Code 1968, §§ 5-25, 5-26) 
Sec. 5-2. - Livestock at large—Generally.     Except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter, the running at large within the city of horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs and other livestock is hereby declared a nuisance and unlawful, and it shall be unlawful to permit the same to be at large. (Code 1968, § 5-1) State Law reference— Livestock at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-3. - Same—Poultry.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of any poultry to allow such poultry to run at large on another's property or on and in the streets or public ways of the city. (Code 1968, § 5-17) 
Sec. 5-4. - Keeping of horses. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep or maintain in any manner whatsoever any horses within the city except as specifically set out below: (1)  All horses housed or quartered within the city as of January 11, 1988 shall be allowed to remain at their present location provided that the horse was properly registered at city hall within sixty (60) days of January 11, 1988. For the purpose of this section, "properly registered" shall be construed to mean that the owner has filed the following documentation with city hall: a.  A color photograph sufficient to identify the horse; b.  The name of the owner and the specific location at which the horse is quartered; and c.  If the horse is a registered horse, the owner shall provide the registration number and a copy of the registration certificate; or, d.  If the horse is not a registered horse, certification from a veterinarian stating the age and sex of the horse. (2)  All horses shall be kept and maintained only in areas within the city zoned A-1. (3)  If any animal was pregnant, then the registration certificate shall also contain certification of such fact by a veterinarian. Otherwise, offspring born after January 11, 1988 shall be prohibited from remaining in any area of the city except A-1. (b)  For purposes of this section "horse" shall be construed to also mean mule, donkey, burro or any other similar animal. (Code 1968, § 5-2; Ord. of 1-11-88) 
Sec. 5-5. - Keeping of cows.     It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep and maintain a cow within the city. (Code 1968, § 5-3) 
Sec. 5-6. - Keeping of swine.     The having, keeping or maintaining of any swine in the city is prohibited. (Code 1968, § 5-4) 
Sec. 5-7. - Keeping of poultry. (a)  The owner of poultry may keep and maintain the same in the city provided such poultry is completely enclosed in a pen or cage on the owner's property, and provided further that said pen or cage is cleaned and sanitized regularly and kept in a sanitary condition in order not to offend adjoining property owners by smell, and not to become a nuisance or a menace to the health and welfare of the residents of the city. (b)  The term "poultry" shall mean domestic fowl which are propagated and fattened for the table, and for their eggs, feathers, and related items, including, although not excluding any other, chickens, turkeys, ducks, guinea fowl, geese, quail, and pheasants. (Code 1968, §§ 5-18, 5-21) 
Sec. 5-8. - Finding, abatement of nuisance.     In addition to the other remedies provided, any citizen of the city may file a complaint with the council to abate a nuisance, and if the council, after a hearing, decide a nuisance is created, it may abate same. (Code 1968, § 5-24) 
Sec. 5-9. - Impoundment—Authorized sale.     Upon violation of section 5-2 or section 5-3, the chief of police or any police officer of the city shall take possession of livestock or poultry, impound the same, and charge the owner daily an amount sufficient to defray the cost of keeping the same. Upon giving the owner, if the owner may be found, written notice of the impounding, the officer may, after seven (7) days, sell the same at public outcry to the highest bidder if the owner fails to claim same and pay the cost of the impounding, and if the owner cannot be found the sale shall be made without notice. (Code 1968, §§ 5-20, 5-22) State Law reference— Impoundment of livestock at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-4. 
Sec. 5-10. - Same—Fees and charges. (a)  There shall be levied and collected an impounding fee on cows, horses, mules, hogs and poultry of ten dollars ($10.00) each. (b)  In addition to the impounding fees prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, the city shall impose and collect daily charges for the care of such impounded animals, sufficient to defray the cost thereof. (Code 1968, §§ 5-6, 5-22) 
Secs. 5-11—5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS; RABIES CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 9. State Law reference— Cruelty to dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; dangerous dog act, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 5-20. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meaning ascribed to them:     Animal control officer: An employee of the sanitation department of the city whose duties specifically include enforcement of the provisions of this article.     Dangerous dog: Any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: (1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation, on public or private property; or (2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification.     Dog control officer: The director of the sanitation department, and such employees of the animal control division of the sanitation department acting under the director's supervision and control.     Free-running line: A line which is attached to or is secured by a swivel or other device which will prevent the line from being wrapped around some object and will protect animal from becoming entangled.     Nuisance: Whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render the soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome or unreasonably offends or impairs the senses of smell, sight and hearing.     Owner: Any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog or cat within the territorial boundaries of the city.     Potentially dangerous dog: Any dog which has without provocation, bitten a human being on public or private property.     Proper enclosure: An enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.     Protection from elements: Keeping animal in a manner which ensures that he/she can seek shelter from rain, cold and inclement conditions without being constantly exposed to those conditions.     Rabies control officer: An employee of the county board of health whose specific duties include enforcement of the rabies control rules and regulations of the county.     Records of an appropriate authority: Records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records maintained by the dog control officer pursuant to this article.     Severe injury: Any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. (Code 1968, § 4-30; Ord. of 1-9-89, § 1; Ord. of 8-25-98(2); Ord. of 11-8-10) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-21. - Preventing nuisance; restraint of dogs; impounding authorized. (a)  The owner or keeper of each dog or cat within the city shall keep it from becoming a nuisance and from endangering or injuring any person. Dogs shall at all times: (1)  Be kept within a proper enclosure from which it cannot escape; (2)  Be restrained upon the owner's property by a substantial chain, cable, rope or other device from which it cannot escape so as to not reach any adjoining property or public right-of-way; or (3)  Be restrained on a leash and accompanied by the owner or other responsible person. (4)  Except in areas authorized for agriculture, the maximum number of dogs that may be kept on any single premise shall not exceed five (5); (exception: licensed veterinary hospitals, kennels and grooming parlors.) Dogs kept in excess of five (5) shall be presumed to create a nuisance in violation of this Code section. (b)  Whenever a dog or cat is kept in such manner, as constitutes a nuisance, a proceeding to abate the nuisance may be brought by the party aggrieved, pursuant to law. An animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the court. (c)  Whenever a dog is allowed to roam free, in violation of this section, impoundment of the animal is authorized. Upon identification of the owner, a citation shall be issued for violation of this section. (d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog not to furnish for such dog adequate food, water, shelter and protection from the elements, all which shall be accessible to the dog at all times. (e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to treat any cat or dog in a cruel and inhumane manner, to abandon it, or to release it upon public or private property with the intention of abandoning it. (f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to secure a dog by leash less than ten (10) feet in length which is not free running as herein defined. (Code 1968, §§ 5-45, 5-46; Ord. of 1-9-89, § 1; Ord. of 8-25-98(2); Ord. of 11-8-10) State Law reference— Confinement of female dogs in heat, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 5-22. - Inoculation; registration; tagging of animals. (a)  All dogs and cats shall be inoculated against rabies in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rabies control rules and regulations of the county, as promulgated and from time to time amended by the county board of health, which by reference are expressly incorporated as a part of this section as if fully set out herein. Violation of such rules and regulations may be enforced by the rabies control officer in the municipal court, upon citation, as an offense against the city. (b)  Between January first and March first of each year, the owner of each dog and cat shall present to the city a current certificate of vaccination, and complete the registration form provided by the city, giving therein the full name, address, and telephone number of the owner, breed and sex of the animal, type of animal, and number of the current vaccination tag. Upon payment of a fee in the amount of two dollars ($2.00), and completion of the foregoing requirements, the city shall issue to the owner a certificate of registration. All certificates shall be valid until March first of the following calendar year; provided, however, no certification of registration shall be transferable. It shall be the duty of the owner to notify the city, within twenty-four (24) hours, if the dog or cat dies, is sold or transferred. If sold or transferred to a new owner within the city, the name, address and telephone number of the new owner shall be provided. (c)  Owners acquiring or bringing animals into the city after March first and before January first of the following year shall immediately cause the animal to be registered with the city in the manner provided by subsection (b) of this section. (d)  The numbered vaccination tag, issued by a licensed veterinarian upon inoculation, shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the animal at all times. Every dog found roaming or running free, whether tagged or untagged, shall be impounded; every untagged cat found roaming or running free shall be impounded. If a tagged animal is impounded, and it is found not to be registered or its current registration has expired, the owner may be cited for violation of this section. (Code 1968, §§ 5-37—5-44; Ord. of 1-9-89, § 1) State Law reference— Rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-23. - Impoundment procedure; publication; disposition of unclaimed animals. (a)  All dogs and cats impounded by the city shall be held in a humane manner. The animal control division shall make a diligent effort to ascertain the owner of the animal; and shall give the owner prompt notice of the fact of impoundment. Notice shall be given by the best means possible to assure actual receipt by the owner. For purposes of this section, written notice to the owner by certified mail, at the address shown on the most current registration form shall be deemed complete upon its mailing. If the owner is personally served, the notice may be left with a person of responsible age residing at the address, or conspicuously tacked on the main entrance thereof. The notice shall advise the owner that the animal will be held for a period of ten (10) days, exclusive of the date of service, and thereafter the animal may be disposed of in accordance with this section. The notice shall state the location and hours of the facility where the animal may be reclaimed, and shall specify the cost for reclaiming the animal. (b)  The animal control office shall charge and assess such fees for pick-up and impoundment as set forth in a schedule approved by the governing body, as may be from time to time amended. If the owner cannot show proof of current rabies vaccination, the animal shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian before release, and the cost thereof collected from the owner. (c)  Any impounded animal, except a "dangerous dog" or "potentially dangerous dog" as defined in this article, may be disposed of on or after the fifth day after date of service of notice on the owner if the owner is known or publication if the owner is unknown. Disposal of animals shall be made by adoption or by destruction in an expedient and humane manner. Animals may be held beyond the period stated if circumstances warrant. (d)  If any dead dog or cat is found upon the public right-of-way, the city shall remove and dispose of the animal and charge the owner, if known, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for such service. (Code 1968, §§ 5-47, 5-48; Ord. of 1-9-89, § 1) 
Sec. 5-24. - Violations generally.     In addition to the fees and charges imposed in this article, any person owning or possessing any dog or cat within the city who shall be adjudged guilty of violation of this article pertaining to such person's duties with reference to confining such dog or cat and the registration of such dog or cat as provided in this article or guilty of a violation of any other duty imposed upon the owner or possessor of any dog or cat in the city by the terms of this article, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1968, § 5-55) 
Secs. 5-25—5-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Dangerous dog act, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; liability for damage caused by vicious animals, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 
Sec. 5-30. - Investigations; finding; notice; hearing; registration; procedure. (a)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the dog control officer's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, the dog control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this division. Whenever the dog control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, notice shall be given the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be deemed complete upon its mailing. (b)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: (1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; (2)  The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's finding that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; (3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within fifteen (15) days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog before the governing authority; (4)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on the day after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and (5)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the governing authority and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering said form to the city. (c)  When the governing authority receives a request for a hearing it shall schedule such hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving the request. The governing authority shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the governing authority shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing authority may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. Within ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, the governing authority shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner. (d)  Subject to the requirements of this section, the dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer or if the dog control officer finds sufficient evidence of: (1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; (2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The sign required to be posted must substantially conform to the design provided by the state department of natural resources; and (3)  Payment to the city of a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to defray the cost of administering and enforcing this section. (e)  The owner of a dangerous dog shall present evidence to the dog control officer of: (1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business within the State of Georgia insuring the owner of the dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or (2)  A surety bond in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. (f)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of an annual renewal of a certificate of registration, a dog control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. (g)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the local government does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subparagraph (d) of this section are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog of potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. (h)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. (i)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. (j)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog in the manner provided by this article within thirty (30) days after becoming a resident. (k)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the manner provided by this article within ten (10) days after becoming a resident in the new jurisdiction. (Code 1968, § 4-34; Ord. of 1-9-89, § 1) 
Sec. 5-31. - Possession of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog without certification; keeping of dog in violation of conditions of certificate; failure to post clearly visible warning sign; confiscation and impoundment; destruction of animal. (a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with section 5-30. (b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. (c)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. (d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog to fail to post a warning sign on the premises where a dangerous dog is located in accordance with section 5-30. (e)  It shall be the duty of the dog control officer, and any person under such officer's authority, to impound the dog if: (1)  The owner does not secure a certificate of registration in accordance with section 5-30; (2)  The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirement of section 5-30; (3)  The owner does not keep the dog within a proper enclosure or permits the dog to roam or run free. (f)  Any dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon payment of reasonable impoundment cost, as fixed by a schedule approved by the governing body, as from time to time amended. Notice of impoundment under this section shall be given the owner, in writing, by certified mail, at such owner's last known address. The notice shall state that if the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within twenty (20) days from receipt of such notice, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner; provided, however, no dog shall be destroyed under this section unless it has been held a full twenty (20) days, exclusive of the date of giving notice. (g)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of the city which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this division be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog or by a dog which the city has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this section or by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this section. (Code 1968, § 4-35; Ord. of 1-9-89, § 1) 
Sec. 5-32. - Violations; penalties. (a)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 5-30 or section 5-31 or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for the second conviction a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed. (b)  The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 5-30 or 5-31 or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for a second conviction a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be imposed. (c)  No owner of a dangerous dog shall be held criminally liable under this division for injuries inflicted by said owner's dog to any human being while on the owner's property. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28. 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Self-inspection of water and sewer projects; state law not applicable with city, § 12-2; prerequisites to issuance of water meter, § 12-21; signs, App. A, art. XIX; building inspector's zoning duties, App. A, § 2101; building on public streets only, App. B, § 304. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 6-1. - Technical codes adopted by reference.     All codes specified in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B) are hereby adopted by reference with all appendixes thereto as the respective codes of the city. (Ord. of 8-2-93(1)) Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 8-20. State Law reference— State-wide application of state minimum standards code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; authority of municipality, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25 et seq. 
Sec. 6-2. - Prerequisites to commencing construction. (a)  Permits: No construction of a building or other structure shall be commenced without a city building permit. At the time the building permit is issued, the water tap, sewer tap and wiring permit shall be paid for. Building permits in the city will be issued only to general contractors licensed by the city. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the general contractor or property owner shall provide or certify the following: (1)  Provide a scale drawing showing the lot dimensions and the dimension and placement of the building on the lot. The drawing shall show the distance from the building line to each side of the lot. (2)  Certify that the proposed building will comply with the current zoning regulations. (3)  Certify that the intended use of the building is in compliance with the current zoning regulations. (4)  Certify that all electrical, plumbing and other work for which a city and/or a state license is required will be performed by an individual or company having current and valid license. (5)  Certify that the material used in the building and the method of construction will be in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal building codes then in effect. (b)  Licenses: All other trades on the job shall be city-licensed, whether the same be paid for by the general building contractor or by the person doing the work. (c)  Penalty for violation of subsection (a): Punishment as provided in section 1-8 shall be imposed on persons starting construction without first securing a building permit. (d)  Individual acting as general contractor: Nothing in this section precludes an individual from acting as a general contractor in constructing a building for such individual's own use and not intended for sale or rent. Such an individual will not be required to be a licensed or a general contractor nor must such person be bonded; however, such person must comply with all other provisions of this chapter. (Code 1968, § 6-16; Ord. of 10-10-83) 
Sec. 6-3. - Building permit fees.     Building permit fees shall be as established in the Standard Building Code as adopted and amended by the city. 
Sec. 6-4. - Restoration of substandard dwelling units.     Every substandard dwelling unit upon becoming vacant shall be brought up to the requirements of the housing code before the dwelling unit may be reoccupied. Anyone failing to comply herewith after due notice to do so shall be cited and punished in accordance with the penalties prescribed in section 1-8. (Code 1968, § 6-51) 
Sec. 6-5. - Satellite dish—Permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, install, alter, move, enlarge, relocate or increase in height any satellite dish or mast or structure or tower for a satellite dish, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a building permit from the building inspector. (Ord. of 9-12-88, § A) 
Sec. 6-6. - Same—Application for permit.     Application for a building permit, signed by the owner or the owners' authorized agent, shall be filed with the building inspector, on a form furnished for that purpose and shall have attached thereto the following: (1)  A site plan, drawn to scale, identifying the site boundary, location of existing buildings or structures and the proposed location of the satellite dish, including support structure. (2)  Manufacturer's installation and construction specifications for the satellite dish, mast and tower structure, including details of footings, guys, and braces. (3)  Detailed structural roof design for roof mounted dish installation. (The building inspector may require structural design drawings prepared by an architect or professional engineer.) (4)  Permit fee. (Ord. of 9-12-88, § B) 
Sec. 6-7. - Same—Restrictions. (a)  Not more than one satellite dish shall be permitted on any one lot or principal building unless otherwise approved by the city council. (b)  Only ground-mounted satellite dishes shall be permitted unless it is demonstrated, by the owner, that a ground-mounted dish is not functional. (c)  Ground-mounted dishes and support structures may be erected, constructed or installed only in rear yards and must be located within the rear yard allowable building area. No satellite dishes will be permitted in a front or side yard. (d)  Where it is demonstrated that a roof mounted satellite dish is required for reception purposes, masts or tower structures shall not be used as bases and the roof shall have been structurally designed and/or altered to support the additional roof load. Roof mounted satellite dishes shall be of open mesh construction, painted or finished in a dark neutral color and shall be placed in a position atop the roof to minimize visibility to pedestrian or vehicular travelers from the street. Such placement shall always be to the rear of hip and gable roofs. (e)  The maximum height for ground-mounted satellite dishes shall not exceed the height of the maximum elevation of the roof line of the principal building on the lot. (f)  The maximum diameter for a satellite dish shall be twelve (12) feet in single family residential zoning districts. (g)  No solid satellite dishes shall be permitted in a single family zoning district unless such satellite dish is screened from ground level view from adjoining single family residential properties. Such screen may consist of a fence or wall, hedge, natural vegetation, building or structure on the lot. (Ord. of 9-12-88, § C) 
Sec. 6-8. - Same—Electrical requirements.     All satellite dishes, masts or support structures, whether ground or roof mounted, shall be electrically grounded. Grounding shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code, adopted by the city, and the satellite dish and support structure's manufacturer's specifications. All installations shall be inspected by the department of inspections. (Ord. of 9-12-88, § D) 
Sec. 6-9. - Same—Exemptions.     Sections 6-5 through 6-8 shall not affect any existing satellite dish support structure which has been constructed and which was in place prior to September 12, 1988. (Ord. of 9-12-88, § E) 
Sec. 6-10. - Construction or development on right-of-way; permit required.     All contractors desiring to construct or develop on any city right-of-way must obtain a permit from the city prior to beginning any such construction activity. To obtain a permit, [the] contractor must submit a plan of development setting out the specifics of any construction and locating all existing utilities within the area of construction. The plans must be approved by the public works director and the city building inspector and upon their approval a permit shall be issued conditioned upon all work being completed according to the plans as approved by the public works director and the city building inspector. (Ord. of 5-8-95(1)) Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 8, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code, hence, codification of said ordinance as § 6-10 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 6-11—6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
Sec. 6-20. - Permit—Required; application; investigation. (a)  Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any building in, into, through, or from the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building inspector. Such permit shall be known as a "building moving permit." (b)  Application for permit: Any person desiring such a permit shall file with the building inspector an application therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by the city for that purpose. Such application shall specify the following: (1)  The character and size of the building to be moved; (2)  The reason for moving; (3)  The use, purpose and occupancy for which such building is to be used; (4)  The location from which and to which such building is to be moved; (5)  A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building upon the property to which such building is to be moved, provided such location is in the city; (6)  The streets on, over or through which it is desired to move such building; (7)  Whether the building conforms to the zoning laws in the location to which it is to be moved in the city. (c)  Investigation: Upon the filing of the application, the building inspector shall investigate the building and determine action thereon. 
Sec. 6-21. - Same—Terms and conditions.     When a building moving permit is granted, such terms and conditions as may be deemed reasonable and proper may be imposed, including, but not limited to, the public streets, or other public property in the city on, over or through which the building shall be moved, and the requirements of the changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building, to the end that the relocation thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district to which it is to be moved. Such terms and conditions shall be written upon the permit or appended in writing thereto. 
Sec. 6-22. - Same—Denial.     No permit shall be issued to move any building which, in the opinion of the building inspector: (1)  The building is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous; (2)  The building is infested with pests or is unsanitary; (3)  If the building is a dwelling or habitation and is unfit for human habitation; (4)  The building is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of three thousand (3,000) feet from the proposed site; (5)  The proposed use is prohibited by the zoning laws of the city; (6)  The building is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by any ordinance of the city; (7)  The building fails to meet the minimum standards of the city construction codes in force and effective at the time such application for permit is applied for; or (8)  The moving of the building causes unreasonable damage to the trees, plants and shrubs on and along the public streets; provided, however, that if the condition of the building in the judgment of the building inspector admits of practicable and effective repair, the permit may be issued upon the terms and conditions as set forth herein. 
Sec. 6-23. - Same—Issuance.     The building inspector shall approve the issuance of a building moving permit when all the necessary requirements and conditions of this article have been complied with. It then shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue the permit. 
Sec. 6-24. - Same—Suspension or revocation.     The building inspector, at any time, for sufficient cause, may revoke or suspend any permit granted under this article. 
Sec. 6-25. - Same—Fee.     A permit fee in a sum as fixed by the city council from time to time shall be paid to the building inspector upon filing of each application for a building moving permit. 
Sec. 6-26. - Estimate of cost; deposit.     The applicant shall also deposit with the city clerk a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost to the city as estimated by the building inspector of a public safety officer to escort the building while it is on the streets of the city, of trimming, moving, removing or replanting of trees or shrubs, of moving, removing or displacing any pole or other structure supporting any wires, cables or other equipment belonging to the city and the cutting, displacing or changing the location of any wire, cable or other equipment upon such poles or structures belonging to the city. 
Sec. 6-27. - Liability insurance. (a)  Every person moving a building in the city shall file with the city clerk a liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the state, which policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this section. (b)  In lieu of filing the insurance policy herein referred to, a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance corporation may be filed. The certificate must show that a policy meeting the requirements of this section has been issued, and shall set forth the expiration date of such policy. (c)  The liability policy required under this section shall insure the person moving a building against loss from the liability imposed by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to any property growing out of the moving of such building: to the amount or limit of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) exclusive of interest and costs, on account of injury to, or death of, any one person, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) exclusive of interest and costs, on account of moving any one building resulting in injury to or death of more than one person, and two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for damage to property of others, resulting from moving any one building. 
Sec. 6-28. - Owner's completion bond or cash deposit—General conditions. (a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of the property upon which the building is to be located shall file with the building inspector a corporate surety bond, conditioned as follows: That all of the work required to be done to complete the relocation, alteration and reconstruction of the building pursuant to the conditions of the permit shall be fully performed and completed within a reasonable time to be specified by the building inspector in the permit. Such bond shall be in principal amount equal to the estimated cost of the work proposed to be done plus ten (10) percent thereof, and shall name the city as obligee, and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. (b)  In lieu of furnishing such a corporate surety bond, the owner or lessee may post a cash deposit in the amount of such bond. (c)  An extension of time for such completion may be granted in writing by the building inspector when, in the building inspector's discretion, circumstances shall so justify, but no such extension shall release any surety or other security. 
Sec. 6-29. - Same—Specific conditions. (a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of the property from which the building is to be moved shall file with the building inspector a bond or other form of security in favor of the city conditioned as follows: (1)  Before any work is started on a building or structure, the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall notify the appropriate utilities in order that all gas, water and oil pipelines that are to be disconnected from the building may be securely capped and sealed. (2)  Immediately after the moving of any building the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall securely barricade all basement excavations and other holes or openings. (3)  Within ten (10) days after moving of any building the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall complete the following work: a.  Securely close and seal any sanitary piping located on the property. b.  Fill with dirt or sand any septic tanks or cesspools located on the property. c.  Fill any openings, excavations or basements remaining on the land with dirt or sand to street level or the natural level of adjoining property, unless otherwise directed by the building inspector. d.  Remove any buried underground tanks formerly used for storage of flammable liquids. e.  Remove all refuse, debris and waste materials from the property. (b)  The bond required by this section shall be in an amount equal to the cost of the work proposed to be done, as estimated by the building inspector. (c)  The bond may be in the form of a corporate surety bond, cash deposit, savings and loan certificate, or an instrument of credit. (d)  An extension of time for completion of the work required by this section may be granted by the building inspector, when, in such inspector's discretion, circumstances justify such an extension; but no such extension shall release any bond or other security furnished pursuant to this section. 
Sec. 6-30. - Same—Site preparation. (a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of the property upon which the building is to be moved shall file with the building inspector such person's affidavit and a bond or other form of security in favor of the city conditioned as follows: (1)  Before any work is started on a building to actually move the same onto the site, that the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent has completed fully all required work of site preparation, including but not limited to clearing and grading of the land, foundation and supports for the building and other related preparatory work in accordance with the standards set forth in the city building code as they apply to the type of building permitted; that the appropriate utility companies have been notified in order that all gas, water, electric and oil pipelines that may be effected or damaged around the site will be disconnected, securely capped and sealed during the time required for the move. (2)  Immediately during site preparation and until the structure is permanently in place, the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall securely barricade all basement excavations and other holes or openings on the property. (3)  Within ten (10) days after the moving of any building onto the land, the permittee or the permittee's authorized agent shall complete the following work: a.  Finish all building foundation work according to approved plans and specifications. b.  Have all utilities necessary for the required changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made turned on and readily available to the structure. c.  Remove all moving equipment, refuse, debris and waste materials used in the move to the property. (b)  The bond required by this section shall be in an amount equal to the cost of the work proposed to be done, as estimated by the building inspector. (c)  The bond may be in the form of a corporate surety bond, cash deposit, savings and loan certificate, or an instrument of credit. (d)  An extension of time for completion of the work required by this section may be granted by the building inspector when, in such official's discretion, circumstances justify such an extension; but no such extension shall release any bond or other security furnished pursuant to this section. 
Sec. 6-31. - Supervision.     Every building which is moved on, over or through any public street, way or park in the city shall be under the authority of the building inspector and every such building shall be moved in a careful manner and the work shall be prosecuted with diligence and to the satisfaction and approval of the building inspector. This section in no way relieves the person having charge of the moving of any building of such person's obligation to furnish proper supervision. 
Sec. 6-32. - Notice to city departments.     Notice must be given by the person to whom the permit is issued, or such person's representative, to both the department in charge of streets and the police department of the city not less than thirty-six (36) hours, nor more than forty-eight (48) hours, before the actual work of moving a building is to commence. 
Sec. 6-33. - Default in performance of conditions. (a)  Whenever a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee by the building inspector, such notice to state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed to be reasonably necessary to complete such work. After receipt of such notice, the permittee must, within the time therein specified, either cause the work to be done or pay over to the city clerk the estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, plus ten (10) percent of such estimated cost. Upon receipt of notice from the city clerk that the permittee has deposited such money, the building inspector shall cause the required work to be performed and completed. (b)  If the permittee defaults, the city shall have the option, in lieu of completing the work required, to demolish the building or structure or to clear, clean and restore the site or sites. 
Sec. 6-34. - Approval of route.     The streets over which any building or structure is to be moved must be approved by the building inspector and the chief of police. 
Sec. 6-35. - Obstructing streets.     No person owning or having charge of the moving of any building into, on, over, through, or from any public street, ways or parks in the city, shall permit such building to remain in any one location on any such street, way or park for a period longer than twenty-four (24) hours except by written permission obtained from the chief of police, or to obstruct traffic on any state or federal roadway. 
Sec. 6-36. - Lights and barricades.     The person having charge of the moving of any building shall maintain proper lights and barricades whenever such building is on any public street, way or park during the hours of darkness; but such building shall not be allowed to remain on any state or federal roadway within the corporate limits of the city after dark. 
Sec. 6-37. - Wires and structural supports. (a)  In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to move, remove or displace any pole or other structure supporting the wires, cables or other equipment of any public utility, cable television company or of the city or to cut, displace or change the location of any wire, cable or other equipment upon such pole or structure, the person to whom such permit has been granted, or such person's authorized representative, shall obtain permission in writing from the owners of such pole or structure or the wires, cables or other equipment thereon, and shall notify such owners at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will necessitate the removal of such obstructions. (b)  The person to whom the permit is granted shall not at the expiration of such time of notice or at any time, cut, move or in any way disturb such public utility, cable television company or city property; and such work shall be done only by the authorized workers of the utility, cable television company or the city, whichever is the owner. (c)  The person to whom such permit is granted shall pay to such public utility, cable television company, or to the city, as the case may be, any and all costs or expense for the removal, rearrangement or replacement of any pole or structural support of wires, cables or equipment thereon or of any damage to such property. 
Sec. 6-38. - Trees, plants and shrubs. (a)  In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to trim, move, remove or replant any tree, plant or shrub belonging to or under the control of the city, the person to whom such permit has been granted, or the person's authorized representative, shall notify the building inspector at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will necessitate the removal of such obstructions. (b)  The person to whom such permit is granted shall not at the expiration of such time of notice or at any time trim, mow, remove, replant or otherwise disturb said trees, plants or shrubs; and such work shall be done only by the authorized workers of the city unless otherwise approved and so ordered by the building inspector. (c)  The person to whom such permit is granted shall pay to the city any and all costs or expense for the trimming, moving, removing or replanting of any trees, plants or shrubs or of any damage thereto. 
Sec. 6-39. - Repairs to public property.     In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder causes damage to the public streets or other public property, in addition to any other remedies the city may have, the building inspector may cause such damage to be repaired and the cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit required herein, or the building inspector may require the person to whom such a permit has been granted, or such person's authorized representative, upon written notification from the building inspector to make all necessary repairs to such streets or property; provided, however, that should such person to whom the permit has been granted, and to whom such notice has been given, or such person's authorized representative, fail to make such necessary repairs within the period of time designated in such written notice, the building inspector may cause such necessary repairs to be made and the cost thereof deducted from the deposit required herein. 
Sec. 6-40. - Refunding of deposits.     When the moving of any building for which a permit has been granted is completed, and all damage to public streets or other public property has been repaired to the satisfaction of the building inspector and all costs of repairing damage or performing other work as provided herein have been paid, and the deposit as required by section 6-28, or such portion thereof then remaining unused under the provisions of this article shall be refunded upon surrender of the deposit receipt representing such money so deposited. Should the cost, however, of repairing damages and/or performing other work as in this article provided, exceed the total amount of money deposited, the person to whom such permit was granted shall be held liable for the amount of damage and/or other cost which is in excess of the amount deposited, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk, upon receipt of the request from the department in charge of streets, to collect such part of the claim which is in excess of the deposit from the person to whom the permit was granted; and no occupancy permit for the building or property shall issue until such delinquency excess is paid in full. 
Secs. 6-41—6-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 23, 2010, repealed art. III, §§ 6-50—6-67 and enacted a new art. III, §§ 6-50—6-55 as set out herein. The former art. III, §§ 6-50—6-67 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of June 13, 1988, §§ 1.1—1.4, 2.0, 3.1—3.6, 4.1—4.3, 4.4-1, 4.4-2, 5.1, 5.2. 
Sec. 6-50. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. (a)  Authorization: Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Vidalia, Georgia, does ordain as follows: (b)  Findings of fact: (1)  The flood hazard areas of Vidalia, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. (2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. (c)  Statement of purpose: It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: (1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; (2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; (3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; (4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and (5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. (d)  Objectives: The objectives of this article are: (1)  To protect human life and health; (2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; (3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, (4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; (5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; (6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and (7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. (Ord. of 3-23-10) 
Sec. 6-51. - General provisions. (a)  Lands to which this article applies: This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Vidalia, Georgia. (b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article.     For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Toombs and Montgomery Counties are hereby adopted by reference.     Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS.     The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the offices of Vidalia City Hall. (c)  Establishment of development permit: A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. (d)  Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions: This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (f)  Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability: The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of City of Vidalia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (h)  Penalties for violation: Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than five (5) days, or both and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. of 3-23-10) 
Sec. 6-52. - Administration. (a)  Designation of article administrator: The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. (b)  Permit procedures: Application for a development permit shall be made to the building inspector on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities.     Specifically, the following information is required: (1)  Application stage: a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential, floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 6-53(b)(2); and d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. (2)  Construction stage: For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.     Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk.     The building inspector shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. (c)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator: Duties of the building inspector shall include, but shall not be limited to: (1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; (2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file; (3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; (4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 6-51(b), then the building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of section 6-53; (5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 6-52(b)(2); (6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 6-52(b)(2); (7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building inspector shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 6-52(b)(1)c. and subsection 6-53(b)(2) or (d)(2); (8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas; (9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); (10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained; (11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the building inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article; and (12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector and shall be open for public inspection. (Ord. of 3-23-10) 
Sec. 6-53. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. (a)  General standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. (2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. (3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. (4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully-enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area. c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. (5)  All heating and air-conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. (7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. (8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. (9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. (b)  Specific standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements: Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 6-53(a)(4), "elevated buildings". All heating and air-conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. (2)  Nonresidential construction: New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 6-52(c)(6). (3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles: Where base flood elevation data are available: a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 6-53(a)(6) above). d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 6-53(b)(3)a., c. above. (4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 6-51(b) are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. b.  Only if subsection 6-53(b)(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 6-53. (c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones): Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 6-51(b) where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: (1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 6-51(b), then the building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 6-53. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: (2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. (3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one (1) foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 6-53(a)(4) "elevated buildings". a.  All heating and air-conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways: Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 6-51(b) where streams with base flood elevations are provided, but no floodways have been designated (zones AE) the following provisions apply: (1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. (2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection 6-53(b). (e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones): Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 6-51(b) may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 6-53(a)(4), "elevated buildings". The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 6-52(b)(1)c. and subsection 6-52(b)(2). (3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. (f)  Standards for subdivisions: (1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. (2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. (3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. (g)  Standards for critical facilities: (1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. (2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. (Ord. of 3-23-10) 
Sec. 6-54. - Variance procedures. (a)  The planning commission as established by the city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. (b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. (c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Toombs County, Georgia, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. (e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. (h)  Conditions for variances: (1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. (2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. (3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (4)  The building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. (i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. (Ord. of 3-23-10) 
Sec. 6-55. - Definitions.     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.     Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.     Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction".     Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article.     Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.     Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in subsection 6-51(b).     Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.     Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.     Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.     Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.     Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: (1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; (2)  Hospitals and nursing homes and housing for the elderly which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; (3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and (4)  Generating plants and other principal points of utility lines.     Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment.     Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.     Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 2, 1988, (the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community).     Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 13, 1988 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community).     Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.     Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.     Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.     Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community issued by the Federal Insurance Administration delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.     Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.     Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.     Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.     Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.     Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.     Historic structure means any structure that is: (1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.     Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.     Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.     Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.     Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.     National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 2, 1988, (the effective date of the initial FIRM) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 13, 1988, (the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.     New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after June 13, 1988 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community).     North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps.     Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: (1)  Built on a single chassis; (2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.     Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.     Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.     Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two (2) or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.     Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.     Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure taking place during a five-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".     Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.     Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article.     Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. of 3-23-10) 
Secs. 6-56—6-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LAND CLEARING AND TREE PROTECTION[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Mobile homes and mobile home parks, ch. 11; planning and development, ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 6-80. - Title.     This article shall be known and cited as the "Land Clearing and Tree Protection Ordinance for the City of Vidalia, Georgia." (Ord. of 5-24-93, § I) 
Sec. 6-81. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to: (1)  Protect the aesthetic quality provided by the natural tree cover on tracts of land being converted to urban development. (2)  Protect and enhance the aesthetic quality provided by street and park trees. (3)  Prevent soil erosion. (4)  Prevent reductions in the drainage holding capacity of land. (5)  Prevent increases in air pollution and carbon dioxide levels in the air. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § III) 
Sec. 6-82. - Exemptions to article.     The following developments are exempted from compliance with the clearing and tree provisions of these regulations, except that all cable and utility companies must comply with permit requirements on all public right-of-way in all city zones: (1)  All property zoned for agricultural purposes. (2)  All property zoned for residential purposes. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § IV) 
Sec. 6-83. - Definitions.     For the purpose of these regulations, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows. Words not defined herein shall be interpreted so as to give the meaning they have in common usage and to give these regulations their most reasonable application. The phrase "used for" shall encompass the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," and "occupied for."     Buffer: Any barrier of plant material which obstructs sight and/or sound and which is now or will be required by the city as may be required by the city zoning regulations.     Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that encloses a space and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature or as may be further defined in the building code of the city.     Caliper: The diameter or thickness of the main stem of a young tree or sapling as measured at six (6) inches above ground level. This measurement is used for nursery-grown trees having a diameter of four (4) inches or less.     Clearing: The removal of vegetation of two (2) inches DBH or greater.     Diameter, breast height (DBH): The diameter or width of the main stem of a tree as measured 4.5 feet above the natural grade of the base of a tree. Whenever a branch, limb, defect or abnormal swelling of the trunk occurs at this height, the DBH shall be measured at the nearest point above or below 4.5 feet at which a normal diameter occurs.     Exceptional tree: Any tree determined by the mayor and city council, as provided for herein, to be of notable, historic interest, high aesthetic value, or of unique character because of species, type, age, or size (eighty (80) percent of state champion).     Greenspace: Any area retained as permeable unpaved ground and dedicated to supporting vegetation.     Greenspace plan: A map and supporting documentation which described for a particular site where vegetation (greenspace) is to be retained or planted in compliance with these regulations. The greenspace plan shall include a tree establishment plan, a tree protection plan and a landscaping plan.     Landscaping plan: A map and supporting documentation which described for a particular site where vegetation, other than within a tree protection or tree establishment area, is to be retained or provided in compliance with these regulations, the types of vegetation, and how such vegetation will be provided. The landscaping plan shall include any required buffer elements.     Tree establishment plan: A map and supporting documentation which described for a particular site where trees are to be planted in compliance with the requirements of these regulations, the type of trees.     Tree protection plan: A map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where existing trees are to be retained in compliance with the requirements of these regulations and the type of trees.     Tree protection zone: The area essential to a tree's health and survival surrounding a preserved or planted tree which is protected within the guidelines of this article.     Treelawn: Is that part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic or otherwise within the public right-of-way.     Vegetative practices: Measures to stabilize erodible or sediment producing areas by covering the soil with plantings such as: (1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting producing a long-term vegetative cover. (2)  Short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover. (3)  Sodding areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § V) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-84. - Permit required for clearing.     Except as herein provided, a property owner shall not clear or permit the clearing of property without first obtaining a clearing permit as provided for in division 5. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VI(1)) 
Sec. 6-85. - Land clearing and tree protection activities manual.     The city comprehensive land clearing and tree protection activities manual, dated 1993, and any amendments thereto adopted by the mayor and city council, which provides detailed information and standards in reference to the provisions of this article, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof. All land clearing and required greenspace (tree protection, tree establishment and landscaping) shall be provided in a manner consistent with the provisions contained in said manual. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VI(2)) 
Sec. 6-86. - Commercial or industrial property.     No tree or trees shall be pruned or cut on any property zoned commercial or industrial or public right-of-way property within the city without prior issuance of a permit pursuant to sections 6-163 through 6-169 and compliance with sections 6-101 and 6-102. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § XII) 
Sec. 6-87. - Unlawful activity.     It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in pruning, treating or removing street or park trees, except those persons that are employees of the city or appointed or designated by the mayor and/or city council. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § XIV) 
Sec. 6-88. - Enforcement.     The city building inspector and/or the city beautification commission through the city building inspector or his designee shall be charged with the enforcement of this article and is hereby authorized to do all acts necessary to insure the compliance to the terms and conditions hereof, including, but not limited to the issuance of citations for violation hereof. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § XV) 
Sec. 6-89. - Jurisdiction.     The provisions of this article shall apply to all lands within the city unless otherwise exempted. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § II) 
Sec. 6-90. - Other jurisdictions.     The city shall have the right to prune obstructive trees and shrubs on private property when such growth obstructs the view of any street intersection, traffic signal light, sign or other traffic control device. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § XIII) 
Secs. 6-91—6-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS FOR GREENSPACES, TREE PROTECTION, TREE ESTABLISHMENT AND LANDSCAPING 
Sec. 6-100. - Applicability.     Except as herein provided, there shall be provided for each new development a greenspace plan. Such plan shall include a tree protection plan, a tree establishment plan and a landscaping plan. Such plans shall conform to the standards and requirements hereinafter set forth. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(1)) 
Sec. 6-101. - Greenspace design principles and standards—Generally. (a)  A minimum of ten (10) percent of the total area of any development shall be devoted to greenspace. (b)  Each greenspace shall have a quality mix of trees and shrubs in accordance with the following schedule provided in section 6-102. The total required tree site density shall be fifteen (15) units per acre, excluding building only. This total fifteen (15) is a combination of factors for protected trees and replacements trees. (c)  Sidewalks, curbing, or other paved or impermeable surfaces within the greenspace area shall not count towards the ten (10) percent minimum greenspace requirement. (d)  All preserved and/or planted trees shall be protected from land disturbance resulting from any building or facility construction. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(2); Ord. of 11-13-95) 
Sec. 6-102. - Same—Protected, replacement, and prohibited trees. (a)  Protected trees. The following schedule shall serve as a guideline for calculations for the units for protected trees: Caliper (inches)        Species Units  3 Green ash, white ash 1.00  4 American beech, hickory 1.20  6 Southern magnolia, Florida maple 1.40  8 Red maple, laurel oak, live oak 1.60 10 Swamp oak, sourwood 1.80 12 Sugarberry, blackgum 2.40 15 Water tupelo, yellow poplar 2.80 18 Dedora cedar 3.20 21 3.40 24 3.60 27 4.00 30 4.40 33 4.80 36 5.20 39 5.60 42 6.00 45 6.40 48 6.80 51 7.20 54 7.60 57 8.00 60 and above 8.40  Caliper (inches)       Species Units  3 Bald cypress, pond cypress .50  4 Red cedar, American elm .60  6 Winged elm, water oak .90  8 Willow oak, American sycamore 1.00 10 Pecan 1.20 12 1.40 15 1.60 18 1.80 21 2.00 24 2.40 30 2.80 36 and above 3.20  Caliper (inches)       Species Units  3 Black cherry, river birch .30  4 Loblolly pine, slash pine .40  6 Pond pine, sweet gum .50  8 Dogwood, redbud, American holly .70 10 .90 12 1.10 15 1.40 18 1.60 21 1.80 24 2.00 30 2.20 36 and above 2.50  (b)  Replacement trees. The following schedules apply to calculations of the units for replacement trees. Fifty (50) percent of the replacement unit factor must be from type I and/or type II trees. Type I Tree—Large Caliper (inches)      Species Units 2—3 Green ash, white ash 1.00 3—4 Red maple, laurel oak 1.20 4—5 Live oak, swamp oak, 1.40 Shumard Oak, sugarberry, Drake oak, Zelkova  Type II Tree—Medium Caliper (inches)        Species Units 1½—2 Water oak, willow oak .60 3—4 Bald cypress, winged elm 1.00 4—5 American sycamore, golden raintree, 1.20 Fringetree, saucer magnolia, Ginkgo (male only), Drake elm, Zelkova  Type III Tree—Small Caliper (inches)        Species Units 1½—2 Dogwood, redbud, American holly .30 2—3 Yaupon holly, silverbell, river birch .50 3—4 Slash pine, loblolly pine, .70 Japanese maple, red cedar  Type IV Tree—Ornamental Caliper (inches)        Species Units 1 Crepe myrtle, waxmyrtle .20 1—1½ Crabapple, cherry laurel .40 2—3 Camellia, Japanese cherries, .60 Loquats, stewantias, Callery pear, Savannah holly, Nellie R. Stevens holly, star magnolia, Hawthorn, Kwanzan cherry  (c)  Prohibited trees. The following trees are prohibited along streets and in public areas: Tree of heaven, sweetgum, female ginkgo, silver maple, pecan, catalpa, thorned honey locust, black locust, willows, and sumacs. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(2); Ord. of 11-13-95) 
Secs. 6-103—6-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREE PROTECTION AND TREE ESTABLISHMENT 
Sec. 6-110. - Protection of preserved or planted trees. (a)  Tree protection zones shall be established and maintained for all trees preserved or planted on a site. The provisions set forth in this division apply to such zones and trees within them: (1)  The area within any tree protection zone must remain open and unpaved. The use of perforated pavers may be allowed subject to approval of the building inspector. (2)  A plan shall accompany all applications identifying how existing trees within tree protection zones are to be protected during clearing and construction of the project. Such plan shall be approved by the city building inspector when it is determined that the plan adequately addresses the criteria set forth in part A of the land clearing and tree protection activities manual. (3)  No vehicles shall be parked, or construction material stored or substances poured or disposed of or placed, within any tree protection zone at any time during clearing or construction of the project. (4)  No change in grade within the tree protection zone shall be allowed except for a maximum addition of two (2) inches of sandy loam topsoil covered with sod or mulch. (5)  Tree wells or tree walls (island) shall be constructed as needed to protect the preserved trees from grade changes which result in changes of water supply to the tree protection zone. Adequate means for drainage of excess moisture from the tree protection zone shall be provided if tree wells or tree walls are constructed. (6)  For planted trees, the following tree protection standards and requirements shall apply: a.  The minimum size tree protection zone centered upon the planted tree shall be as specified in the manual. b.  No tree shall be planted closer to a building foundation or water, sewer, or natural gas line (when existing) than as follows: Five (5) feet for a mature small tree. Ten (10) feet for a mature medium tree. Fifteen (15) feet for a mature large tree. c.  No tree shall be planted under overhead utility distribution lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater than the lowest overhead wire. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(3)(A)(1—6)) 
Sec. 6-111. - Irrigation requirements; exceptions. (a)  Requirements: Except as provided for herein, irrigation shall be provided for tree protection zones in the following manner: (1)  A permanent water source shall be installed on each site. (2)  All trees within a tree protection zone must have a permanent water source. (3)  The minimum permanent water source shall be a hose bib capable of delivering a minimum of three (3) gallons per minute. (4)  All irrigation systems connected to any potable water supply shall be provided with an adequate means to prevent contamination of the potable water supply. The term "permanent water source" should not include a pond, lake, etc., unless provisions are made to pump water. (b)  Exceptions: Irrigation shall not be required where: (1)  Existing individual trees or clumps or groups of existing trees or wooded areas are to be preserved, and grading, filling or other land disturbing activities have not disturbed the natural groundwater supply to such trees; or (2)  For planted trees if it is determined by the city building inspector or other authorized official that the natural groundwater supply and/or the natural soil conditions is sufficient to sustain tree growth. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(3)(A)(7)) 
Sec. 6-112. - Trees near excavations or construction on publicly owned property.     All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work, shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame, or box not less than four (4) feet high and eight (8) feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches DBH, which ever is greater, and all building material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(3)(A)(8)) 
Sec. 6-113. - Placing materials on public property.     No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the city building inspector. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(3)(A)(9)) 
Sec. 6-114. - Designation of exceptional trees. (a)  The mayor and city council may, on its own initiative or upon petition, designate a tree as exceptional, as defined in subsection (c) of this section. (b)  All nominations for exceptional tree designation shall be reviewed by the review board who shall make a recommendation on such nominations to the mayor and city council. Trees so designated shall thereafter be considered a public landmark and shall not be destroyed or endangered. (c)  The designation of an exceptional tree shall be based upon an evaluation of the tree in relation to the following criteria: (1)  The tree is demonstrated to have an association with a documented historical event, or is located on an historic site. (2)  The tree has unusually high aesthetic value. (3)  The tree is of unique character because of its age, species, variety, location, or because of the size and development of its crown, trunk, or main stem. (4)  The tree is free of disease, pests or serious injury. (5)  The tree has a life expectancy of more than ten (10) years. (6)  The tree is free from structural defects which could present a hazard to the public. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(3)(B)) 
Sec. 6-115. - Trees on adjacent city property. (a)  A property owner responsible for any land disturbing activity within fifty (50) feet of a tree located on city property shall provide for the protection of such trees to the standards described in these regulations. (b)  A property owner responsible for a land disturbing activity that causes damage to or affects the health or growth of a tree on city property as determined by the tree advisory board, shall compensate the city for such tree loss or damage. Compensation shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. Preference is given to the planting of additional trees on the site. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(3)(C)) 
Sec. 6-116. - Landscaping requirements.     A landscaping plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. The details of the landscaping plan (i.e., plant species, plant size, plant location, placement of buffers, etc.) shall be submitted before the approval of a clearing permit for the site. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VII(4)) 
Secs. 6-117—6-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 6-130. - Designation of the administrator of the article.     The city building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § VIII(1)) 
Sec. 6-131. - Duties and responsibilities.     It shall be the responsibility of the city planning commission to hear appeals and requests for variances, to investigate, report and recommend upon any special matter coming within the scope of its responsibility. (Ord. of 11-13-95) Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 13, 1995, repealed §§ 6-131—6-134 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 6-131—6-134 pertained to creation and establishment of a tree advisory board, term of office, compensation, and duties and responsibilities and derived from §§ VIII(1)(A)—(D) of an ordinance adopted May 24, 1993. 
Secs. 6-132—6-134. - Reserved. Note— See the editor's note following § 6-131. 
Secs. 6-135—6-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LAND CLEARING ACTIVITIES 
Sec. 6-150. - Application for land clearing activities permits. (a)  Applications for permits for land clearing activities shall be submitted by the land owner or an authorized agent on a form provided for this purpose. Such application shall be submitted to the city building inspector along with all required attachments. Each land clearing activities permit application shall include the data, items, plans, and other documents listed in subsection (b). Required data may be combined into a single document as long as clarity is maintained. Complete applications shall be reviewed by the city building inspector. If the application is not routine then it will be reviewed by the advisory board. (b)  Plan required for land clearing activities permit. (1)  Project description: Such description shall include: a.  The purpose of the requested permit. b.  A map showing existing and proposed land uses, buildings, parking, and other pertinent elements of development. c.  A boundary survey which shall include the location of all easements, building setback lines, nearby governmental jurisdictional boundaries, and nearby zoning district boundaries. d.  The anticipated starting and completion dates for each phase of the project. (2)  Tree protection plan: Such plan shall include: a.  A topographic survey map showing existing tree cover and tree cover that is to be removed. b.  The location and species of all trees to be retained on the site. c.  The location, species, specifications if different from those listed on the 1993 land clearing and tree protection activities manual and DBH of all trees located on adjacent city right-of-way. However, where a grouping or cluster of twenty (20) or more trees is located within a proposed tree protection zone, the location of individual trees within such cluster is not required to be spotted on the plan, provided the number of trees for each species within the cluster is given, and the average DBH is identified for each species. (3)  Tree establishment plan: Such plan shall include: a.  A topographic survey map showing the location and species of all trees to be planted on the site. b.  Tree protection zones and a listing of all trees to be planted on the site giving their respective species. c.  A description of tree planting specifications if altered from those listed in the 1993 land clearing and tree protection activities manual. (c)  The building inspector may waive the requirement for one and/or two (2) of the three (3) plans listed in subsection (b), upon finding that three (3) or fewer trees are being proposed for removal, no grading is to occur, and such removal will not be contrary to the purpose of the regulation. In the event the trees are to be removed and there shall be no development on the site, then the building inspector may waive the requirements of one and/or two (2) and the topographic survey of subsection (b)(3)a. (d)  If a tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase as appropriate. (e)  If a permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant in writing. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § IX(1)) 
Sec. 6-151. - Appeals and variances. (a)  Appeals from the orders, rulings or decisions of the building inspector or request for variances from the provisions of this article shall be made to the city planning commission. Forms are provided for such purpose by the building inspector. All such appeals or requests shall be heard at a time consistent with the established procedure for placing items on the agenda of the city planning commission. The actions of the city planning commission may be reviewed by the city council, which as a body may hear any appeal from any order, ruling or decision of the city planning commission. (b)  Variances shall only be granted upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief. (c)  Variances shall only be granted upon: (1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; (2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and (3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not adversely impact the intent and purpose of these regulations. (d)  In consideration of variances, and appeals, and the purpose set forth for the regulations, the city planning commission may impose or require such additional standards as may be necessary to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § IX(3); Ord. of 11-13-95) 
Secs. 6-152—6-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PUBLIC TREE PLANTING, PRUNING, REMOVAL, AND CARE 
Sec. 6-160. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Street trees and park trees: Street trees means trees and all woody vegetation on land lying on either side of all streets within the city. Park trees means trees and all woody vegetation in public parks and other areas defined by the city to which the public has free access as a park. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(1)) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-161. - Selection of trees for streets and parks.     Prior to planting a tree on any street, park or other public land, the species must be approved by the city. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(2)) 
Sec. 6-162. - Placement of street trees and park trees. (a)  The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the recommendation by size as provided by the state forestry commission. Small trees may not be planted less than thirty (30) feet apart, medium trees forty (40) feet apart and large trees fifty (50) feet apart, except in case of special planting effects created by a qualified landscape designer. (b)  No tree may be placed closer to a curb or sidewalk than the following distances: Small trees, two (2) feet; medium trees, three (3) feet; large trees, four (4) feet. No pines within ten (10) feet. No tree may be planted any closer than thirty-five (35) feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs. No tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet of any fireplug. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(3)) 
Sec. 6-163. - Planting, maintenance or removal. (a)  No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or municipal-owned property without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the city building inspector or otherwise specified municipal authority. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by the city building inspector. (b)  Application for permits must be made at the office of the city building inspector not less than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. (c)  Standards of issuance. The city building inspector shall issue the permit provided for herein if, in his judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. (d)  Notice of completion shall be given within five (5) days to the city building inspector for his inspection. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(4)(I)) 
Sec. 6-164. - Application data.     The application required herein shall state the number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information as the city building inspector shall find reasonably necessary for a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(4)(II)(A)) 
Sec. 6-165. - Improper planting.     Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this division, it shall be lawful for the city building inspector to remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of special assessments. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(4)(II)(B)) 
Sec. 6-166. - Removal, replanting, and replacement. (a)  Whenever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees from a treelawn in connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the municipality shall replant such trees or replace them. Provided that if conditions prevent planting on treelawns, this requirement will be satisfied if any equivalent number of trees of the same size and species as provided for in this article are planted in an attractive manner on the adjoining property. (b)  No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the city building inspector, and without replacing the removed tree or trees in accordance with this adopted article. Such replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as provided for in a permit issued by the city building inspector. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(4)(III)) 
Sec. 6-167. - Obstruction; pruning of trees. (a)  It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten (10) feet over sidewalks, and twelve (12) feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares which shall have a clearance of sixteen (16) feet. (b)  No topping, dehorning, or otherwise pruning, trimming or removal of trees shall be permitted except by written permission of the city building inspector. Proper cabling and bracing shall be substituted for this practice wherever possible. (c)  All large, established trees shall be pruned to sufficient height to allow free passage of pedestrians and vehicular traffic; ten (10) feet over sidewalks and twelve (12) feet over all streets except those that are subject to truck traffic which shall have a clearance of sixteen (16) feet. (d)  It shall be the policy of the city building inspector to cooperate with utilities companies, and vice versa, in the development of a system of tree pruning to give effective street illumination and clearance of distribution lines. However, pruning shall not exceed the minimum needs of the utility company and as may be agreed upon with the city building inspector. (e)  All cuts shall be made with a saw or pruner and only at the nodes or crotches. No stubs shall be left. No spurs or climbing irons shall be used in the trees, except when trees are to be removed. All dead, crossed, and rubbing branches shall be removed. (f)  All tools being used on a tree suspected to be infected with a contagious disease shall be disinfected before being used on another tree. (g)  Whenever streets are to be blocked off to public service, police and fire departments shall be notified of the location and length of time the street will be blocked. Notification shall be given these departments upon the removal of such barriers or if such barriers are to remain longer than originally expected. (h)  To protect the public from danger, suitable street and sidewalk barriers, highway cones, or signs shall be used when pruning a tree. Flashing signals or flares shall be placed on all barriers or obstructions remaining in the street after dark. (i)  The stumps of all removed trees shall be cut to at least three (3) inches below the ground, and soil shall be replaced and the area leveled. If the area where the tree is removed is to be paved, the tree should be cut or stump removed at least six (6) inches below the ground. (j)  All cabling and bracing practices with screw rods shall follow National Arborist Association or other accepted arboricultural standards. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(4)(IV)) 
Sec. 6-168. - Notice to prune; order; failure to comply. (a)  Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as hereinabove provided, the city building inspector shall order such person or persons within seven (7) days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees. (b)  The order required herein shall be served by mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by certified mail. (c)  When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the municipality to prune such trees, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of special assessments. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(4)(A)(I—III)) 
Sec. 6-169. - Abuse or mutilation of public trees.     Unless specifically authorized by the city building inspector no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree, allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § X(4)(V)) 
Sec. 6-170. - Public tree care. (a)  The advisory board may recommend to the city building inspector the removal of any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason that its nature is a public hazard or is injurious to any public improvement and is affected with any fungus, insect or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the city. (b)  The stumps of all removed trees shall be cut to at least three (3) inches below the ground, and soil shall be replaced and the area leveled. If the area where the tree is removed is to be paved, the tree should be cut or stump removed at least six (6) inches below the ground. (c)  Tree topping is permitted only in cases of severe damage by storms or other causes, and for certain old established trees under utility wires where conventional pruning practices are impractical. (Ord. of 5-24-93, § XI) 
Secs. 6-171—6-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 8, 1996, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of substantive provisions of said ordinance as § 6-180 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 6-180. - Adopted by reference.     The Code of Ordinances, City of Vidalia, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding an article to be numbered Chapter 6, Article V, Standard Unsafe Building Abatement, which said article shall incorporate by reference the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code 1985 edition and any replacements, amendments, supplements or changes thereto as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International in its entirety with the exception of section 105.1 which shall read as follows: "A board of adjustments and appeals shall be established for the express purpose of providing for the final interpretation of provisions of this Code. The board shall consist of the city planning and zoning commission and their successors as may be appointed by the mayor and council." (Ord. of 4-8-96(1)) 
Sec. 6-181. - Sections to O.C.G.A. adopted by reference.     This section shall incorporate by reference the Official Code of Georgia Annotated §§ 41-2-1 through 41-2-17 in its entirety and any replacements, amendments, supplements or changes thereto. (Ord. of 10-13-97) 
Sec. 6-182. - Procedures for housing abatement. (a)  Authority of city marshall: (1)  In addition to any authority presented to the city marshall under Vidalia Code Sec. 2-6, the city council may appoint city marshall and his successor in office, to fulfill duties of "public officer" pursuant to O.C.G.A. 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, regarding the abatement of public nuisances. (2)  It shall be the duty of the city marshall to determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling, building, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the City of Vidalia. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): a.  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; b.  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; c.  Dilapidation; d.  Disrepair; e.  Structural defects; and f.  Uncleanliness. (3)  The city council may provide additional standards to guide the city marshall, or his agents, in determining the fitness of a dwelling, building, or structure for human habitation or for its current commercial, industrial, or business use. (4)  This section provides that the city marshall may from the date of adoption of this ordinance, determine, under the authority of this ordinance, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency as evidence of drug crimes being committed. (b)  Power of public officer: (1)  The city council may authorize the city marshall to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out the purpose and provisions of O.C.G.A. 41-2-7 though 41-2-12, including the following powers in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. 41-2-7 through 41-2-17: a.  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the municipality in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; b.  To administer oaths and affirmation, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; c.  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the tenant possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; d.  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and e.  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. (c)  Procedure for abatement of public nuisance: (1)  That whenever a request is filed with the city marshall by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use or is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the public officer shall, if preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his designated agent) at a place within the municipality in which the property is located, fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file and answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer; (2)  That if, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use or is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with commission of drug crimes, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: a.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. In no event shall the governing authority of any such county or municipality require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this law; (3)  That, if the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished: and that the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful." (4)  That, if the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the public officer, set forth in paragraph (b)(1)d. of this Code section and this paragraph, shall not be exercised until the governing body shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of Code Sections 41-2-7, 41-2-8, this Code section, and Code Sections 41-2-10 through 41-2-17 with respect to the particular property or properties which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance; (5)  That the amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the municipality and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the public officer in the office of the clerk of the governing body of the municipality on a lien docket maintained by said clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing in this Code section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise; (6)  Municipal corporations may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures only in the following manner: a.  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the municipal corporation, within thirty (30) days after the perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount due and by further paying to said municipal corporation the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed; b.  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the municipal corporation; and c.  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of said three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subparagraph b. of this paragraph, the municipal corporation may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in Code Section 48-5-358 and other applicable statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Title 18. (Ord. of 12-27-00(1)) 
Sec. 6-183. - Demolition Ordinance.     The city council hereby authorizes the city marshall and his successor in office, to effectuate the purpose of Vidalia Code Section 6-182 and O.C.G.A. Sections 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 by authorizing the demolition of property which the city marshall has found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, to wit: 205 Morris Street, Vidalia, Ga., currently owned by T. E. Maddox. (Ord. of 12-27-00(2)) 
Chapter 7 - CIVIL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 7-1. - "Emergency management" defined.     As used in this article, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. (Code 1968, § 7-1) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(1). 
Sec. 7-2. - Emergency management office established; appointment and powers of coordinator.     In agreement with the governing officials of the county, the City of Vidalia and the City of Lyons, there is hereby established the county emergency management office. The officials of the county, the City of Vidalia and the City of Lyons shall nominate for appointment by the governor a coordinator of emergency management for the county. When appointed, the coordinator is charged with the following duties: (1)  To represent the governing officials of the county, the City of Vidalia and the City of Lyons on matters pertaining to civil preparedness. (2)  To assist the above government officials in organizing departments for emergency operations. (3)  To develop, in conjunction with all departments and agencies of the City of Vidalia and City of Lyons, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in this chapter. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the above governmental agencies and thence to the state emergency management office for approval. (4)  To maintain the office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the rendering of required reports to the state office. (5)  To render reports, such as financial, daily activity, etc., as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. (6)  To procure, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. (7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of a declared emergency and under the supervision of the county, City of Vidalia and City of Lyons governing officials. (Code 1968, § 7-2) 
Sec. 7-3. - Emergency management departments. (a)  The county organization shall be established around the departments and agencies of the county, the City of Vidalia and the City of Lyons, and the emergency functions listed in section 7-1 are assigned as follows: Department Emergency Functions (1) Executive (elected officials of the county, City of Vidalia, City of Lyons) Direction and control Public information Supply—Finance (2) Police (police units of the county, City of Vidalia, City of Lyons) Security Movement Search Communication Warning (3) Fire control (fire departments of the county, City of Vidalia, City of Lyons) Fire control Rescue Damage assessment (4) Public works and engineering Utilities and public service Hazards analysis (5) Human resources a. Division of family and children's services Human needs, including: Welfare b. Division of physical health Health control c. Hospital services Medical and mortuary services d. Ambulance services Casualty transport (6) Emergency management Shelter Radio Rescue Assistance in industrial and institutional emergency planning  (b)  Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency functions. Such plans will be submitted through the coordinator to the governing officials of the county, the City of Vidalia and the City of Lyons. (Code 1968, § 7-3) 
Sec. 7-4. - Emergency powers.     In the event of a man-made or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens, the governing officials of the county and other participating governments may declare, in their respective jurisdictions, that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues the following emergency powers: (1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. (2)  To seize, take for temporary use or condemn any property for the protection of the public. (3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any of such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city; to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. (4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. (Code 1968, § 7-4) 
Sec. 7-5. - Volunteers.     All persons, other than officers of the county, the City of Vidalia and the City of Lyons, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as the county, City of Vidalia and City of Lyons officers and employees. (Code 1968, § 7-5) 
Chapter 7.5 - ENVIRONMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 9; planning and development, ch. 16; environmental protection, A-1 Agricultural District, App. A, § 404. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 7.5-1—7.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 9, 2018 , amended article II in its entirety, which previously pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted June 14, 2004, §§ I—IX and an ordinance adopted September 29, 2009. 
Sec. 7.5-21. - Title.     This article will be known as "City of Vidalia Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-22. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated:     Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1, of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.     Board: The board of natural resources.     Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.     Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.     Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282.     Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).     CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc,. which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.     Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation.     Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).     Design professional: A professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure.     Director: The director of the environmental protection division of an authorized representative.     District: The Ohoopee Soil and Water Conservation District.     Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources.     Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the low and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.     Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.     Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A., Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protection at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 7.5-24(c).     Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation.     Final stabilization: All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.     Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.     Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.     Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.     Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 7.5-23(5).     Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this article, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.     Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a).     Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.     Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.     Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.     NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit.     NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit.     Operator: The party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications, or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions.     Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.     Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.     Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Phase or phased: Subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.     Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.     Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1, of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal.     Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.     Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.     Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.     Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Ohoopee Soil and Water Conservation District.     Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.     State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f).     State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.     Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."     Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.     Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas by covering the soil with: (1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; (2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or (3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.     Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."     Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.     Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-23. - Exemptions.     This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; (2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; (3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this section. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this section, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; (5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, daily, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; (6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 7.5-24(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; (7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; (8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this article, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage way; which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10); (9)  Construction or maintenance project; or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12.7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; (10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and (11)  Any public water system reservoir. ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-24. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. (a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. (b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. (1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this article, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). (2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. (3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. (4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. (5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) (16) and (17) in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). (c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1, of the year on which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: (1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; (2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; (3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; (4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; (5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; (7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this section, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; (10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; (11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; (12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; (14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2); (15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) and (17), there is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-B, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed, and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and (16)  There is established a fifty (50) foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five (25) foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed, and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. (17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a twenty-five (25) foot buffer would consume at least eighteen (18) percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than five hundred (500) square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. (d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c). (e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-25. - Application/permit process. (a)  General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. (b)  Application requirements . (1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. (2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building inspector and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c). Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two (2) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. (3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. (4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections (c)(15) (16) and (17) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 7.5-25(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. (5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. (6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. (c)  Plan requirements. (1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 7.5-24(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1, of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. (d)  Permits. (1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. (2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 7.5-24(c)(15) (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other articles relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. (4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. (5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. (6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-26. - Inspection and enforcement. (a)  The building inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. (b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. (c)  The building inspector shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. (d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. (f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-27. - Penalties and incentives. (a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity . If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. (b)  Stop-work orders . (1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; (2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; (3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and (4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. (c)  Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 7.5-25(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to him a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-28. - Education and certification. (a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. (c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. (d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-29. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. (a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and city council within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. (b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Toombs County. ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 7.5-30. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 9th day of July, 2018. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. ( Ord. Of 7-9-2018(1) ) 
Secs. 7.5-31—7.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 7.5-41. - Short title and purpose. (a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." (b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. (Ord. of 8-9-99, § 1) 
Sec. 7.5-42. - Definitions.     When used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section:     Hazardous waste or material: Any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: (1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or (2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.     Sanitary landfill: A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.     Wellhead: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. (Ord. of 8-9-99, § 2) 
Sec. 7.5-43. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone.     There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is two hundred fifty (250) feet. (Ord. of 8-9-99, § 3) 
Sec. 7.5-44. - Permitted uses.     The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: (1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one (1) acre; and (2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. (Ord. of 8-9-99, § 4) 
Sec. 7.5-45. - Prohibited uses.     The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 7.5-44 or this section: (1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; (2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; (3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs or buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 7.5-44 of this article; (4)  Sanitary landfills; (5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; (6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; (7)  Underground storage tanks. (Ord. of 8-9-99, § 5) 
Sec. 7.5-46. - Administration.     The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limit those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. (Ord. of 8-9-99, § 6) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 8-1. - Fire hydrants—Permit to open.     It shall be unlawful for any person to open a city fire hydrant without a permit from the city water department, unless the same is opened by the fire department. (Code 1968, § 8-1) Cross reference— Municipal utilities and services, ch. 12. 
Sec. 8-2. - Same—Obstructing.     It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire hydrant in the city without first notifying the fire department in writing and obtaining the consent of the department. (Code 1968, § 8-2) Cross reference— Municipal utilities and services, ch. 12. 
Sec. 8-3. - Damaging fire apparatus.     It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and knowingly damage, in any way or by any means whatever, any hose, hook, ladder, reel or vehicle, or any other implement, material or apparatus of any kind belonging to, connected with, or used by the fire department in the city, as a part of its machinery, material or equipment for extinguishing fires. (Code 1968, § 8-3) Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 13. 
Sec. 8-4. - False alarms—Prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to give or cause to be given a false alarm of fire, or to ring a fire bell or alarm except in case of fire. (Code 1968, § 8-4) Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 13. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 
Sec. 8-5. - Same—Fees.     A fee shall be charged to the alarm user by the city for the second, third and fourth false fire alarms from any single alarm system in a calendar year. In the event a fifth false fire alarm from any single system occurs in a calendar year, the city shall double the fee that was charged for the fourth false fire alarm. A fee schedule will be set by city council and maintained on file at city hall. (Mo. of 2-8-88; Ord. of 6-11-18(2) ) 
Secs. 8-6—8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— State regulations as to protection against fires, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4; welfare, O.C.G.A. § 88-401. 
Sec. 8-20. - Adoption of code. (a)  The edition of the Standard Fire Prevention Code adopted in section 6-1 is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code for the city. (b)  Such code is incorporated in and by reference made part of this article as fully as if set forth at length, and shall govern all matters covered therein, within the corporate limits. (c)  A copy of such code shall be kept with the minutes of the council in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. of 8-2-93(2)) 
Sec. 8-21. - Modifications of code.     The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or the chief's duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (Code 1968, § 8-16) 
Sec. 8-22. - Enforcement of code.     The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. (Code 1968, § 8-17) 
Sec. 8-23. - Appeals from decisions of fire chief.     Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (Code 1968, § 8-18) 
Sec. 8-24. - Violations and penalties. (a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed, shall severally and for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be punished as provided in section 1-8. (b)  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. (c)  The application of the above penalties shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Code 1968, § 8-19) 
Chapter 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Rabies control, § 5-20 et seq.; municipal utilities and services, ch. 12. State Law reference— Abatement of nuisance in city, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 9-1. - Noise—General prohibition.     It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessarily or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city. Cross reference— For specific regulations in industrial districts, see App. A, § 1504. 
Sec. 9-2. - Same—Specific prohibitions; exemptions. (a)  Prohibited noises: The following acts among others are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Code, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: (1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc.: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. (2)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising: The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio or television set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is on the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. (3)  Yelling, shouting, etc.: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. (4)  Exhaust: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motor boat or any other motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. (5)  Vehicles out of repair, etc.: The use of any automobile, motorcycle, motorscooter, go cart, or any other vehicle so out of repair, or so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise, including excessive noise coming through the exhaust thereof. (b)  Exemptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations: (1)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. (2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in the time of an emergency. (3)  Any other noise resulting from activities of temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the city in accordance with its ordinances and laws. 
Sec. 9-3. - Same—Tests and standards.     The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of sections 9-1 and 9-2 exists shall include but shall not be limited to the following: (1)  The volume of the noise. (2)  The intensity of the noise. (3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual. (4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural. (5)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any. (6)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities. (7)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates. (8)  The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates. (9)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs. (10)  The duration of the noise. (11)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant. (12)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
Sec. 9-4. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators and similar receptacles. (a)  Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises within the city to allow or permit any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, trunk, chest or other receptacle or container in which a person might become imprisoned to be or remain on such premises if such icebox, refrigerator, trunk, chest, receptacle, container or device has a virtually airtight lid, door, snap lock, latch or other locking device, without first removing such door, lid, snap lock, latch or other locking device. (b)  Definition: Any such container shall be considered and deemed abandoned when it is no longer used for the purpose for which it was intended, and is unattended outside of any building or other structure, or is within an abandoned or unoccupied building or other structure within the city. (Code 1968, § 13-1) Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 13. State Law reference— Abandoned refrigerators, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Secs. 9-5—9-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEANLINESS OF PROPERTY[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Littering with handbills, § 10-45; refuse collection, § 12-70 et seq.; vehicles hauling trash, §§ 19-9, 19-10. State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq., 40-6-249; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 9-20. - Street and sidewalk to be kept free of debris.     The occupants of buildings abutting a street or sidewalk shall keep the portion of the street and sidewalk on which such building abuts clean and free of paper, trash, boxes and other debris. (Code 1968, § 9-1) 
Sec. 9-21. - Dumping, depositing debris in public places.     No paper, garbage, cardboard, wooden boxes, bottles or cans shall be dumped, dropped, deposited, placed, cast or thrown on the streets, sidewalks, grass plots, squares or parks of the city. (Code 1968, § 9-2) 
Sec. 9-22. - Accumulations of trash, debris.     It shall be unlawful for any property owner in the city to allow on such property any accumulation of trash or other debris. (Code 1968, § 9-30) 
Sec. 9-23. - Growth of weeds, similar vegetation.     It shall be unlawful for any property owner to allow weeds and similar vegetation to grow to a height exceeding twelve (12) inches on such property. (Code 1968, § 9-31) 
Sec. 9-24. - Notice of violation—Service generally.     Upon finding a parcel of property in violation of this article, if the owner of such property is known and is a resident of the city, the city shall, under the signature of the city marshal give notice to the owner of such property by having the marshal serve the owner personally with a notice of the violation. (Code 1968, § 9-32) 
Sec. 9-25. - Same—Service upon unknown or nonresident owner.     Upon finding a parcel of property in violation of this article if the owner of the property is unknown or is a nonresident of the city, the city shall serve such owner by publishing a notice of the violation in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Code 1968, § 9-33) 
Sec. 9-26. - Same—Contents.     The notice of violation shall contain the location of the property, the particular type of violation, and instructions to clean such property within ten (10) days. (Code 1968, § 9-34) 
Sec. 9-27. - Authority of city to correct violation.     Upon failure of a property owner, after being notified as provided herein, to clean the property and correct the violation within ten (10) days after service of notice, in addition to the owner being liable to punishment as provided in section 1-8, the city may correct the violation and clean the lot and charge the owner therefor. (Code 1968, § 9-35) 
Sec. 9-28. - Execution, levy, sale for costs of cleaning property.     The city shall have the right to issue an execution against property for the payment of the costs of cleaning it, and levy on and sell the property for payment of same. (Code 1968, § 9-36) 
Secs. 9-29—9-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Authority to remove illegally stopped vehicles, § 19-32. State Law reference— Authority as to junked motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-60-4, 40-11-3 et seq. 
Sec. 9-40. - Person's responsibility—Generally.     No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or let or sublet to another for occupancy, or keep and maintain whether in use or abandoned, any vehicle, whether motorized or nonmotorized, upon such person's premises or on city property adjacent to such person's premises for any purpose whatsoever which, under the provisions of this article, constitutes a nuisance. 
Sec. 9-41. - Same—Specifically.     It shall be the duty of both the owner and the occupant or inhabitant of any building, dwelling, or dwelling unit to keep the interior and exterior of any vehicle, whether motorized or nonmotorized, and the exterior of such building, dwelling and dwelling unit, including its premises, yards, lawns, grounds, courts and alleys, clean, clear and free of any attractive nuisance created by abandoned, useless, worn-out or damaged vehicles (defined for purposes of this article as any vehicle which is not in working order and which does not possess a valid license tag and inspection sticker, if required by law, of the current year), from filth, rubbish, garbage, debris, combustible materials, or excessive growth of weeds or grass, or similar matters which are conducive to rodent, vermin or insect infestation, or conditions conducive to spread of fire or disease, in and around such vehicles, and the same duty shall rest on the owner of any vacant lot or land adjacent to such vehicle or vehicles. 
Sec. 9-42. - Declaration of nuisance generally.     Any vehicle, whether motorized or nonmotorized, is a nuisance where it is perilous to life or property by reason of abandonment, neglect, filth, dilapidation, overcrowding or of a condition that it is not fit for the purpose for which it was originally intended and is susceptible to fire or accessible to children playing who could be injured because of such condition, and as such is a danger to the health of the citizens because of such vehicles' providing a harboring place for vermin and the spread of disease. 
Sec. 9-43. - Specific nuisance conditions. (a)  Any vehicle, whether motorized or nonmotorized, which may have one or more of the following defects shall be deemed unfit and as junk and shall constitute a nuisance: (1)  Those which have propelling mechanism which has failed and is no longer operational. (2)  Vehicles required to have a license tag and liability insurance under state law which do not have same. (3)  Those which have bodies and/or framework which is useless, worn out and damaged to such an extent that they are no longer fit for the use for which originally intended. (4)  Those which have become worthless and discarded and are only fit to be turned to some use other than the use originally intended such as salvaging on the usable parts of the machinery and remelting the remainder of the metal for recycling. (5)  Those which are abandoned in the same or approximate same location for thirty (30) days or longer without the owner or person in possession making some repair disposition and removing such vehicle from the premises. (6)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other cause so as to have become dangerous to the life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the occupants of the premises or of the adjacent premises or the people of the city. (7)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to their intended use that they are unfit for human use or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, safety and general welfare of those living around the same. (8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached or detached that they may injure members of the public or property. (9)  Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of the city. (10)  Those outside and/or inside of premises which are not clean, clear and free of any attractive nuisance or accumulation of dirt, junk, filth, rubbish, garbage, debris, combustible materials, excessive growth of weeds or grass, or similar conditions conducive to rodent, vermin or insect infestation or the spread of fire or disease. (11)  Excessive accumulation of vehicle parts not displayed or stored in an enclosed building that are visible from street. (b)  Any vehicle, premises or place in which one or more of the foregoing defects shall exist shall not be permitted to remain in such condition without the abatement of the nuisance, for any period longer than thirty (30) days after service of official notice upon the owner or agent that such conditions exist, except upon the specific written authority of the city council. 
Sec. 9-44. - Noncompliance deemed nuisance; abatement by city authorized.     Noncompliance with this article shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated by the city in the manner provided hereinbelow. 
Sec. 9-45. - Inspection of premises—Procedure.     The enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of any vehicles located on the premises or adjacent to the premises of any building, dwelling or dwelling units, the premises, yards, lawns, grounds, courts and alleys of any such building unit, or any vacant lot or land located within the city in the interest of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants and of the public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter onto, examine, survey and photograph at all reasonable times any such vehicles and the premises thereabout. 
Sec. 9-46. - Same—Disinterested city employees required; restriction on giving out information.     No official or employee of the city making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections thereto shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be required, nor shall any such official or employee give to any person, other than those authorized persons listed, any information relative to any such repairs or corrections; nor shall such officials or employees give to any mechanic, automobile body repair establishment or individual or other persons engaged in the business of automobile repairs the locations of any vehicles complained of under this article or the names of the owners thereof, on which repairs or corrections have been ordered. 
Sec. 9-47. - Notice; required, contents.     Whenever the enforcement officer finds that any vehicle located on the premises or adjacent to the premises of any building, structure, enclosure, place or the premises, yards, lawns, grounds, courts and alleys thereof, or any vacant lot or land has one or more of the defects set out hereinabove, or that other conditions exist which in such officer's opinion constitute a nuisance, such officer shall give written notice to the owner and/or the occupant of such property stating that in such officer's opinion the conditions constitute a nuisance; such notice shall: (1)  Be signed by the enforcement officer; (2)  Be served upon the owner or the owner's agent, or the occupant of the premises adjacent to such vehicle, as the case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to such person's last known address; or if such person is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of the state; (3)  Service may also be obtained by determining the name of the owner of the vehicle as listed in the vehicle registration files for the tab number located upon such vehicle; (4)  Outline the conditions complained of; (5)  Outline the remedial action deemed necessary to abate the nuisance; (6)  Specify a reasonable time (not more than thirty (30) days) which shall be allowed for taking the required remedial action; and (7)  State that unless the required action is taken within the time specified, the party notified will be summoned to appear before the municipal court to have determined the question whether the conditions complained of constitute a nuisance and should be abated. 
Sec. 9-48. - Jurisdiction of municipal court.     Should the remedial action specified in the notice provided hereinabove not be taken within the time allowed, the enforcement officer shall cause the party notified to be summoned to appear before the municipal court, to have determined the question whether the conditions complained of constitute a nuisance and should be abated. 
Sec. 9-49. - Failure to appear.     Any person who shall fail to appear in response to a summons issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense for such failure to appear, and may be punished as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 9-50. - Separate offense.     If, upon such hearing, the judge shall find that the conditions complained of constitute a nuisance, and shall order the same abated, each ten (10) days that such condition shall be maintained subsequent to the expiration of the time fixed by the court for the same to be abated shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as herein provided. 
Sec. 9-51. - Emergency power authorized.     Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, whenever the enforcement officer shall determine that the conditions found constitute imminent and immediate danger or hazard to person or property, such officer is authorized forthwith to cause the summons provided for herein to be issued, without the necessity of giving any preliminary notice to the owner or occupant. 
Sec. 9-52. - Appeals to city council.     Any person receiving written notice from the enforcement officer pursuant to the provisions of this article, within fifteen (15) days following the date of such notice, may enter an appeal in writing to the city council. No appeal filed later than fifteen (15) days after the date of such notice shall be acted upon by the city council, unless the enforcement officer shall consent thereto. 
Sec. 9-53. - Reports, etc., available to specified persons.     After any order, report or recommendation has been made by any official or employee of the city and is on file in the respective department, such information shall, upon request, be available to the press, owner of the property, or such person's authorized agent, the manager of the property, the attorney for any of the foregoing, any licensed attorney for the examination of titles, any official or employee of the city for official purposes, and to any other persons upon written application to the respective department where such order, or other information is on file. 
Sec. 9-54. - Placarding of premises.     After written notice has been given by the enforcement officer to the owners of such vehicle or the owners or agents of properties adjacent to such vehicle that conditions have been found therein which, in such officer's opinion, constitute a nuisance under this article, the enforcement officer (with concurrence of the city council) is authorized to place a signed notice on such vehicle reciting the findings and action taken with respect thereto following condemnation by the court. It shall be unlawful for such notice to be mutilated or removed from such vehicle, premises, or place until required improvements have been made or the nuisance abated. 
Sec. 9-55. - Appeals to court.     Any persons found to be in violation of this article by the municipal court and upon appeal to the city council shall have the right of appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, and upon appeal the city authorities shall be authorized to defend their decision in determining such violations to be a nuisance and in need of abatement for the public interest. 
Secs. 9-56—9-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE WATER WELLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 9-75. - General.     This section is to prohibit the drilling of water wells in the city limits of Vidalia except in those instances that the mayor and council determines that it is impractical for the city to provide water. (Ord. of 6-9-03) 
Sec. 9-76. - Inspection and testing; fee.     On the first day that any private water well is used, one gallon of water from the well will be furnished to the city and a one gallon on the same day of each month thereafter will be furnished to the city so that the proper analyses may be run on the water supply. In addition thereto, the property shall be physically inspected by the city, and a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) a month will be charged in connection therewith. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-75) 
Sec. 9-77. - Shutting down well.     If, from the monthly inspection required by section 9-76, an analysis of the well and the water obtained therefrom or if, from any other source, it is determined that the well and its operation is contaminating the aquifer from which the water is obtained; or if it is determined that the well and its operation are causing an increase in the iron content of the public water supply of the city, the well shall be immediately shut down and not used thereafter. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-76) 
Sec. 9-78. - Prohibited use of well water.     Under no circumstances shall water obtained from private water wells be used in such a manner as to be ingested by humans or animals. This prohibition specifically includes, but is not limited to, the use of water in swimming, bathing or wading pools. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-77) 
Sec. 9-79. - Private water supplies to be metered before introduction into city sewerage system.     Any private water supply, regardless of whether its source originates within or without the city, shall be metered in accordance with existing city standards or otherwise evaluated as determined by the applicable sewer use rate schedule before being introduced into the public sewerage system of the city. The provisions of this section shall apply to existing installations as well as future installations. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-78) 
Sec. 9-80. - Sewer service charges to apply to water from all sources.     The existing charge as now established or which may hereafter be established for sewerage disposal shall apply to all water, from whatever source obtained, which may hereafter be introduced into the public sewerage system. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-79) 
Secs. 9-81—9-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 9-91. - Permit.     No private wells shall be constructed upon any premises whether industrial or residential within the city until after a permit for the installation thereof has been obtained from the building inspector and the project has the approval of the mayor and city council. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-70) 
Sec. 9-92. - Application.     Any person desiring to dig a water well within the city shall make application therefor and show the following facts: (1)  The name of the applicant. (2)  The exact location of the proposed well. (3)  The size of the well. (4)  The depth of the well. (5)  The length of the casing to be used in connection with the well. (6)  The purpose for which the water from the well is to be used. (7)  The maximum of water to be obtained from the well. (8)  The aquifer from which the water is to be obtained. (9)  Safeguards to be installed which would prohibit the contamination of the aquifer from surface waters. (10)  An opinion from a geologist, expert in the field, that the drilling and the proposed use of the well will not interfere with the public water supply of the city, tend to contaminate the water supply of the city or add dissolved iron to the supply of water for the city. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-71) 
Sec. 9-93. - Application fee.     Each application required by this division shall be accompanied by an application fee in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), to be used by the city to verify the facts contained in the application. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-72) 
Sec. 9-94. - Wells creating contamination, reduction, etc., in city water supply prohibited.     No well shall be permitted which would, in the opinion of geologists, experts in the field, tend to reduce the public water supply of the city or endanger the water supply through contamination or add dissolved iron to the water supply. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-73) 
Sec. 9-95. - Procedure upon approval of application.     If the application for the drilling of a water well is favorably acted upon by the city, such private water well shall be drilled subject to inspection by the city, and a log of the well shall be maintained by the driller and a copy thereof furnished to the city. At the completion of the drilling and the installation of the pump, the driller of the well shall supply to the city a certificate, under oath, that the well was drilled in compliance with the application. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-74) 
Secs. 9-96—9-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LITTER CONTROL[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 13, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of substantive provisions of said ordinance as §§ 9-111—9-116 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 9-111. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the term:     Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in paragraph (6) of O.C.G.A. section 16-7-51.     Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. (Ord. of 6-13-94) 
Sec. 9-112. - Waste control. (a)  Short title: This section shall be known and may be cited as the "waste control law." (b)  Definitions: As used in this article, the term:     Biomedical waste means that term as defined in paragraph (1.1) of O.C.G.A. section 12-8-22 on January 1, 1993.     Commercial purpose means for the purpose of economic gain.     Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, or dispose of a substance. (Ord. of 6-13-94) 
Sec. 9-113. - Littering on public or private property or waters. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this state or any waters in this state, unless: (1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; (2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or (3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. (b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: (1)  By a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); (2)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or (3)  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. (c)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this Code section. (Ord. of 6-13-94) 
Sec. 9-114. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. (a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of O.C.G.A. section 16-7-43, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. (b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this Code section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of O.C.G.A. section 16-7-43 is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such a person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. (Ord. of 6-13-94) 
Sec. 9-115. - Enforcement of this article.     All law enforcement agencies, officers, and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof or any enforcement agency, officer, or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof is authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this article. (Ord. of 6-13-94) 
Sec. 9-116. - Misuse, vandalization, or scavenging of container. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise scavenge or vandalize any containers provided by the city or any city contractor for the dumping of trash or garbage. (b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. of 6-13-94) 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Finance, § 6.10 et seq. Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; mobile homes, mobile home parks licensed, regulated, ch. 11; displays of merchandise and wares on streets and sidewalks, § 17-17; use of carts and stands on streets and sidewalks for sale of merchandise, § 17-18; licensing, regulation of taxicabs, § 20-20 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 10-1—10-15. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 20, 1994, repealed §§ 10-1—10-15. Formerly, said sections pertained to licenses and business regulations generally and derived from §§ 10-1—10-10, 10-12—10-14, 10-16 and 10-17 of the 1968 Code and an ordinance adopted Aug. 8, 1983. 
Sec. 10-16. - Flea market; garage, stall or yard sale. (a)  Garage sale permit required; number of permits limited: Any person desiring to sell used merchandise or personal property of such person's own or of another person on such person's own premises or at other locations within the city, with written permission from the owner of said property, shall obtain a free permit from the city for such sale. Upon request, any one (1) family unit shall be issued a permit for a period of three (3) days; however, no family unit will receive more than two (2) permits per year. Any signage used in conjunction with this activity must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the activity and no signage is permissible on any right-of-way. (b)  Nonprofit organizations: Any nonprofit or charitable organization shall be issued a free yard sale, garage sale or similar sale permit on a quarterly basis upon adequate proof of nonprofit or charitable status. (c)  Commercial property owners: Commercial property owners shall be allowed two (2) permits yearly at no charge, after two (2) permits have been issued, including those issued in section (a), within one (1) calendar year, the owner shall purchase the required business occupational tax permit. (d)  Flea markets: The owner of a flea market shall be charged a regulatory fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per permanent stall and ten dollars ($10.00) per area allocated for a vehicle stall plus the seventy dollars ($70.00) administrative fee. The definition of a vehicle stall equals a minimum area of 144 square feet and a maximum area of five hundred seventy-six (576) square feet. (Flea market vendors will not be required to purchase an occupational tax certificate.) (e)  Display of goods: Merchandise to be displayed or stored on premises for which a license or permit is required by this article shall be stored behind closed doors between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (f)  Casual sales: The owner of land who desires to rent or permit any part or all of said land to use for the purpose of casual sales of other personal property by third party or parties shall be charged a regulatory fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per area allocated for such casual sales, plus the seventy dollars ($70.00) administrative fee. The definition of land for casual sales shall mean a minimum area of 144 square feet. (Code 1968, § 10-18; Ord. of 12-29-82, §§ 2—4; Ord. of 12-20-94; Ord. of 8-14-95; Ord. of 8-27-02(1); Ord. of 3-25-03(1); Ord. of 8-12-13(1) ) 
Sec. 10-17. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. (a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in paragraphs (8) and (9) of O.C.G.A. 46-5-1(b); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with each payment schedule until December 31, 2012. (b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. (Ord. of 6-8-09, § 1) 
Sec. 10-18. - Authorized designee.     The city manager or his designee, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. 46-5-1, et seq., and shall perform the following duties: (a)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. (b)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. (c)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law, section 10-17 and this section. (d)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law, section 10-17 and this section. (e)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. (f)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. (Ord. of 6-8-09, § 2) 
Secs. 10-19—10-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT 
Sec. 10-30. - Children's amusement rides and devices. (a)  Amusement rides or devices, except coin-operated devices, designated primarily for use by children conducted on private property, for each week of operation shall pay a license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). (b)  Prior to license being granted, the license applicant shall file with the city evidence of public liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), such insurance to be approved by a representative of the city. (Code 1968, § 10-30; Ord. of 12-29-82, § 7) 
Sec. 10-31. - Shows, circuses; proximity to residences of animal shows, gambling, restricted attendance. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any show or circus with animals to operate or exhibit in the city within three hundred (300) yards of any residence without the written consent of the occupant of such residence. (b)  Licenses granted to circuses or other shows shall not authorize such shows, or any person connected with them, to operate any game of chance, or any gambling or gaming device, or any other game device prohibited by law. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person having in charge, or assisting in the management of any circus, show, horse show, dog show, or similar exhibition, to which the public is invited through the sale of tickets of admission or the giving of passes, to permit the attendance of the public in numbers in excess of the number of seats provided, or to fail to provide means of access to and exit from, such seats, or to permit such means of access and exit to become crowded before, during or after performances. (Code 1968, § 10-31; Ord. of 12-29-82, § 9) Cross reference— Animals, ch. 5. 
Secs. 10-32, 10-33. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 8, 2015 , repealed §§ 10-32 and 10-33, which pertained to billiards, poolrooms, or game rooms—hours of operation and prohibited conduct and derived from the Code of 1968, §§ 10-27 and 10-28 and an ordinance adopted February 12, 2007. 
Sec. 10-34. - Hours of operation. (a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, establishments, public and private clubs, conducting business and operating for the purposes of providing entertainment to the general public in the form of providing the venue and services for disc jockey, dancing, singing, serving of beverages or food, any form of listening to or providing music and/or games of any type, to the end that many types of criminal activities and loud noises which create a nuisance frequently engendered by such business will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot defacto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protective form of expression would vanish. As to these establishments, this section represents a balancing of competing interest; reduce criminal activity and reduce loud and offensive noises which create nuisances and protection of neighborhoods through regulation of such establishments versus the protected rights of the establishments and patrons. (b)  Hours of operation. Hours of operation for such licensed businesses and clubs shall be from 8:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, all businesses or clubs must close on Sunday by 12:00 a.m. and vacate the premises no later than 12:30 a.m., on Thanksgiving Day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and closed on Christmas Day. (c)  Revocation. Failure to comply with the terms and provisions of this section or any violation may result in the suspension and/or revocation of license, if applicable, or the privilege of operation after notice and opportunity for a hearing. (Ord. of 8-25-09(2)) 
Secs. 10-35—10-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRIBUTORS OF HANDBILLS, PAMPHLETS AND CIRCULARS 
Sec. 10-40. - License—Required.     No person shall distribute handbills, circulars or pamphlets upon the public streets or other public property or upon private property in the city without first obtaining a license from the city. (Code 1968, § 10-41) 
Sec. 10-41. - Same—Application. (a)  A license hereunder shall be issued by the city clerk upon application to the city clerk. Such application shall show the name, age, sex and criminal record of the applicant for five (5) years preceding the date of application and also whether the applicant proposes to distribute circulars, pamphlets or handbills for such person's or others and if for others a list of clients for whom the applicant will make distribution. (b)  A licensee hereunder may at any time amend the application to include additional clients for distribution, without any additional charge therefor. (Code 1968, §§ 10-42, 10-43) 
Sec. 10-42. - Same—Duration; fee.     Licenses hereunder shall be granted for six (6) months, for which the applicant shall pay the license fee prescribed by ordinance. (Code 1968, § 10-43) 
Sec. 10-43. - Same—Disqualification of applicant.     Licenses under this article shall be denied to any person who has a record of conviction of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude within five (5) years from the date of application, but shall otherwise be granted as a matter of right. (Code 1968, § 10-45) 
Sec. 10-44. - Same—Forfeiture.     Any person granted a license under this article and thereafter convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude shall by such conviction forfeit the license. (Code 1968, § 10-47) 
Sec. 10-45. - Scattering; littering.     No person shall broadcast or scatter circulars, handbills or pamphlets upon the public streets or upon any property in the city, and all persons distributing handbills, circulars or pamphlets within the city shall hand such pamphlets, circulars or handbills to persons for whom intended, or leave the same secured in some way in order not to become litter and trash upon the public streets or other property. (Code 1968, § 10-46) Cross reference— Littering, § 9-20 et seq.; attaching handbills to poles, § 17-23. 
Sec. 10-46. - Violations and penalties.     In addition to the forfeiture of license provided for in section 10-44, any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1968, § 10-48(a)) 
Secs. 10-47—10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE 
Sec. 10-50. - Life insurers license fees.     There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon each life insurer doing business within the city in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 10-51, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). (Ord. of 9-23-83, § 1) 
Sec. 10-51. - License fee for life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of twenty-six dollars and twenty-five cents ($26.25) per location for each year. (Ord. of 9-23-83, § 2) 
Sec. 10-52. - Life insurance agency license fees; independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed.     There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 10-50, in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each such location within the city. (Ord. of 9-23-83, § 3) 
Sec. 10-53. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life, accident and sickness insurers.     There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-50. (Ord. of 9-23-83, § 4) 
Sec. 10-54. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.     There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. (Ord. of 9-23-83, § 5) 
Sec. 10-55. - Insurer license fees.     There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For each separate business location in excess of one which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For the purposes of the section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. (Ord. of 11-15-83, § 1) 
Sec. 10-56. - Due date for license fees.     License fees imposed in sections 10-50, 10-51 and 10-52 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. (Ord. of 9-23-83, § 6) 
Secs. 10-57—10-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS 
Sec. 10-60. - Statutes adopted.     The provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 37 (O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.), pertaining to precious metals and gems, and the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 44, ch. 12, pt. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.) are adopted by reference. (Mo. of 3-11-91(2)) 
Secs. 10-61—10-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 13, 2016 , repealed the former art. VI, §§ 10-80—10-94, and enacted a new art. VI as set out herein. Former art. VI. pertained to peddlers and derived from Ordinances adopted June 12, 2006; May 11, 2009; and July 12, 2010. 
Sec. 10-80. - Short title.     This chapter shall be known and may be recited as "The Transient Merchant, Peddler and Solicitor Ordinance of 2016." (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-81. - Definitions.     The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below unless the use of any such word or phrase in context clearly indicates otherwise:     City: The word "city" shall mean the mayor and council members of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, a municipal corporation, and the jurisdictional authority of that municipal corporation.     Street: The word "street" shall mean and include any street, alley, lane, avenue, court, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or any other public place within the city.     Transient merchant: A "transient merchant" is any person, firm, or corporation, whether resident or nonresident of Vidalia, who has no permanent, regular place of business within the city and who engages in the business of selling or offering to sell goods or services from a temporary fixed place of business located within the city, such temporary places of business to include any room or space in a hotel or motel, boardinghouse, public or private building, or any other fixed place of business within the city; however, no merchant shall be considered a transient merchant under this article if: (1)  Such merchant is a bona fide commercial traveler selling goods at wholesale by samples; (2)  Such merchant has already paid a license to the city for the privilege of conducting permanent business; (3)  Such merchant is a peddler otherwise licensed by the city to sell goods from place to place; or (4)  Such merchant is a civic club, service club, or school who, from time to time, engages in the selling of merchandise to the public as a club or school project.     Transient peddler: A "transient peddler" is any person who is a nonresident of the city, who has no permanent, regular place of business within the city, and who engages in the business of selling or offering to sell goods or services by going from place to place within the city.     Local peddler: A "local peddler" is any person who is a resident of the city, who has no regular fixed place of business within the city, and who engages in the business of selling or offering to sell goods or services by going from place to place within the city.     Solicitor for charitable or religious purposes: Any person who solicits contributions from the public, either on the rights-of-way of the city or from door-to-door, for any charitable or religious organization, and who does not sell or offer to sell any single item with a cost to the purchaser in excess of twenty dollars ($20.00), shall be defined as a "solicitor for charitable or religious purposes." No qualification as a "charitable" or "religious" organization shall exist unless the applicant: (1)  Is able to demonstrate a current exemption certificate from the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; or (2)  Has maintained in Toombs County a continuous existence as a charitable or religious organization for a period of three (3) years prior to the date of its application pursuant to this chapter.     Solicitor for subscriptions: Any person who solicits subscriptions by going from place to place within the city, and who offers for sale subscriptions to magazines or other materials protected by the provisions of the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of America, shall be defined as a "solicitor for subscriptions."     License: A "license" is the right or privilege granted by the city to engage in business as a transient merchant or peddler within the corporate limits of the city. Evidence that such right or privilege has been granted shall be in the form of a license document issued by the city clerk, which document shall be kept at the merchant's place of business within the city or on the peddler's person or within the peddler's vehicle.     Permit: A "permit" is the authorization granted by the city to solicit for charitable or religious purposes, or to solicit subscriptions as defined by this chapter there being no fee nor charge for such permit. Evidence that such authorization has been granted shall be in the form of a permit document issued by the city clerk.     Booth, stand: A "booth" or "stand" is any table, shelf, counter, cart, or other facility, whether mobile or fixed, which is placed on a street or other public place within the city for the purpose of selling or offering to sell any goods or service to the public, or for soliciting for any purpose. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-82. - License or permit required. (a)  No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a business as a transient merchant or peddler within the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city; and no solicitor for charitable or religious purposes or solicitor for subscriptions as defined by this chapter shall solicit within the city unless a permit has been granted by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such license or permit shall be effective only for the period stated in the document unless suspended or revoked prior to expiration.     Application for a license or permit shall be made on forms provided by the administrative secretary and shall provide such information as is required by this chapter, and such additional information as may be necessary to define completely the activities to be conducted within the city.     (b) At the time of filing any application for a permit or license under this chapter the applicant shall present with the application to the city a current valid driver's license showing a picture identification reasonably acceptable to the administrative secretary containing the picture of the applicant thereon. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-83. - Application for transient merchant's license, transient peddler's license.     An application containing the following information shall be completed and filed with the city clerk by each applicant for a license to do business within Vidalia as a transient merchant or transient peddler: (1)  Name of the applicant; (2)  Permanent address and telephone number of the applicant; (3)  Local address and telephone number of the applicant; (4)  The applicant's date of birth and age, if an individual; (5)  The applicant's social security number, or federal employer identification number; (6)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name and home address of each partner, principal, or corporate officer; (7)  If the applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; (8)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name, home address, date of birth, age and social security number of the principal representative in the city; (9)  Name and home address of all employees to work in Vidalia; (10)  Name of the business represented by the applicant, if different from the applicant; (11)  Permanent address of the business represented by the applicant; (12)  Name of agent conducting sale, if any; (13)  Local address and telephone number of sales agent, if any; (14)  Type of merchandise or service to be offered for sale; (15)  Place where business is to be conducted; (16)  Date to be in business, and total number of days to be in business; (17)  Hours during which business will be conducted; (18)  Manner in which business is to be conducted; (19)  Georgia sales tax number of authorization; (20)  Georgia state business license number, if required; (21)  State and license tag number of each vehicle to be used in the business; (22)  List of all cities where business has been conducted by the applicant within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the application. The application and license shall be signed under oath by the applicant; (23)  List of any and all felony criminal convictions and convictions of any crime involving moral turpitude of the applicant within five (5) years prior to the date of the application; (24)  Require criminal history at applicant's expense; (25)  A signed letter of approval from property owner (with dates(s) of sale and address) where peddler to conduct business. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-84. - Registered agent required; transient merchant.     Any transient merchant shall submit evidence with his license application showing that such transient merchant has filed with the city clerk the name and permanent address of the transient merchant's registered agent. Such agent shall be a local property owner and a resident of Toombs County for the previous twelve (12) months. It shall be the responsibility of this individual to act as agent of such transient merchant upon whom any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law to be served upon the transient merchant may be served in the same manner provided by law for the service of a summons or complaint. Said registered agent shall agree in writing to act as such agent, and a copy of the agreement shall be filed with the license application.     Any such registered agent shall act in the same capacity and have the same duties and responsibilities, and be subject to the same actions of the superior court, as would any agent registered as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-46-5 (H.B. 1568) of the General Assembly of Georgia adopted in 1980 and known as the "Transient Merchant Act of Georgia."     In addition, all registered agents shall also complete an application containing the following information and file such with the administrative secretary before any license shall be issued to a transient merchant: (1)  Name of registered agent; (2)  Permanent address and phone number of registered agent; (3)  Registered agent's social security number; (4)  Length of time that registered agent has been a resident of Toombs County; (5)  Location of property owned by this individual which would qualify one to act as a registered agent.     Such application shall be signed under oath by the registered agent. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-85. - Basis for disapproval or revocation of license.     No license shall be approved and any license previously issued may be revoked if an investigation determines that: (1)  Any false statement, material omission, or untrue or misleading information is contained in or left out of the application; (2)  The applicant, or any principal participant in the business has been convicted within the past five (5) years of a felony, or of any crime involving moral turpitude, whether in connection with operation of the business or not; or (3)  Said business is operated, or is proposed to be operated, in violation of any law of the United States or the state, or in violation of any ordinance of the city. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-86. - Building official approval required.     No transient merchant, transient peddler, local peddler or solicitor shall set up a booth, stand, to conduct business or operation within the city until the building official of the city has reviewed the application to assure compliance with zoning, building, and safety code requirements of the city before issuing the license. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-87. - Permit and fee for transient merchant.     A transient merchant as defined by this chapter shall pay a base regulatory fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), not to be prorated. Said regulatory fee shall expire at midnight on the fourteenth consecutive day after the effective day of the transient merchant permit. After the fourteenth consecutive day from the effective date of the transient peddler permit, the transient peddler shall pay to the city an additional regulatory fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day the transient peddler conducts business in the city. In the event that a higher regulatory fee is required of a transient peddler pursuant to another ordinance, statue or regulation, such higher regulatory fee shall apply. The maximum amount of regulatory fees to be paid by any transient merchant to the city in any calendar year pursuant to this section shall not exceed the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00). Said regulatory fee shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year issued. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-88. - License fee for transient peddler.     Before conducting any business regulated by this chapter, the applicant for a permit for a transient peddler as defined in this chapter shall pay the city a regulatory fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), not to be prorated. Said regulatory fee shall expire at midnight on the fourteenth consecutive day after the effective day of the transient merchant permit. After the fourteenth consecutive day from the effective date of the transient peddler permit, the transient peddler shall pay to the city an additional regulatory fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day the transient peddler conducts business in the city. In the event that a higher regulatory fee is required of a transient peddler pursuant to another ordinance, statue or regulation, such higher regulatory fee shall apply. The maximum amount of regulatory fees to be paid by any transient peddler in any one (1) calendar year pursuant to this section to the city shall not exceed the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00). Said regulatory fee shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year issued. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-89. - License fee for local peddler.     Any local peddler as defined by this chapter shall be licensed in the same manner and in the same amount as is required of any other local merchant as provided by the various laws and ordinances of the city. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-90. - Application for a permit; solicitor.     Any application for a permit to solicit funds for a charitable or religious organization, and any applicant for a permit to solicit for subscriptions, shall make application to the city clerk. Such applicant shall provide the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the business or organization represented, the dates during which activities will be conducted within the city, the identity of all persons to solicit within the city, and such other information that the city clerk may find necessary to identify the solicitors and define the activities to be conducted. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-91. - Issuance of license or permit.     After all provisions of this chapter have been met by an applicant for a transient merchant's license or peddler's license, or a solicitor's permit, the occupational license clerk shall be authorized to issue a license or permit. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-92. - Transient merchant, peddler and solicitor regulations.     The following regulations shall apply to any transient merchant, local peddler, or transient peddler doing business within Vidalia, and to any solicitor for a charitable or religious organization or for subscriptions who is required to obtain a license or permit: (1)  No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall be permitted to set up and operate a booth or stand on any public street or sidewalk, or in any other public area within the city, except with the written permission of the city manager. (2)  No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall stand or sit in or near the entrance to any house or place of business, and no peddler or solicitor shall stand or sit in any place which may disrupt or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (3)  No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall offer to sell goods or services or solicit in vehicular traffic lanes of the city, and no such peddler or solicitor shall operate a "road block" directed towards vehicular traffic. (4)  If any officer of the city police department should determine that pedestrian or vehicular traffic congestion is such that public hazard or inconvenience would result from peddling, soliciting or selling in a congested area, such officer shall have authority to require any peddler or solicitor to move from the area. (5)  No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall enter a private residence, place of business, public building, or other premises within the city under false pretenses for the purpose of peddling goods or services, soliciting orders for the sale of goods or services, soliciting subscriptions, or soliciting contributions; no peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall remain in or on such premises after the owner, occupant, or other person in charge has requested the peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant to leave; and no peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall go in or on such premises when the owner, occupant, or other person in charge has displayed a "No Soliciting" sign or other similar sign on the premises. (6)  Any stand or booth operated by or used by a transient merchant, transient peddler, local peddler or solicitor which is located on private property shall be located thereon with the expressed written permission of the property owner, and shall satisfy all zoning regulations of the city, health safety and building code requirements and regulations of the city, and of applicable state law. Upon request by the building official, the designee of the building official, or any law enforcement officer, the transient merchant, and transient, local peddler or solicitor shall present said written permission from the property owner. In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, and of applicable law the transient merchant, transient peddler, local peddler or solicitor shall notify the police department of the city of the location of the stand or booth wherein such business is to be conducted. (7)  No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall harass or intimidate the public in any manner. (8)  Each transient merchant, peddler, solicitor for subscriptions, and each solicitor for a charitable or religious organization shall be required to display a valid license or permit issued by the city, or a copy thereof, in a manner which can be clearly observed by any person being solicited for a sale, subscriptions, or contribution; however, each member or representative of a charitable or religious organization which has been issued a permit to solicit contributions within the city may, in lieu of displaying a copy of the permit, display an identification badge or insignia of the organization if such insignia has been established a statutory service or trademark, in a manner which can be clearly observed by any person being solicited. (9)  When any officer of the Vidalia Police Department or any other authorized city officer, deems that a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant is in violation of any provision of this chapter, such officer shall have authority to direct the peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant to correct the violation immediately, and such peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall comply with the directive or be subject to the penalties prescribed by this chapter. (10)  No transient merchant, transient peddler, or local peddler or solicitor shall operate or conduct business within the city at any time in violation of state law, rules or regulations, or at any time in violation of any other ordinance or regulation or special order of the city commission, or on any day prior to 8:00 a.m., or later than one-half (½) hour before sunset, or at any time on Sunday, except by specific appointment with or by invitation of the prospective customer. (11)  No transient merchant, transient peddler, local peddler or solicitor shall conduct business or set up a sales booth or stand with the city except with the expressed written permission of the owner of the property where business is being conducted. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-93. - Compliance required; penalty for violation.     Any person, firm, or corporation doing business within the city as a transient merchant, transient peddler, local peddler, solicitor, or in any other manner covered by this chapter who violates any provision of this chapter, or any merchant, peddler, or solicitor who makes any false statement in any application for a business license or permit shall be subject to revocation of any license or permit according to the procedures established by ordinance and shall, upon conviction before the court of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned not exceeding ninety (90) days, either or both, in the discretion of the court. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or a portion thereof during which such violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or continued. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Sec. 10-94. - Exceptions.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: (1)  Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the ordinary course of business; (2)  Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares, and merchandise according to law; (3)  Bona fide residents of the state selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products which were produced on land within the state, owned or controlled by such vendor. (Ord. of 6-13-16 ) 
Secs. 10-95—10-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CABLE TV FRANCHISE REGULATIONS 
Sec. 10-100. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:     Cable service: (1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of: a.  Video programming, or b.  Other programming service, and (2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.     Cable television distributor or cable television program supplier: Any person who leases, licenses, or sells program material or program services used or useful in the operation of a cable television system by a cable television exhibitor.     Cable television exhibitor or cable television operator or cable operator: Any person: (1)  Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or (2)  Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.     Cable television system or cable system: A system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and equipment used or to be used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry and any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air.     Combine, contract, is a party to, and assist: Shall include affiliation with a cable television program supplier.     Franchise: An initial authorization or renewal thereof that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.     Franchisee: The entity to whom the franchise is awarded and shall include all persons having any rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities or obligations under the franchise agreement, and also all persons having or claiming any title or interest in or to the system, whether by reason of the franchise itself or any subcontract, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, security agreement, management or operating agreement, or otherwise arising or created.     Subscriber: A person whose premises are physically wired to receive, and/or who is receiving by any manner, any transmission from the system in exchange for a fee. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-73) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-101. - Purpose.     This article is designed to implement the interest of the city in facilitating the opportunity for free and open competition among cable television operators franchised to provide cable television services to the citizens of the city. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-72) 
Sec. 10-102. - Contracts or combinations in restraint of cable TV.     It is an unlawful restraint of trade for a cable television exhibitor providing or intending to provide cable services within the city to contract, combine, or conspire with any other person to restrain trade with respect to any of the goods or services necessary or useful for the provision of cable television services by a cable operator within the city. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-74) 
Sec. 10-103. - Monopolizing cable TV.     It is an unlawful restraint of trade for a cable television exhibitor providing or intending to provide cable services within the city to monopolize, attempt to monopolize, or combine or conspire with any other person to monopolize or attempt to monopolize, any part of the trade in goods and services necessary or useful for the provision of cable television services within the city. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-75) 
Sec. 10-104. - Contracting or combining to discriminate in acquiring goods and services.     It is an unlawful restraint of trade for a cable television exhibitor providing or intending to provide cable services within the city to combine or contract with any other person, covering the provision of credit, or the lease, sale or exchange of goods or services necessary or useful for the provision of cable services within the city, to require or provide for such other person to discriminate against another cable operator providing or intending to provide cable services within the city with respect to the availability of services or products, or with respect to the price for such services or products, where the effect of such discrimination may be to lessen competition substantially, or to tend to create a monopoly or to injure, destroy, or prevent or hinder competition with respect to the provision of cable television services within the city. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-76) 
Sec. 10-105. - Party to or assisting in discrimination in acquiring goods and services.     It is an unlawful restraint of trade for a cable television exhibitor providing or intending to provide cable television services within the city to be a party to, or to assist in any transaction to lease, sell or purchase, or contract to lease or sell or purchase, which transaction discriminates against competitors of the cable exhibitor, by way of any discount, rebate, allowance, service charge, or price with respect to goods or services necessary or useful for the provision of cable television services within the city, where the purpose or effect of such discrimination is to diminish, eliminate or prevent competition in the provision of cable television service. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-77) 
Sec. 10-106. - Discrimination by cable television distributor in marketing of programs and program services.     It is an unlawful restraint of trade for a cable television distributor or cable television program supplier to engage in any transaction to lease, license, or sell or to contract to lease, license, or sell, which transaction discriminates between cable television exhibitors or franchisees by way of availability of product, differential pricing, discounts, rebates, allowances, service charges, or the like with respect to program material and program services used or useful for the provision of cable television services within the city, where the purpose or effect of such discrimination is to diminish, eliminate, or prevent competition in the provision of cable television service. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-78) 
Sec. 10-107. - Pricing to impede or destroy competition.     It is an unlawful restraint of trade for a cable television operator providing or intending to provide cable television services within the city, to reduce rates for service, below cost or otherwise, or to offer rebates, discounts or refunds for its cable services, for the purpose or to achieve the effect of diminishing, eliminating or hindering competition, or which makes it impossible or impracticable for a present or potential competitor to offer cable services within the city or within any area of the city. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-79) 
Sec. 10-108. - Boycotting, blacklisting, or contributing to withholding of goods and services.     It is an unlawful restraint of trade for a cable operator providing or intending to provide cable services within the city to be a party to, or to assist in, any transaction that discriminates against, boycotts or blacklists, or prevents the lease or sale by a distributor of products or services necessary or useful to the construction and operation of a cable television system to another cable operator intending to provide or providing cable services within the city, when the transaction is for the purpose of diminishing, eliminating or preventing competition in the provision of cable television services within the city. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-80) 
Sec. 10-109. - Cancellation of subscription contracts without penalty.     All subscription contracts for the provision of cable services to a resident of the city may be cancelled by the subscriber within three (3) business days after execution without cause and without imposition of any penalty. No cable operator providing cable services within the city shall impose any penalty for cancellation of a contract for such services by the subscriber after a period of sixty (60) calendar days from the date of its execution. A copy of all forms of contracts for the provision of cable services offered by a cable operator within the city shall be supplied every subscriber, and such forms shall include a notice, in a size equal to at least ten-point boldface type, of these rights to cancel. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-81) 
Sec. 10-110. - Violation grounds for franchise termination.     A violation by a franchisee of any of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for terminating the franchise of the violator. Prior to exercising its right to terminate, the city shall give notice to the franchisee of its intention to do so and shall in all other respects follow the procedures set out in section 20-69 of the cable TV ordinance of the city adopted on March 14, 1988. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-82) 
Sec. 10-111. - Enforcement by judicial action.     The provisions of this article may be enforced in an action brought by the city, an affected cable operator providing or desiring to provide cable services within the city, or by an affected subscriber of cable services within the city, in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking declarative, injunctive or monetary relief, including punitive or exemplary damages, as is found appropriate, plus reasonable attorneys fees when the plaintiff secures affirmative relief, whether by way of damages or declaratory or injunctive relief. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-83) 
Sec. 10-112. - Presumption of intent in action to enforce.     In all actions brought under this article, proof of one or more proscribed acts, together with proof of the injurious effect of such acts, is presumptive evidence of the purpose or intent to injure competitors or to diminish, eliminate or prevent competition. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-84) 
Sec. 10-113. - Revocation of franchise following adverse judicial finding.     A final judgment in an action under this article based on a finding that a cable operator providing cable services within the city has violated any of its provisions is grounds for revocation of that cable operator's franchise by the city. (Ord. of 8-14-89, § 20-85) 
Sec. 10-114. - Franchise fee for state-issued cable or video franchise.     The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five (5) percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. (Ord. of 1-7-08, § 1) 
Sec. 10-115. - Authorized designee.     The city hereby authorizes the mayor of the City of Vidalia, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five (5) percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. (Ord. of 1-7-08, § 2) 
Secs. 10-116—10-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sec. 10-120. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
Sec. 10-121. - Definitions.     The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below:     Adult bookstore: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five (5) percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult dancing establishment: A business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Adult minimotion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult Store: A commercial establishment or other establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade (five (5) percent or more) or derives a significant or substantial portion (five (5) percent or more) of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion (five (5) percent or more) of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental or any form of consideration of any instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products, article or articles which are designed, sold or viewed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, or which are sold or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs.     Adult video store: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Erotic dance establishment: A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Escort bureau; introduction services: Any business, agency or persons who, for a fee or commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.     Good moral character: A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five (5) years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime.     Minor: For the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.     Specified anatomical areas: Any of the following: (1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. (2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities: Any of the following: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty. (2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation. (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain. (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.     Zoning administrator: The person charged with enforcement of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. of 3-27-02(1)) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-122. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. (a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. (b)  No later than March first of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. (c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. (d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. (e)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. (f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. (g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. (h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. (i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two (2) feet from the level of the floor. (j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten (10) feet to any patron. (k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. (l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. (m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. (n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
Sec. 10-123. - Certain activities prohibited.     No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
Sec. 10-124. - Permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
Sec. 10-125. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
Sec. 10-126. - Admission of minors unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
Sec. 10-127. - Sales to minors unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
Sec. 10-128. - Location. (a)  No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: (1)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes. (2)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. (3)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. (4)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. (5)  On less than three (3) acres of land containing at least one hundred (100) feet of road frontage. (b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
Sec. 10-129. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. (a)  Qualifications: Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. (b)  Approval for employment: Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to the city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. (c)  Suspension, revocation of license: Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. (d)  Independent contractors: For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
Sec. 10-130. - Application and fee for permit. (a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or the clerk's designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a license fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. This permit fee shall be nonrefundable; provided, however, that nine hundred dollars ($900.00) of the license fee shall be refunded if no license is issued. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city clerk at the time such application is submitted. (b)  The application for a permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. of 3-27-02(1)) 
Sec. 10-131. - Application contents.     Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: (1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. (2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. (3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. (4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. (5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. (6)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last six (6) months. (7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five (5) percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. (8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. (9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. (10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. (11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. (12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. (13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders or more than five (5) percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. (14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five (5) years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. (15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. (16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in this state including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. (17)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a Code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five (5) years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. (18)  Address of the premises to be licensed. (19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right. (20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. (21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner. c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
Sec. 10-132. - Applicant to appear.     The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
Sec. 10-133. - Application; investigation.     The city shall have thirty (30) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and the city council may grant the permit if it finds: (1)  The required fee has been paid. (2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. (3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. (4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. (5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. (6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of the state prior to the date of application. (7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. (8)  The applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. (9)  That the applicant, the applicant's employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five (5) years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. (10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. (11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder. (12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States. (13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
Sec. 10-134. - Persons prohibited as licensees. (a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: (1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. (2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. (3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five (5) percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. (4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five (5) percent interest therein are not of good moral character. (5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. (6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. (b)  Should there by a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 U.S. 50, 81). 
Sec. 10-135. - Permit—Refusal; appeal.     If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion, and within thirty (30) days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten (10) days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 10-136. - Same—Renewal.     Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 10-137. - Same—Nontransferable.     No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
Sec. 10-138. - Change of location or name. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the Code have been met. (b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. (c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. (Ord. of 3-27-02(1)) 
Sec. 10-139. - Appeal—Procedure. (a)  The permittee shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. (b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. (c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the application for council action. 
Sec. 10-140. - Same—City council determines procedure.     When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: (1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. (2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
Sec. 10-141. - City council hearing.     Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
Sec. 10-142. - Powers of hearing officer.     The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
Sec. 10-143. - Rules of evidence inapplicable.     The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
Sec. 10-144. - Hearing officer—Report. (a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail tot he permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city administrator and chief of police. (b)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten (10) days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
Sec. 10-145. - Same—Action by city council.     The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: (1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. (2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
Sec. 10-146. - Violations; penalty.     Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
Sec. 10-147. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.     Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
Sec. 10-148. - Cleaning of licensed premises.     Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
Sec. 10-149. - Self-inspection of licensed premises.     The licensee of a licensed premises or designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record such findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
Sec. 10-150. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions.     A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer upon the finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on the licensee or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within twenty-four (24) hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
Sec. 10-151. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance.     A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
Secs. 10-152—10-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OCCUPATION TAX[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 20, 1994, added §§ 19-36—19-39, 19-42—19-46, 19-48—19-55, 19-58, and 19-66—19-79 to this Code. For purposes of classification, said sections have been included herein as §§ 10-161—10-192 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 10-161. - Required for business dealings within the city. (a)  For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in Vidalia, Georgia, whether with a location in Vidalia, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in Vidalia, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Vidalia, Georgia, such business tax registration must be shown to the city clerk or his/her designee or to any police officer of said City of Vidalia, Georgia, upon his/her or their request to prove payment of the occupation tax. Otherwise, they shall comply with this article. [(b)  Reserved.] (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-162. - Construction of terms; definitions. (a)  Wherever the term "City of Vidalia" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "City of Vidalia, Georgia"; wherever the term "city" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the "City of Vidalia, Georgia." (b)  As used in this article, the term:     Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax.     Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from.     Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax or whose employer issues to such individual for the purpose of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099.     Full time employee means an employee working forty (40) hours or more weekly.     Location or office shall not include temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. However, any vehicle which does not stop at any particular location except as requested by a customer at which time sale and delivery is simultaneous shall be considered a location within the city for purposes of issuing an occupational tax certificate. (For example, sales by snow cone or ice cream vendors.)     Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes.     Part time employee means an employee working less than forty (40) hours weekly.     Person wherever used in this article shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize eighty (80) percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes.     Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation.     Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax.     Regulatory fees means payments whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. (Ord. of 12-20-94; Ord. of 12-11-95; Ord. of 6-2-03(1)) 
Sec. 10-163. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. (a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of seventy dollars ($70.00) shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. (b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. (Ord. of 12-20-94; Ord. of 12-11-95) 
Sec. 10-164. - Levied; restrictions. (a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county or within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: (1)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner excluding the owner of a sole proprietorship and/or the partners in partnership. [(2)  Reserved.] (b)  Fee structure: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per each full time employee. Part time employees to be calculated as follows. The average weekly hours of employees who work less than forty (40) hours weekly are to be added and the total divided by 40 to produce full time position equivalents. (c)  The minimum fee which may be imposed for any one (1) business will be seventy dollars ($70.00) which shall be called an administrative fee. The maximum fee which may be imposed on any one (1) business will be seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. of 12-20-94; Ord. of 12-11-95) 
Sec. 10-165. - The number of businesses considered operating in city.     Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-166. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18.     Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 (c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one (1) of the following: (1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. (2)  A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. (3)  This election is made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1st of each year. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-167. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government.     Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-168. - Purpose and scope of tax.     The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-169. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. (a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1st of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1st of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in section 10-175 of this chapter. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and ten-percent penalty plus cost imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk or his/her designee and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained said registration, offender shall, upon conviction of the city or county judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (b)  In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. (Ord. of 12-20-94; Ord. of 3-9-98) 
Sec. 10-170. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose.     No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless eighty (80) percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-171. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. (a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. (b)  Each person which is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-172. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable.     Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-173. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.     All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1st of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-174. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. (a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before April 1st of each year, on the second day of April of each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1st of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties provided in section 10-175. (b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk or his/her designee, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-175. - Penalty of article violation.     Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. of 12-20-94; Ord. of 3-9-98) 
Sec. 10-176. - City clerk or his/her designee; subpoena and arresting powers.     The city and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as a deputy marshal-business inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the Business Tax Ordinance for 1995 (this article) and succeeding years thereafter. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-177. - Business not covered by this article.     The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: (1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. (2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. (4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. (5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. (6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. (7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. (9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. (10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-178. - When due and payable; payment options.     The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the city clerk or his/her designee, on January 1st of each year and delinquent if not paid on or before April 1st each year. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-179. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax.     In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk or his/her designee of the city, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest not to exceed the rate of ten (10) percent penalty after such tax or installment becomes delinquent, plus one and one-half (1.5) percent per month until paid, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the persons, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the marshal of said city upon the property of defendant located in said city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the charter of said city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk or his/her designee against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of taxes. (Ord. of 12-20-94; Ord. of 12-11-95) 
Sec. 10-180. - Amendment, repeal of provision.     This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-181. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinances.     This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-182. - Enforcement of provision.     It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk or his/her designee or the Vidalia Police Department to see that the provisions of this article relating to the occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the recorder's court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk or the chief of police and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-183. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council.     This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-184. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.     After January 1, 1996, the Vidalia City Council shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing if in any year the revenue from occupational taxes is greater than the revenue from the preceding year. (Ord. of 12-20-94; Ord. of 12-11-95) 
Sec. 10-185. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax.     The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-186. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions.     Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-187. - Severability.     If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to effect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-188. - Transfer and proration. (a)  There shall be no transfer, assignment or rebate of any licenses provided for herein. (b)  When any person commences business on or after July 1st in any year, the regulatory fee and the business or occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee authorized as a component of an occupation tax shall not be reduced as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-189. - Application of provisions to activities not expressly provided for.     All persons engaged in or desiring to engage in any business within the city, not expressly provided for, shall make application for a license to the city clerk or his/her designee, and shall pay such occupation tax and fees as may be assessed by the license committee of the council. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-190. - Revocation, suspension of license.     In addition to the other penalties provided herein, the council shall have the authority to revoke or suspend any registration of any licensee who violates the provisions hereof. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-191. - Repeal of conflicting provisions.     All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, be, and the same are, hereby repealed. (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Sec. 10-192. - Regulatory fees.     [Regulatory fees shall be as follows:] (1)  Game rooms and pool halls ..... $500.00 (2)  (Other regulatory fee categories will be determined at a later date.) (Ord. of 12-20-94) 
Secs. 10-193—10-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 8, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1 and 2 of said ordinance as §§ 10-221 and 10-222 herein was at the editor's discretion. Charter reference— Powers to levy and provide for collection of license fees and taxes on business regulations, § 1.13(5). 
Sec. 10-221. - Business license tax.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93 there is hereby levied for the year 1995, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of twenty-five-one-hundredths (0.25) percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. (Ord. of 5-8-95(3), § 1) 
Sec. 10-222. - Due date; filing of return.     Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return.     The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1995, and April 1 of each subsequent year. (Ord. of 5-8-95(3), § 2) 
Secs. 10-223—10-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - HOME OCCUPATIONS[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 8, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—3 and 5 of said ordinance as §§ 10-241—10-244 herein was at the editor's discretion. Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 10-241. - Permitted accessory uses in residential district; limitations.     A home occupation shall be permitted as an accessory use in any residential district, provided the home occupation is subject to the following limitations: (1)  The use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling or permitted accessory building and carried on by the inhabitants living there, and no others. (2)  The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling and dwelling purposes and shall not change the character of use as a dwelling. (3)  The total area used for the home occupation shall not exceed one-half (½) the floor area of the user's living unit. (4)  There shall be no exterior advertising other than identification of the home occupation by a sign which shall be attached to the dwelling or the accessory building and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area and which shall not be illuminated. (5)  There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material or equipment used as a part of the home occupation. (6)  There shall be no offensive noise as defined by chapter 9 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Vidalia; nor shall there be vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line. (7)  There shall be no storage or use of toxic, explosive or other dangerous or hazardous materials upon the premises. (8)  A home occupation, including studios or rooms for instruction, shall provide off-street parking area adequate to accommodate needs created by the home occupation. Not more than a total of eight (8) vehicles per day will stop, in connection with the home business, at the place of business in any one (1) twenty-four-hour period. This includes parking, stopping to load or unload anything, and stopping to pick up or drop off passengers. Not more than three (3) vehicles shall be parked at the premises at any one (1) time. (9)  The use must be [in] conformance with all valid covenants and agreements recorded with the Clerk of Court of Toombs County, covering the land underlying the dwelling. (10)  A home occupation permit may be issued for any use allowed by the Zoning Code of the City of Vidalia, providing all other criteria for issuance of a home occupation permit are met. No home occupation permit shall be issued for any other use. (Ord. of 5-8-95(4), § 1) 
Sec. 10-242. - Occasional use.     Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, prohibit or regulate the occasional part-time use of a residence for the purpose of entertaining in connection with business, for the purpose of studying or working on papers brought home from work, or for the purpose of making telephone calls or using a computer in connection with work. (Ord. of 5-8-95(4), § 2) 
Sec. 10-243. - Exemptions.     Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as regulating or prohibiting any of the following: (1)  Holding a meeting in a home for religious purposes. (2)  Holding a meeting in a home for political purposes. (3)  Having a meeting for social purposes. (Ord. of 5-8-95(4), § 3) 
Sec. 10-244. - Nuisance, injunction.     Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this article, the city attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for any injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this article. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction. (Ord. of 5-8-95(4), § 5) Charter reference— Powers to abate a nuisance, § 1.13(21). 
Secs. 10-245—10-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - BONA FIDE COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. adopted June 8, 2015(1) , § 1, repealed Art. XII in its entirety and enacted a new Art. XII to read as set out herein. Former Art. XII, §§ 10-250—10-262, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. adopted May 14, 2012, Exh. A. 
Sec. 10-250. - Short title.     This article shall be known as the "City of Vidalia Bona Fide Coin-Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance." (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-251. - Gambling devices prohibited.     Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2) are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (k). (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-252. - Gambling places prohibited.     Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. §16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-253. - Definitions.     The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Amusement game room: Any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one (1) or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated that permit noncash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C) or a combination thereof.     Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine: The same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: (1)  Pinball machines; (2)  Console machines; (3)  Video games; (4)  Crane machines; (5)  Claw machines; (6)  Pusher machines; (7)  Bowling machines; (8)  Novelty arcade games; (9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; (10)  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; (11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; (12)  Basketball machines; (13)  Shuffleboard machines; (14)  Kiddie ride games; (15)  Skee-Ball&reg; machines; (16)  Air hockey machines; (17)  Roll down machines; (18)  Trivia machines; (19)  Laser games; (20)  Simulator games; (21)  Virtual reality machines; (22)  Maze games; (23)  Racing games; (24)  Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; and (25)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia.     The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: (1)  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; (2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; (3)  Gas and electric meters; (4)  Pay telephones; (5)  Pay toilets; (6)  Cigarette vending machines; (7)  Coin-operated vending machines; (8)  Coin-operated gumball vending machines; (9)  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; (10)  Coin-operated massage beds; and (11)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia.     Location: A business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupational taxes and business licenses and the entire office or area of the business in any one (1) location owned or leased by the same proprietor or proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes.     Location owner or location operator: An owner or operator of a business where one (1) or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-254. - License required.     No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without having first obtained an amusement game room license by payment of two hundred dollars ($200.00), having paid the applicable occupational tax, and having obtained an occupational tax certificate required under this article. A separate amusement game room license must be obtained for each location in the jurisdiction which bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-255. - Issuance of license.     Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: (1)  Name, address and age of the applicant and the date of the application; (2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; (3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; (4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; and (5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant.     Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of this article. The city shall require a license fee for an amusement game room license or registration. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupational taxes in accordance with chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-256. - Occupational tax required.     No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupational tax certificate application form, paid the required occupational tax, obtained an occupational tax certificate, and paid the administrative fee. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-257. - Minimum distance requirements. (a)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. At a public meeting, the mayor and city council may waive the application of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. (b)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to sell alcohol set out in section 4-60 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. At a public meeting, the mayor and city council may waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-258. - Number of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines at a location.     No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than nine (9) class B bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering noncash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 (c) and (d)(1)(2), or both, at the same location. At a public meeting the mayor and city council may, after consideration of the nature and character of the business, waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-259. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines and from business. (a)  Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the class B amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. (b)  Any location owner or location operator subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(1) is hereby required to provide a monthly report to the city clerk of the city. Such report shall indicate the monthly gross retail receipts for each business location located within the jurisdiction of the city and shall be due by the twentieth day of each month, subsequent to the month in which the sales have taken place. In addition, each owner or operator must allow the local government an annual audit of the reports from the owner or operator to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. (c)  No location owner or location operator may derive more than fifty (50) percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for this business location in which the class B machines are situated from such class B machines and any location owner or location operator found in violation of such provision may be fined and may have any city issued license suspended or revoked as allowed under this article. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the fifty (50) percent of gross retail receipts requirement. Any violations of this provision shall be reported to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-260. - Notice requirements. (a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or substantially similar language: "GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." (b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. (c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-261. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines.     Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71(a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 or § 50-27-78. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-262. - License suspension and revocation. (a)  The city may suspend or revoke any city issued license of any location owner or location operator to manufacture, distribute or sell alcoholic beverages as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f) or (g). (b)  The city may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator of any other license granted by the municipality as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f) or (g). (c)  The suspension or revocation of licenses under this Code section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: (1)  No license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing and upon prior three (3) days' written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. (2)  The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: a.  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. b.  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. c.  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. d.  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. e.  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license. f.  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed businesses and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. (3)  Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as provided by the licensee to the city. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. (4)  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city council. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the proceeding. (5)  Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses offered by the city and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. (6)  The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten (10) business days of the completion of the hearings. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one (1) or more of the following: revocation of the license, suspension of the license for no more than twelve (12) months, imposition of a probationary period not to exceed twelve (12) months, and/or a civil monetary penalty not to exceed the amount allowed under the City Charter. Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation, are encouraged but not required. Where the remaining term of the license is less than twelve (12) months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three (3) separate and unrelated violations within twenty-four (24) months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. (7)  The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten (10) business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. (8)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager, in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and nonappealable. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-263. - Criminal penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. (a)  Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city or other court of competent jurisdiction, are as follows: (1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. (2)  Second offense: Fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation, suspension of the owner's or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three (3) months or both. (3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner's or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six (6) months, or any combination of these penalties. (b)  The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city, or the judge of any other court of competent jurisdiction. Suspension or revocation of the owner's or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city may be imposed by the mayor and council after a public hearing as described in section 10-262 of this article. (c)  Offering one (1) or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-264. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated machines in violation of law or ordinance.     The municipal court of the city, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine: (1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. (2)  Second and subsequent offenses: Fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-265. - Operating regulations.     All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: (1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All bona fide coin-operated amusement machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. (2)  Inspection. The chief of police may inspect or cause the inspection of any location in which any such bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated or set up for operating, and may inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. (3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any location owner or location operator to open the location to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. (4)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance of the peace, as defined by law; c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. (5)  Shirt and shoes required. All location owners and location operators shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their location. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-266. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. (a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin-operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current amusement game room license and occupational tax certificate issued by the city. (b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license to operate in the same or different location in the city. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-267. - Enforcing officer.     The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements in this article. (Ord. of 6-8-15(1) , § 1) 
Secs. 10-268—10-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 
Sec. 10-280. - Definitions.     Hours of operation: Hours of operation shall mean the time period from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. each day of operation.     Days of operation: Days of operation of mobile food vendors shall be limited to Thursday, Friday and Saturday.     Mobile food vending unit: Mobile food vending unit shall mean any motorized vehicle designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food is peddled, vended, sold or given away.     Permitted locations : Mobile food vending units are allowed to operate on improved private property only within the following specific location: 1.  Private property in the following zoning districts: C-2, C-3 and Industrial; 2.  On property owned or leased by the city and the food is served during an event that is sanctioned and/or approved by the city. The city marshall or zoning officials will verify all proposed locations for vendor units that meet the standards for the city's zoning ordinances. All permitted locations approved for the placement and operation of any mobile food vending unit must maintain a minimum distance of four hundred (400) feet as described in the city's alcoholic beverages ordinances, measured from any building housing an established licensed eating and drinking establishment as defined under this Code.     Signage: Signage shall mean any type of design or artwork that advertises the use of a mobile food vending unit or which contains the name of a mobile food vending unit.     Permitted signage: Permitted signage shall mean any signage marketing and/or advertising any mobile vending unit that meets the following requirements: 1.  Sandwich board signage located on the premises where the mobile food vending unit is located while the mobile food vending unit is operating. 2.  Wall signage that is safely affixed to the mobile food vending unit so as to be flat against the surface of the mobile food vending unit.     Prohibited signage: Prohibited signage shall mean any signage of any type that is erected or maintained on a right-of-way owned or maintained by the city, county, or the state; and any and all signage located off the premises where the mobile food vending unit is operating. (Ord. of 12-17-15 ) 
Sec. 10-281. - Business license requirements. (a)  The person or business entity owning or operating a mobile food vending unit shall not operate a mobile food vending unit within the city limits at any permitted location unless and until such person or business entity has obtained a business license from the city. (b)  Prior to the issuance of a city business license, the person or business entity applying for a business license under this article must show compliance with the following requirements: (1)  Each mobile food vending unit which will be engaged in the selling of cooked or prepared food must be licensed by the state health department. A copy of the license of each mobile food vending unit to be operated within the city limits must be submitted with the business license application. (2)  Each mobile food vending unit that will be operated within the city limits must have a current inspection by the health department which must be conspicuously posted on the mobile food vending unit. A copy of the current inspection of each mobile food vending unit to be operated within the city limits must be submitted with the business license application. (c)  That a mobile food vending unit is licensed by the health department does not guarantee that the city will issue it a business license or that the city will approve the mobile food vending unit for any permitted locations. (d)  All business license applications submitted under this article must be reviewed and approved by the following departments of the city: (1)  The business license department which will verify that all state licensing requirements have been satisfied and that the application is complete; (2)  The planning and zoning department which will review the application to insure that the location and district standard requirements are met; (3)  The police department which will review the application to verify if any existing safety violations for the applicant are pending. (Ord. of 12-17-15 ) 
Sec. 10-282. - Permitted location application. (a)  Either after receipt of a business license from the city or contemporaneously with the application for a business license, each owner of a mobile food vending unit must obtain approval for each permitted location at which it intends to operate. To obtain such approval, the owner or operator of each such mobile food vending unit to be operated in the city limits must submit an application for permitted location which requires the following information: (1)  The applicant shall complete and submit all information required by the application form supplied by the city. (2)  A copy of either the business license issued by the city or a pending application for a business license with the city. If a copy of the application is submitted, copies of all attachments must also be submitted. (3)  A list of all locations at which the applicant intends to operate a mobile food vending unit. (4)  A location plan of each permitted location at which the owner or operator of a mobile food vending unit intends to operate. That location plan must identify where the mobile food vending unit will be located. Each such plan shall be no smaller than eight and one-half by eleven inches (8½" × 11"). Each such plan shall illustrate the distance measured from the mobile food vending unit to the building location of the nearest established eating and drinking establishments. No mobile food vending unit shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of another mobile food vending unit. (5)  A written approval from the property owner of record for such occupancy. (6)  A written statement that the location contains a suitable surface and designated parking spaces for the mobile food vending unit and patrons or customers. (7)  A signed affidavit from the applicant that the mobile food vending unit will not transport alcoholic beverages to the permitted location and will not sell or give alcoholic beverages at the permitted location to any of its patrons or customers. (Ord. of 12-17-15 ) 
Sec. 10-283. - Requirements and restrictions.     Failure of an owner or operator of a mobile food vending unit to abide by the following requirements and restrictions shall constitute a violation of this article: (1)  Only one (1) mobile food vending unit may be permitted per applicant. (2)  A mobile food vending unit shall operate only during the hours of operation. Operation of a mobile food vending unit outside of the hours of operation shall be a violation of this article. (3)  A mobile food vending unit shall not operate at any location that is considered to be a permitted location unless and until that mobile food vending unit is approved to be operated at that location by the city. To be approved for any permitted location, each mobile food vending unit must submit an application on forms provided by the city. (4)  Any mobile food vending unit which begins operating at a permitted location without securing all permits shall be in violation of this article. (5)  A mobile food vending unit shall not arrive to operate at a permitted location more than thirty (30) minutes prior to the time it intends to begin to operate or prior to 6:30 a.m., whichever is later. (6)  A mobile food vending unit shall not stay at a permitted location more than thirty (30) minutes after it is finished operating or later than 10:30 p.m. on any day, whichever is earlier, unless permitted under subsection (2) of this section by the city. (7)  Any semi-permanent structure used and/or associated with the mobile food vending unit operation shall also be removed from the site during hours of non-operation. (8)  A mobile food vending unit shall use only permitted signage and shall not use any prohibited signage. (9)  Mobile food vending units shall not utilize any temporary connections to potable water. All water used by a mobile food vending unit shall be provided by an internal tank within that mobile food vending unit. The mobile food vending unit shall not replenish that internal tank at the permitted location. (10)  All electricity to the mobile food vending unit shall be from a generator or a main power supply via a portable cord that is in conformance with the National Electrical Code. (11)  A mobile food vending unit shall not make use of any outdoor cooking facilities. To the extent that cooking is done at a permitted location, it shall be done within the confines of the mobile food vending unit. (12)  A mobile food vending unit shall not, at any time, utilize outdoor storage or devices to warm or refrigerate food with the exception of storage for disposable tableware. (13)  A drive through shall not be used at any mobile food vending unit. (14)  A person operating a mobile food vending unit shall not conduct business with, or accept orders from, any patrons or customers when such patrons or customers are in their motor vehicles. (15)  The area within which a mobile food vending unit is operating shall, at all times, be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, rubbish and debris. To that end, each mobile food vending unit must provide a trash or garbage receptacle in which patrons or customers may place their litter or garbage. The receptacle shall be within ten (10) feet of the mobile food vending unit. The operator of the mobile food vending unit must remove this litter or garbage receptacle and any loose litter or garbage from the permitted location when he or she leaves the permitted location. (16)  A mobile food vending unit shall not use amplified music of any type. This restriction shall not apply to the operation of a vehicle operated solely as an ice cream truck and which does not sell any other type of food. (17)  A mobile food vending unit shall not use temporary or portable lighting outside of that necessary to illuminate the inside of the unit and the servicing area of the unit. (18)  All of the following shall be posted on each mobile food vending unit in a conspicuous place: a.  The current business tax receipt; b.  A list of the locations at which the mobile food vending unit is permitted to operate; c.  A copy of the business license issued by the city. (19)  A mobile food vending unit operating at or participating in any event sponsored, authorized, or approved by the city shall pay the registration fees set forth or required by the city or event coordinators. Such fees, if applicable, shall be paid prior to the event. (20)  A person who operates a mobile food vending unit shall not go into a park owned or operated by the city, the county or the United States of America to sell, offer for sale, or display a food item, unless the person's activity is authorized by a rental agreement or written permission of the director of the parks and recreation department of the city. (21)  Parking requirements and restrictions: a.  Owners and operators of mobile food vending units shall secure a minimum of two (2) dedicated parking spaces for customers utilizing their services. b.  Parking spaces shall be marked as required by zoning regulations. c.  Parking spaces shall meet the size requirements established by the city. d.  Owners and operators of mobile food vending units shall not sell to customers in areas designated as public rights-of-way. (Ord. of 12-17-15 ) 
Sec. 10-284. - Enforcement.     The provisions of this article may be enforced through the city's code enforcement procedures or as otherwise authorized in this Code and may be pursued by appropriate remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction. The remedies that the city may pursue for a violation include, but are not limited to: (1)  Any violation of this article may be punishable as provided for in section 1-8. (2)  Revocation of the business license of the owner or operator of the mobile food vending unit found in violation of this article; (3)  Refusal of the city to renew the business license of the owner or operator of the mobile food vending unit found in violation of this article. (Ord. of 12-17-15 ) 
Chapter 11 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Land clearing and tree protection, § 6-81 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; mobile home parks, App. A, art. XVIII. 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions.     As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:     Mobile home: A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation, after fabrication, on streets or highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailer, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. A travel trailer or recreational vehicle is not to be considered as a mobile home, provided it is not occupied while parked outside of a mobile home park.     Mobile home park: A plot of ground with space for the parking of more than one mobile home, either permanently or temporarily. (Code 1968, §§ 11-5, 11-12) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-2. - Chapter inapplicable to licensed dealers.     This chapter shall not apply to mobile home dealers licensed by the city. (Code 1968, § 11-11) 
Sec. 11-3. - Mobile home registration permit; decal; subject to taxation. (a)  All mobile homes intended to be used as a residential structure now existing or set up in the city hereafter shall be registered with the city and a permit shall be obtained by the owner thereof within ten (10) days of the move into the city. Such permit shall include a decal to be mounted in a conspicuous place near the main entrance to a mobile home so as to be readily seen from twenty (20) feet. (b)  At the time the owner of a mobile home registers such home the owner shall check to see whether a property tax return for the mobile home is required. All such laws and ordinances or property taxation now in effect shall be applicable to mobile homes. (c)  Prior to any mobile home being moved or relocated the owners shall notify the city clerk of such move. If any mobile home is moved outside the city the owner shall give such owners' forwarding address so that tax bill can be sent to such owner. All taxes not paid shall be collected as provided by law. (d)  Mobile home park operators shall notify the city of all existing mobile homes and their owners that are in the park on January first of each year. The operator shall also inform the city of new mobile home tenants in a mobile home park and also inform the new tenants of the requirements for registration. (Code 1968, § 11-4) 
Sec. 11-4. - Parking of mobile home, etc., outside of park—Subject to conditions and regulations.     Every person not parking in an approved mobile home park, desiring to park, place or maintain, temporarily or permanently, a mobile home, trailer or similar structure (hereinafter referred to as mobile home) in the city, shall not do so except under the conditions and regulations prescribed in this chapter. (Code 1968, § 11-1) 
Sec. 11-5. - Same—Prohibited; exception.     It shall be unlawful for any person to park a mobile home in the city in a place other than a mobile home park; provided however, that this shall not apply to mobile homes continuously so parked since July 27, 1967; provided further, that when such mobile homes parked in a place other than a mobile home park are moved or removed therefrom, it shall thenceforth be unlawful for such space to be occupied by a mobile home. (Code 1968, § 11-2) 
Sec. 11-6. - Same—No new permits. (a)  After July 28, 1967, no new permits for mobile homes shall be issued by the city clerk and no mobile home shall be placed within the city except in a licensed mobile home park under the ordinances and regulations in force. (b)  Upon removal of any mobile home which has been validly permitted heretofore outside of a mobile home park, such mobile home shall not be replaced by another mobile home. (Code 1968, § 11-3) 
Sec. 11-7. - Mobile home park license—Required.     All mobile home parks shall be licensed and shall operate under the conditions prescribed in this chapter. (Code 1968, § 11-5) 
Sec. 11-8. - Same—Application; deposits.     Prior to establishing a mobile home park the person desiring to operate same shall make application to the council for a license to operate a mobile home park, which application shall contain information as to the location of the real property, the number and location of the spaces to be operated, the name of the owner of the land, the name of the operator and manager of such park, a statement as to available water and sanitary facilities, and the number of mobile homes to be rented by the owner. Such application shall be sworn to by the applicant, and accompanied by a deposit payment for a yearly business license, and a deposit payment for all water and sewer taps and meters for each space. (Code 1968, § 11-6) 
Sec. 11-9. - Same—Issuance; denial.     The city council shall within ten (10) days investigate an application to operate a mobile home park as to the health, safety, moral and general welfare to the people of the city, approve or disapprove same by usual majority vote, and issue or refuse to issue a license for same. The signing of the license by three (3) council members, one of whom shall be from the ward in which the mobile home park is to be located, shall be an approval of the issuance of such license, and the clerk shall be authorized to issue same upon such approval. (Code 1968, § 11-7) 
Sec. 11-10. - Same—Fee as prescribed.     The fee for issuance of a license to operate a mobile home park shall be as provided by ordinance. (Code 1968, § 11-8) 
Sec. 11-11. - Renewal of licenses and permits.     The licenses and permits under this chapter shall be renewable each year at the prices and pursuant to the provisions set forth herein. (Code 1968, § 11-10) 
Sec. 11-12. - Transfer.     Mobile home park licenses granted hereunder shall not be transferred to a new owner or operator without approval of the city council. (Code 1968, § 11-14) 
Sec. 11-13. - Operation, maintenance of mobile home, park.     All persons having a permit or license hereunder shall operate and maintain such mobile home or mobile home park in an orderly, sanitary, moral manner and upon violation of same, the council, after giving five (5) days' notice, may have a hearing and revoke the permit or license to maintain same. (Code 1968, § 11-9) 
Sec. 11-14. - Design standards for mobile home parks. (a)  Mobile home parks shall contain a minimum of three (3) acres and each mobile home lot shall contain a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet. (b)  Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum width and frontage of forty (40) feet on a street within the mobile home park. (c)  Each mobile home lot shall be clearly marked and staked and the proposed location of the mobile home shall be clearly marked and staked. (d)  Each mobile home lot shall be equipped with a public water and sewer system which meets the standards of county health authorities. (e)  No mobile home lot shall have direct access to a publicly dedicated street. All mobile home lots shall have access to an interior roadway which is not less than thirty (30) feet in width. Such roadway shall have unobstructed access to a public street. (f)  Parking areas for tenants and visitors shall be clearly designated. (g)  Each mobile home park shall have provisions for a minimum of five (5) mobile home spaces at the time the park is established. (Code 1968, § 11-13) 
Chapter 11.5 - MOTORIZED CARTS/GOLF CARTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 19, 2013, added provisions to the Code but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as chapter 11.5. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 11.5-1—11.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTORIZED CARTS 
Sec. 11.5-21. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Motorized cart: Every motor vehicle having not less than three (3) wheels and an unladen weight of one thousand three hundred (1,300) pounds or less, and which cannot operate at more than twenty (20) miles per hour, and designed to carry no more than the recommended manufacturing seating capacity, and shall be consistent with the definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(32). This includes golf carts and similar types of self-propelled vehicles. ( Ord. of 12-19-13(1) ) 
Sec. 11.5-22. - License and registration required.     Motorized carts may be operated within the city only after the owner has completed the registration process pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-331(b), and only if a person who possesses a valid Georgia driver's license is operating the motorized cart or is present and supervising the operator of the motorized cart. Registration fees are charged by the city to cover the costs of implementing and maintaining this article. It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart that is operated on public roads, recreational paths, rights-of-way or other public property in the jurisdiction of the city to register the motorized cart with the city within ten (10) days of the date of purchase/acquisition. There shall be a registration fee and a user fee as set out below. ( Ord. of 12-19-13(1) ) 
Sec. 11.5-23. - Registration application and fee. (a)  Registration with the city shall include a record of the model, make and vehicle identification number or serial number on such motorized cart, the name and address of the owner, a contact phone number, and any other such information as the city shall require, all of which shall be maintained at city hall. A person desiring to register a motorized cart shall bring documentation setting forth a description of such cart to the Vidalia Police Department and complete an application of registration of such cart. (b)  Upon registration, the clerk shall issue a numerical decal to be applied to a conspicuous place on such cart so as to be plainly visible. This decal issued shall be nontransferable from the cart for which it is issued. (c)  Before any motorized cart may be operated within the city, the cart must have affixed thereto an emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. (d)  There shall be a fifteen dollar ($15.00) registration and licensing fee due annually on January 1 of each year. ( Ord. of 12-19-13(1) ) 
Sec. 11.5-24. - Emblem required. (a)  Before any motorized cart may be operated within the city, the cart must have affixed thereto an emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. Failure to have a current registration decal affixed to a motorized cart shall be a violation of this section and subject the owner of such motorized cart to the penalties set forth in section 11.5-27. (b)  The decal issued by the city shall be nontransferable from the motorized cart for which it was issued. ( Ord. of 12-19-13(1) ) 
Sec. 11.5-25. - General regulations. (a)  Motorized carts may only be operated on public roads, recreational paths, rights-of-way or other public property which are part of the city's street system which have a speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less, and the motorized cart must be equipped with functional headlights and taillights. Additionally, motorized carts must also be equipped with a flashing or rotating yellow or amber light mounted on the top. Motorized carts shall not be operated on public roads, recreational paths or rights-of-way of the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. (b)  All occupants of a motorized cart must wear seatbelts at all times, if available. (c)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on the sidewalks. (d)  Restrictions placed upon licensed motorists shall apply in the same manner as if operating a motor vehicle. (e)  The maximum occupancy of a motorized cart traveling on public roads, recreational paths, rights-of-way or other public property shall be one (1) person per designated seat. (f)  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the designated public roads, recreational paths, rights-of-way or other public property of the city. (g)  The city council may, at its discretion, and by resolution, waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration. (h)  A city employee on city business, in a city vehicle, and in the exercise of his/her duties, may operate gasoline, diesel fuel or battery-operated powered vehicles or motorized carts upon the city's streets, parks, parking lots, and other public properties within the city limits. (i)  Motorized carts cannot be operated within any commercial district of the city or on any street with a posted speed limit above twenty-five (25) miles per hour. (j)  No motorized vehicle may be operated on any city street without the approved city decal. (k)  All motorized carts noncompliant with the requirements herein shall not be allowed to be operated on any city street. (l)  Any owner registering a motorized cart with the city and any operator of same agrees to abide by all the requirements of state law and this Code. ( Ord. of 12-19-13(1) ) 
Sec. 11.5-26. - Liability.     The owner or operator of a motorized cart is liable for his or her own actions. Any person who operates or owns a motorized cart is responsible for procuring liability insurance in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per person for bodily injury, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per accident for bodily injury to one (1) or more people, and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per accident for property damage. Proof of insurance coverage must be provided at the time of registration and maintained on the motorized cart at all times. ( Ord. of 12-19-13(1) ) 
Sec. 11.5-27. - Violation—Penalty.     It shall be unlawful for a motorized cart to be operated on the streets of the city except as expressly authorized in this section, and every person convicted of a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months or both. ( Ord. of 12-19-13(1) ) 
Sec. 11.5-28. - Effective date.     The ordinance codified in this article shall become effective immediately upon receiving supplies for registration of carts, but no later than thirty (30) days after passage. ( Ord. of 12-19-13(1) ) 
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Opening fire hydrant, § 8-1; obstructing fire hydrant, § 8-2; health and sanitation, ch. 9; subdivisions, App. B. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 12-1. - Extensions of water and sewer lines. (a)  Existing development and existing subdivisions: When the city extends water and sewer lines in order to furnish such services to older developed sections of the city and existing legally recorded subdivisions which were partially developed or completely developed as of October 14, 1968 such extensions shall be accomplished by the city as it deems it necessary. (b)  Developments after October 14, 1968, and before: When completely a new subdivision or lot is legally recorded after October 14, 1968, the subdivider or owner shall bear the cost of pipe, materials, fittings, fire hydrants, manholes, etc., for water and sewer lines. Installation of pipe will be accomplished by the city at no cost to the subdivider. Subdivisions now legally recorded, but without properly dedicated streets to the city are considered new subdivisions for the purposes of this section. Group developments such as apartments, which are not a part of a subdivision shall comply with these provisions. (c)  General policies: (1)  Water and sewer lines shall be placed within public easements established for such purpose or within the right-of-way line of streets which have been dedicated to the city. (2)  The costs of water and sewer pipe, materials, fittings, fire hydrants, etc., shall be estimated by the city and shall be paid in advance by the subdivider and/or property owners before construction begins. Adjustment of the final cost of facilities shall be made by the city and the subdivider and/or property owners upon completion of work. (3)  All pipe, lines, fittings, fire hydrants, and connections used in water and sewer lines shall be of size, dimension and specifications as determined by the city manager or consulting engineers. (4)  Where engineering studies determine that water and sewer extensions are impractical either because of excessive costs to the city or unusual conditions, even though other criteria of this section can be met, the city shall not extend water and sewer lines until such time as it is more feasible to extend lines. (5)  Whenever water and sewer extensions involve financial participation by the city, the city shall participate in financing the improvements if funds are budgeted for the fiscal year in which the improvements are to be made. All money budgeted for one (1) fiscal year shall not be used on one (1) project. (6)  Should the city encounter subsurface or latent conditions during the installation of pipe which are beyond the city's capabilities to remove or correct, the city shall give immediate notice to the subdivider and/or property owners of such conditions. The divider and/or property owners shall make suitable arrangements for corrections of subsurface conditions. (7)  Whenever water and sewer extensions are to be installed in areas of unusual topographic features and water bodies, where it is beyond the capabilities of city personnel to install lines properly without the aid of a survey and where subdividers and/or property owners are to pay for extensions then such parties shall also bear the cost of surveying and engineering fees. Where the city is directly involved in paying for lines, then the city shall absorb engineering and surveying fees. (8)  When water and sewer pipe, materials, fittings, fire hydrants, etc., are purchased by subdividers and/or property owners and installed in street right-of-way or easements, such pipe automatically becomes city property and the city is responsible for maintenance. (Code 1968, § 19-1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Self-inspection of water and sewer projects; state law not applicable with city.     Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 3 of Act 1046 Georgia Laws, 1996, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. (Ord. of 5-28-96) Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 28, 1996, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 1 of said ordinance as § 12-2 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 12-3—12-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
Sec. 12-20. - Requirements incorporated in contracts.     The rules and regulations contained in this article shall be considered a part of the contract with every builder, developer and consumer of city water. Such builder, developer and consumer of city water shall be governed by and subject to such rules and regulations. 
Sec. 12-21. - Compliance with building regulations prerequisite to issuance of water meter.     The city shall not issue any water meter within the city unless all requirements of the building chapter of this Code have been met. The city shall not be authorized to issue any water meter within the city where the same appears to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the city. Cross reference— Buildings; construction and related activities, ch. 6. 
Sec. 12-22. - Connection—Without authority.     It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any pipe to the city water system without express permission of the city. 
Sec. 12-23. - Same—Application. (a)  Connection with the mains of the city will be made upon the written application of the owner of the premises to be supplied with a connection, or of the owner's duly authorized agent upon blanks approved by city and upon compliance by the applicant with the rates, rules and regulations of city, and after the approval of the application by the city endorsed thereon. The size of service lines, valves, meters and other fittings, fixtures or appliances necessary to give the service applied for shall be determined by the city inspector. (b)  Application for water service connections shall be made at the city offices in the city hall by the owner or agent of the property to be served, upon blank forms furnished therefor. Such application shall state the official street number or numbers of the premises, the size of the pipe required and the approximate location where such services shall enter the premises. 
Sec. 12-24. - Same—Making.     The making of all service connections from the meter to improvements on premises including laying pipes, setting of water service fixtures, whether on private property or on public grounds, to be served by city water shall be made by duly licensed plumbers under the supervision of the building official. 
Sec. 12-25. - Service taps—Authority; meter and back flow installation. (a)  No service taps shall be made unless first authorized by the city. All such taps shall be made in accordance to city "Standard Plans, Standard Construction Specifications," or as otherwise directed by the city. (b)  All new service taps shall include a water meter and back flow preventer provided by the city. All back flow preventers shall be of a double valve design and shall be approved by the American Waterworks Association. The cost for such service tap shall be included in the city's fees for service tap and shall be not less than the city's cost of hardware, labor, overhead, and administration. (c)  Any meter replaced within the city's water system shall be equipped with a back flow preventer. All back flow preventers shall be of a double valve design and shall be approved by the American Waterworks Association. The cost for replacement meters shall be borne by the city. 
Sec. 12-26. - Same—Charges for meters and back flow preventers. (a)  Installation for new meters with back flow preventers shall be paid by the property owners. The cost for installation shall be reviewed and established by the city council and set out on a schedule to be maintained by the city clerk. (b)  Installation of backflow preventers for fire meter assemblies shall be set as follows: All such installations shall be cost of material plus fifteen (15) percent. (c)  Additional costs may be added for boring under roadways. (d)  These costs may be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the city council. (e)  The above costs shall be paid at the time the application for metered service is made to the city. All meters and back flow preventers shall remain the property of the city and may be replaced at the discretion of the city. (Code 1968, § 19-5; Ord. of 5-8-95(2); Ord. of 2-24-09) 
Sec. 12-27. - Same—For water used for swimming pools; sewer charge deduction.     The city shall charge the normal rate for water used for the filling of swimming pools. The amount of water used for the filling of swimming pools shall be deducted from the total number of gallons used for figuring the sewer charge. (Code 1968, § 19-14.1) 
Sec. 12-28. - Number of meters. (a)  All water customers of the city residing in single-family dwellings will have a water meter installed to record the amount of water used so as to pay the city for the total amount of water consumed. (b)  All water customers residing in a duplex or similar place of abode will comply with the rule in subsection (a) unless it is not practical; then the city will determine the disposition of each water customer, if there is a reason to do so. (c)  Where there are three (3) or more families living in an apartment unit and where the apartment owner charges for water as a part of the cost to the tenants, then the city will be satisfied with one (1) meter and will charge the apartment owner for the total water consumed by the tenants and the owner will either collect a share from each tenant or will absorb the cost personally if this cost is a part of the lease agreement, but it will be the owner's responsibility to pay the city for total water registered on the water meter. (d)  Water meters shall be installed on all municipal and public buildings, including churches, and any other such buildings that use water, and the city clerk shall render a bill every thirty (30) days for such service. (Code 1968, §§ 19-13, 19-14) 
Sec. 12-29. - Tampering with meter. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or deliberately damage a city water meter. Any such tampering or deliberate destruction shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and shall be penalized as follows: (1)  Twice the city's estimate of water consumed in excess of actual reading in the case of property owner or consumer tampering; or (2)  Twice the cost of meter installation in the case of nonproperty owner or consumer destruction. (b)  Any subsequent tampering or deliberate destruction shall result in a citation to appear in municipal court and, upon a determination of guilt, to punishment as prescribed in section 1-8. 
Sec. 12-30. - Application for service—Submitting; contents. (a)  Upon the application of the owner, or any authorized agent, or tenant of the owner, premises will be furnished through the connections already made, or applied for by the owner, and upon compliance by the applicant with the rates, rules and regulations of city, as established from time to time as the need requires by resolution, and after approval of the application by city endorsed thereon. (b)  The application shall state the name of the owner of the premises, the character and extent of the service desired, a description of the premises, including the name of the street, and house number, if any, the number and kind of fixtures through which water will be supplied, and such other information as may be reasonably required by the city to enable it to give the desired service. (c)  Such application may be in substantially the form on file at city hall. 
Sec. 12-31. - Same—On change in ownership, tenancy or service.     A new application shall be made and approved by the city upon any change in ownership or tenancy of the property, or in the service, as described in the application. The city shall have the right to discontinue the water supply until such new application is made and approved. 
Sec. 12-32. - Deposit for water service. (a)  All water customers of the city shall deposit with the city the amount indicated below for each meter to guarantee the prompt and full payment of all charges imposed by the city for water furnished by the city to the customer: (1)  Residential customers, one hundred dollars ($100.00). (2)  Commercial customers, an amount determined by the city manager based upon the projected use. Any account to which water service is terminated for nonpayment of a city water bill shall be revaluated and water service shall not be reestablished until a deposit in the amount determined by the city manager to be sufficient to cover the average account balance is paid to the city. (b)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all existing deposits held by the city in connection with water service being furnished by the city and to all present and future customers obtaining water service from the city. (Code 1968, §§ 19-6, 19-9; Mo. of 11-9-92; Ord. of 2-10-14 ) 
Sec. 12-33. - Schedule of charges for water service.     The charges for water service from the city shall be based on rate studies conducted every two (2) years or more often; the charges shall be fixed after each such study. (Code 1968, §§ 19-11, 19-12) 
Sec. 12-34. - Payments. (a)  At the time of making application for connection or service, applicant must make payment to city of the fees, deposits, or rates, as the case may be, as fixed by the city council. (b)  Rates for water service shall be subject to change according to the fiscal needs of the city from time to time as determined by the city council; such rates shall be published in the office of the city hall where utility bills may be paid and in accordance with the most recent resolution by the city council pertaining to such rates. (c)  The rate shall have a minimum period charge based on minimum gallons provided plus a charge for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water use over the minimum per period. 
Sec. 12-35. - Due date; shut-off for nonpayment; restoration of service.     Water bills are due on the twentieth day of each month. If a water bill is not paid by the fifth day of the next month, water service to the premises for which the bill was rendered may be terminated by the city; once terminated service shall not be restored until the bill has been paid. In addition, when a bill is not paid by the second Monday of the following month, no water service shall be furnished until the bill is paid to the customer responsible for payment of the bill at any other location or to any member of the customer's household. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is added to the bill if the bill is not paid by such second Monday of the following month. In addition, if there is a second termination within six (6) months, an amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) will be added to the bill, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) of which will be applied to the customer's deposit. ( Ord. of 2-10-14 ) 
Sec. 12-36. - Fixtures and equipment. (a)  The city will furnish and maintain at its own cost all necessary fittings, pipes, appliances, including all meters and meter boxes, to deliver water to the consumer's pipeline, at a point just inside the curb line on the street, and just outside the property line in alleys or other public places; all such fittings, pipes, appliances, meters and meter boxes shall remain the property of city, and shall at all times be accessible to city and under its control. The service line from the curb box or meter to the consumer's premises shall be laid and maintained by the applicant at applicant's own cost. The line shall be of ample size, of standard weight and quality, and all cutoffs, valves, fixtures and appliances furnished by the consumer shall be maintained in good order and condition. All builders or developers, as the case may be, must install a "bleed valve" on all water lines installed in street cul-de-sacs. (b)  All service laterals are the pipes that run from the property owner's home and connect to the water and sewer services provided by the City of Vidalia. Property owners are responsible for maintaining the water service laterals that run through their property which begin at the point where it connects to the city owned water meter, also known as the water service connection. Should a leak, break or blockage occur on the property owner's side of the water service connection, the property owner is responsible for damages, repairs and all associated costs. Should such leak, break or blockage occur on the property owner's side of the water service connection within the city's right-of-way, then the property owner's repairs can only be conducted under the direct supervision of the appropriate authorized or designated city official. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to conduct any water maintenance within the city right-of-way regardless of where the water connection point might be, without permission and direction of the city, even though all such work shall be at the sole expense of the property owner. ( Ord. of 7-14-14(1) ) 
Sec. 12-37. - Leaks.     All leaks in the service or any other pipe, or fixture, on the premises of the consumer shall be immediately repaired. Upon failure to repair any such leak, the service may be discontinued until repairs are made. 
Sec. 12-38. - Inspection.     All pipes, meters and fixtures shall at all reasonable hours be subject to inspection by city or by its duly authorized agents. 
Sec. 12-39. - Damages. (a)  The city shall in no event be responsible for maintaining any service line owned by the consumer, nor for damage done by water escaping therefrom, nor for defects in lines or fixtures, on the property of the consumer. The consumer shall at all times comply with all regulations of the city and of regulations relating to the service lines, and shall make all changes in the line as required on account of change in grade or otherwise. (b)  All damage to service pipes or street mains caused by careless or negligent work, or improper filling at excavations, shall be chargeable to the persons causing such damage, and the expense of repairing the same shall be recovered from such persons. 
Sec. 12-40. - Installation, maintenance, etc. (a)  All service pipes and fixtures from the water meter to the premises, including the corporation cocks at the mains, shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the property owners, and all leaks and other defects in the same shall be promptly repaired by them, or if not promptly repaired, then water will be turned off until such repairs have been made, and the expense thereof shall be charged against the owners, and must be paid before water shall be turned on again. (b)  The city shall not be held responsible by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or apparatus, water coil, or for failure in the supply of water. 
Sec. 12-41. - Illegally turning on water after cut-off for nonpayment.     It shall be unlawful for any person to cut on or use any water after such person's water service has been discontinued for nonpayment of bills. 
Sec. 12-42. - Bypassing meter.     It shall be unlawful for any person to run any pipe around any meter with intent to defraud the city of water revenue. State Law reference— Theft of service, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 12-43. - Injury to or tampering with water meters, pipes, etc. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally injure, destroy or permit to be injured or destroyed any water meter, pipe, conduit, line or other apparatus belonging to or operated by the city. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to intentionally prevent a water meter belonging to or operated by the city from duly registering the quantity of water supplied to or in any way interfere with the proper action or just registration of such meters. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to intentionally divert any water from any place of the city, or do otherwise, intentionally use or cause to be used, without the consent of the city, any water manufactured or distributed by the city. (b)  Any person who intentionally injures or destroys, or permits same, to any water meter, pipe, conduit, line or other apparatus belonging to the city and/or the existence of any device, by whatever name used, for the purpose of diverting any water from any pipe of the city without the consent of the city, shall be prima facie evidence of the intent to defraud by the person receiving the benefits from such action. The destruction or damage to city property or the existence of such a device shall be deemed presumptive evidence of the intention referred to in this section. (c)  Any charge or violation of the above provisions shall result in a citation to appear in municipal court and, upon a determination of guilt, to punishment as prescribed in sections 12-29 and 1-8 herein. (Ord. of 4-13-92(2), § 19-80; Ord. of 12-19-13, §§ 1, 2 ) 
Sec. 12-44. - Temporary water service.     A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the city for temporary water service. No such service shall be continued for a period of time in excess of ten (10) consecutive days. (Mo. of 4-20-93) 
Secs. 12-45—12-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS AND DRAINS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 
Sec. 12-50. - Definitions.     Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows:     BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter.     Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.     Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.     Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.     Department head: The head of the water and sewer department.     Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.     Industrial wastes: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.     Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.     pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.     Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.     Public sewer: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.     Sanitary sewer: A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.     Sewage: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.     Sewage treatment plant: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.     Sewage works: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.     Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.     Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.     Storm drain: (sometimes termed storm sewer ): A sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.     Suspended solids: Solids that are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.     Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Code 1968, § 19-52) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-51. - Unsanitary deposit of objectionable waste.     It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Code 1968, § 19-53(a)) 
Sec. 12-52. - Discharge to natural outlet.     It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any waste water or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. (Code 1968, § 19-53(b)) 
Sec. 12-53. - Construction and maintenance of septic tanks, etc.     Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any septic tank or other facility intended or used for the disposal of waste water. (Code 1968, § 19-53(c)) 
Sec. 12-54. - Connection to sanitary sewer required. (a)  The owner of all buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at such owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, and to maintain such connection, provided that sewer public sewer is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line of such owner's property if connection can be made using gravity flow. (b)  All service laterals are the pipes that run from the property owner's home and connect to the water and sewer services provided by the City of Vidalia. Property owners are responsible for maintaining the sewer service laterals that run through their property which begin at the point where it connects to the city owned sewer meter, also known as the sewer service connection. Should a leak, break or blockage occur on the property owner's side of the sewer service connection, the property owner is responsible for damages, repairs and all associated costs. Should such leak, break or blockage occur on the property owner's side of the sewer service connection within the city's right-of-way, then the property owner's repairs can only be conducted under the direct supervision of the appropriate authorized or designated city official. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to conduct any sewer maintenance within the city right-of-way regardless of where the sewer connection point might be, without permission and direction of the city, even though all such work shall be at the sole expense of the property owner. (Code 1968, §§ 19-15, 19-53(d); Ord. of 7-14-14(2)) 
Sec. 12-55. - Private sewage disposal. (a)  Where public sanitary sewer not available: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 12-54, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. (b)  Permit required: Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the department head. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the department head. (c)  Inspection: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the department head. The department head shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the department head when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the department head. (d)  System standards: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of natural resources, environmental protection division of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. (e)  Hookup to public sewer: At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 12-54, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned. (f)  Operation at owner's expense: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (g)  Additional requirements: No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. (Code 1968, § 19-54) 
Sec. 12-56. - Building sewers and connections. (a)  Permit required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. (b)  Installation and connection costs to be borne by owner: All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the city property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay to the city a standard sewer tap fee. (c)  Separate sewer required for each building; exception: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. (d)  Old building sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found on examination and test by the department head to meet all requirements of this article. (e)  Conformance with building and plumbing codes: The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF, Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. (f)  Elevation of building sewers: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewer carried by such drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. (g)  Connecting sources of surface runoff or groundwater to building sewer or building drain: No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (h)  Connection of building sewer into public sewer: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specification of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials shall be approved by the department head before installation. (i)  Supervision and inspection of connection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the department head when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the department head or the department head's representative. (j)  Guarding excavations; restoration of public property: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (k)  Tap fees: Sewer tap fees shall be subject to change from time to time as determined by the city council; such rates shall be published in the office of the city hall in accordance with the most recent resolution by the city council pertaining to such rates. NOTE: Appropriate back flow prevention as specified by the water and sewer department and any applicable state and federal laws will be utilized. (Code 1968, § 19-55; Ord. of 11-13-00) 
Sec. 12-57. - Use of the public sewers. (a)  Discharge of stormwater, surface water, groundwater, etc.: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (b)  Designation of sewers for discharge of unpolluted waters: Stormwater, industrial cooling water, unpolluted, process water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. (c)  Prohibited discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: (1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. (2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to damage or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. (3)  Any waste which will cause corrosion or determination of the treatment system. All wastes discharged to the public sewer system must have a pH value in the range of 5.5 to nine (9) standard units. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds and substances which will react with water to form acidic products. (4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. (d)  Department head to determine acceptability of certain wastes; prohibited substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the department head that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property; or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the department head will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, the materials of construction of the sewers, the nature of the sewage treatment process, the capacity of the sewage treatment plant, the degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: (1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit, sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius. (2)  Waste water containing more than twenty-five (25) milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiogradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin; or waste water from industrial or commercial plants containing more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of floatable oils, fats or grease, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit, zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius. (3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. (4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. (5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the department head and/or the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources for such materials. (6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-producing or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. (7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the department head in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. (8)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. (9)  Materials which exert or cause: a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. b.  Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. c.  Unusual BOD, above three hundred (300) milligrams per liter, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirement in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. (10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (11)  Waters or wastes containing suspended solids in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter. (12)  Waste waters at a flow rate or containing concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentrations, quantities or flows during normal operation and that would cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment efficiency. (e)  Procedure upon discharge or proposed discharge of certain prohibited wastes: If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d), and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the waste water facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitutes a public nuisance, the department head may take any action necessary to: (1)  Prohibit the discharge of such waste water. (2)  Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this article. (3)  Require pretreatment, including storage facilities or flow equalization, necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate these rules and regulations. (4)  Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional cost or expense incurred by the city for handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment system. (5)  Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this article. When considering the above alternatives, the department head shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the department head permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the department head. All industrial contributors proposing to discharge other than domestic sanitary wastes to the municipal system shall comply with pretreatment regulations set forth in 40 CFR 128 of the Federal Register, dated November 8, 1973. (f)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the department head, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in subsection (d)(2) above, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the department head and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the department head. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. (g)  Information to be provided to department head: The department head may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: (1)  Waste water discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period. (2)  Chemical analyses of waste waters. (3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting waste water volume and quality. (4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquids, sludges, oils, solvents or other materials important to sewer use control. (5)  A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location. (6)  Details of waste water pretreatment facilities. (7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. (h)  Measurement and testing standards: All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the department head. (i)  Compliance with federal regulations: All industrial users of the sewer system must comply with the Environmental Protection Agency Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 128, concerning industrial pretreatment. (j)  Sampling structures: When required by the department head, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the department head. The structure shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (k)  Special agreements, arrangements: No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. (Code 1968, § 19-56) 
Sec. 12-58. - Protection from damage.     No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently, break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the waste water facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Code 1968, § 19-57) 
Sec. 12-59. - Powers and authority of inspectors. (a)  Right of entry for purposes of inspection, observation, etc.: The department head and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharges to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this article. (b)  Inquiry into processes: The department head or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the waste water collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public might result in an advantage to competitors. (c)  Observation of applicable safety rules: While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a), the department head or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. (d)  Right of entry to private properties through which city holds easement: The department head and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the waste water facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Code 1968, § 19-58) 
Sec. 12-60. - Service rates—Procedure. (a)  Sewer service charge; surcharge for certain polluted wastes: There shall be established a sewer service charge, generally based on water consumption, the charges for which are fixed as provided in section 12-61, for each connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city, both inside and outside the city limits, and each sewer service customer shall pay the appropriate sewer service charge established by resolution of the city council, on file in the city clerk's office. The rates for all sewer service customers shall have a minimum charge. This minimum charge shall be considered a set standby or readiness-to-serve charge and will be charged whether the customer's premises are occupied or not. Waste water with strengths in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter of suspended solids shall be subject to a surcharge per pound of BOD and per pound of suspended solids in addition to the above noted charges for domestic waste. Any waste water with other pollutants above the normal content of domestic waste water shall be subject to a surcharge for the excessive pollutants as determined by the department head. (b)  Sewer service billing, collection and penalties: Bills for the sewer service charge shall be rendered monthly and shall be listed as a separate item on the same bill with the water system charges. Such bills shall set forth thereon the separate charge for water service, the separate charge for sewer service, and the total thereof. No payment shall be accepted for the water service unless the sewer charges are paid at the same time. Sewer bills are considered part of the water bill for billing and collection purposes. (Code 1968, § 19-59) 
Sec. 12-61. - Same—Calculation; review; industrial cost recovery system. (a)  Sewer user charges will be calculated in a manner consistent with the methodology described in the "Study for Establishing Sewer User Charges in the City of Vidalia, Georgia," prepared by Thomas and Hutton Engineering Company, dated September 13, 1978; each user will be notified at least annually of the rates that apply to the user's bill. (b)  Costs of operation, maintenance and replacement will be reviewed biannually and sewer rates adjusted periodically to insure compliance with the user charge provision of P.L. 92-500, as amended. (c)  The city will adopt an industrial cost recovery system consistent with P.L. 92-500, as amended, at such time as industries subject to the industrial cost recovery provisions derive beneficial use of the wastewater treatment facilities constructed under EPA grant C-130383. (Code 1968, § 19-59) 
Sec. 12-62. - Penalties. (a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 12-58 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 12-58 or who shall continue any violation of this article beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. Each day in which such a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and violation. (Code 1968, § 19-60) 
Sec. 12-63. - Environmental conservation, on-site sewage management and permit ordinance. (a)  Short title. This section shall be known, referred to, and may be cited as "The Environmental Conservation, On-site Sewage Management, and Permit Ordinance of the City of Vidalia." (b)  Purpose. It is the intent and policy of the City of Vidalia to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the City of Vidalia and its residents; to protect the natural resources, the environment, and the public health of the City of Vidalia to facilitate the adequate provision of on-site sewage management for all development in the local jurisdiction; to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other development; to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, flood plain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; to establish measures to preserve an adequate supply of safe drinking water and a quality for state waters which is necessary to protect the health and welfare of the public as well as to provide for future growth; to protect the environment, including the soils, air quality, and water resources, from pollution and inappropriate development; to assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the city; and to require permits for new development or location within the city. (c)  Definitions. When used in this section the following words and phrases shall have meanings given in this section. (1)  Hazardous waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the Federal Act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Sections 260 and 261, and as amended by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division Rules for Hazardous Waste Management (Chapter 391-3-11). (2)  Lot. The contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of size or use. (3)  Perennial river/stream. A river/stream or section of a river/stream that has normal stream flow consisting of base flow or both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. (4)  Protected river corridor. All land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river within a distance of one hundred (100) feet horizontally on both sides of the river measured from the uppermost part of the river bank, as existing at the time of the application of this ordinance; the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the water is included in the protected area. (5)  River/stream bank. The rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. (6)  Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development, whether immediate or future. This shall include all divisions or re-subdivisions of land involving a new road or change in existing roads. Excluded from this definition is the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. (7)  Utility. Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, fiber optic lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. (8)  Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas, including wetlands created for mitigation purposes under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. (d)  General provisions. (1)  Permit required. No building, mobile home, structure, or land within the jurisdiction of the City of Vidalia shall hereafter be erected, constructed, located, moved, used, subdivided, altered or disturbed except in conformity with the regulations herein and without first obtaining a permit from the City of Vidalia. This provision does and shall apply to the location of all manufactured housing and industrialized buildings in the city. (2)  Minimum lot size. All lots intended for residential or other use within the city shall be of such size as necessary to meet all requirements, rules, and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health according to the "Rules of Georgia Department of Public Health for On-Site Sewage Management Systems" Manual for On-site Sewage Management Systems; and as necessary to comply with the minimums set forth in the tables MT-1 and MT-2 hereby attached to and made a part of this section as Appendix 1, if on-site sewage management is utilized, and/or the local county board of health determination under the manual; and/or this or other local ordinance, whichever is stricter (requires the largest lot size). (3)  On-site sewage management permit required. No person or business shall construct an on-site sewage management system on any lot within the city until site approval and an on-site sewage management construction permit has been obtained from and issued by the Toombs County Health Department. (4)  Permit coordination. The required permit under subsection (d)(1) shall not be issued until the Toombs County Health Department issues an on-site site sewage management construction permit or a site approval letter, whichever is appropriate, so that all lots proposed to be used or subdivided would satisfy the requirements of this Ordinance, including the "Rules of Georgia Department of Public Health for On-Site Sewage Management Systems." If the Toombs County Health Department is delegated the responsibility for administering this section, the permit or letter under this subsection (4) shall suffice as the permit required under subsection (d)(1). (5)  Requirements are minimum. The regulations and requirements set by this section shall be the minimum requirements. (6)  Compliance with state and federal regulations. All developments, structures, and uses within the city shall also meet the requirements of all other local, federal and state regulations in effect, including but not limited to, Department of Transportation regulations, State Fire Marshal regulations, Georgia's Uniform Construction Codes, Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act permits, and all other Georgia Department of Natural Resources and Georgia Environmental Protection Division environmental rules and regulations. Issuance of a permit under this section does not constitute certification of compliance with such codes or regulations, and does not abrogate responsibility of the owner to so comply. (7)  Map interpretation. If there is any uncertainty as to whether a lot, portion of lot, or a proposed construction or location impacts an environmental resource regulated by this section because of interpretation of the applicable map, the decision of the City of Vidalia, or the Toombs County Health Department if it is delegated the responsibility for administering this section shall take precedent and be considered correct and final, but may be appealed as set forth in subsection (d)(8). (8)  Map appeal. Any person who feels aggrieved by a decision of the City of Vidalia or the Toombs County Health Department, as appropriate, regarding map interpretation may at their own expense request reconsideration. Such reconsideration shall include submission of scientific evidence for reversal of the alleged error in map interpretation, and such evidence must be documented by a state registered engineer, geologist, or soils scientist. To obtain a reversal of the decision of map interpretation, the evidence must be acceptable to Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division, and the City of Vidalia, or and the Toombs County Health Department if the Toombs County Health Department is delegated responsibility for administering this section. Any costs for submission of evidence to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division shall be borne by the person requesting reconsideration. (9)  Coordination with zoning and other regulation. This section shall be coordinated with any zoning or other regulations adopted by the City of Vidalia, and if there is any conflict with those zoning or other regulations, the stricter provisions shall apply. If zoning is or has been adopted, the provisions of this section shall be considered an overlay, or additional requirement(s) to the requirements of underlying zoning regulations and district. (10)  Fees. Any fees for applications, inspections, and the issuance of permits or certificates required or issued under the provisions of this section shall be paid by the person seeking such permit at the time of application in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. The amount of such fees, if any, shall be those established by the City of Vidalia from time to time. (e)  Delegation of section administration. The City of Vidalia, because of the need for coordination, hereby charges the City of Vidalia zoning administrator with responsibility for administering this section and ensuring compliance with its provisions. (f)  Wetlands protection regulations. (1)  Findings of fact. The wetlands within the City of Vidalia are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. (2)  Reference map. The official maps to be used as the determinant for location of wetlands in the City of Vidalia and to be regulated areas under this section will be the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's National Wetlands Inventory Maps for Toombs County. These maps portray generalized wetlands inventory areas, and these wetlands inventory areas do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands under the authority of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or a wetland delineation by that agency. (3)  Wetlands development permit requirements. No activity or use except those identified in subsection (f)(4) shall be allowed within wetlands without a permit issued under this section. Activities or uses permitted under Section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act may receive a local permit once any required federal permit, or if appropriate, letter of permission/determination, is obtained as described below, and any other applicable provisions of this section have been satisfied. a.  If there is a determination in the administration of this section that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein would not be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and would not disturb an identified wetlands inventory area, no further action concerning this particular subsection is necessary. b.  If there is a determination in the administration of this section that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein may be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and might disturb wetlands which appear to be under the jurisdiction of Section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a permit under this section. c.  If a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination is required, no local permit under this section will be issued until the person requesting the permit, at their own expense, obtains either a Section 404 permit, if so required, or a letter of permission/determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that no federal permit is required. d.  No action in the administration of this section, or no local permit issued pursuant to this section, relieves the landowner from any federal or state permitting requirements, including those relating to wetlands or land disturbance. (4)  Permitted uses not requiring a permit. The following uses are permitted without permit within the wetlands of the city to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein, and provided they have no long term impairment for wetland function. a.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. (Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, Section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption.). b.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, or other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require a Section 404 Permit. c.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, hunting, bird watching, hiking, biking, boating, horseback riding, kayaking, and canoeing. d.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. e.  Normal agriculture activities, including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. (5)  Prohibited uses. In compliance with the Georgia "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. a.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. b.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. (g)  Groundwater recharge areas protection regulations. (1)  Findings of fact. Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops and animal waste, like septic tank affluents, contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. (2)  Reference map. The official map for delineation of significant groundwater recharge areas in the City of Vidalia to be regulated areas under this subsection is the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 edition)." (3)  Groundwater recharge areas development permit requirements. All uses except those identified in subsection (g)(4) and those subject to further restriction by any underlying zoning district are allowed. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: a.  All new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of six hundred sixty (660) gallons, shall have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of such tanks or one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks, and shall otherwise meet the requirements of U.S. EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1 and following. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal and state requirements. b.  All single-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, mobile home parks, or other uses located within a groundwater recharge area and not served by both public water and sewer systems shall be required to have one hundred fifty (150) percent of the minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of the Georgia Department of Public Health Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DPH Manual) Tables MT-1 and MT-2 (included as part of this section in Appendix 1), as determined by the Toombs County Health Department. The minimums set forth in Tables MT-1 and MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the Public Health Manual. Said minimum lot size shall not be in any case less than the minimum lot size specified by any underlying zoning district. The regulations or determination specifying the largest minimum lot size shall apply. c.  All lots shall have a minimum width of one hundred fifty (150) feet, or as specified in any underlying zoning district if stricter (larger), in the area where an approved on-site sewage management system is to be located. d.  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank or other on-site sewage management system unless the Toombs County Health Department first approves the proposed on-site sewage management system installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Public Health Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and the provisions of this section. e.  All new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner except for the construction of mining settling basins. f.  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compact clay having a thickness of one (1) foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service, or Georgia's Environmental Protection Division. (4)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. a.  All new hazardous waste storage, treatment and disposal facilities. b.  New facilities handling hazardous materials regulated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as to require a permit. c.  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins. d.  All new sanitary or other landfills. (h)  Major river corridor protection district regulations. (1)  Findings of fact. Perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least four hundred (400) cubic feet per second are of vital importance to Georgia in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable for habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. These river corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb flood waters. (2)  District delineation. Protected rivers as defined under the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, adopted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Section 12-2-8 of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, includes any perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least four hundred (400) cubic feet per second. The Altamaha River and the Ohoopee River through Toombs County meet this criteria. A protected river corridor and a protective one hundred (100) foot natural vegetative buffer, as defined in Georgia Rule 391-3-16, is hereby established along the entire length of this river(s) within the jurisdiction of Toombs County. The buffer area is measured horizontally from each river bank, if any, within the city jurisdiction. Under the method prescribed by the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, no development or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the protected river corridor and within a one hundred (100) foot buffer of the river bank except for the following permitted uses. (3)  Permitted uses. No development, or construction, or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the one hundred (100) foot buffer from the protected river except for the following uses, as long as they do not impair the long term functions of the protected river or the protected river corridor. In addition, the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity or construction permitted within the river corridor for these acceptable uses. a.  Single-family dwellings, if any underlying zoning district so permits, provided each dwelling is located on a lot with a minimum size as specified by the Toombs County Health Department or the underlying zoning district regulations, but shall be the greater of these requirements; however, in any case the lot for each dwelling shall not be less than two (2) acres, not including any area between the river banks; and provided the septic tank drainfield is located outside of the one hundred (100) foot buffer area. b.  Any residential uses existing or under construction prior to the adoption of these local protection ordinances provided the use has an on-site sewage management construction permit issued by the Toombs County Health Department prior to the date of adoption of these local protection ordinances. c.  Any industrial or commercial uses existing prior to the adoption of these local protection ordinances, providing they do not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and meet all other federal and state environmental rules and regulations. d.  Road and utility crossings, and utility locations if no other location is reasonable, providing the construction of these crossings and uses meet the requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or any other state or local requirements, if stricter, protect the integrity of the buffer area to the extent reasonably possible, and are located as far from the river bank as is reasonably possible. e.  Timber production and harvesting, providing it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission, and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. f.  Agricultural production and management, provided it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission or its successor, and all other state and federal laws and regulations, including those promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture; and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. g.  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of Section 12-2-8 (as amended) of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). h.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. i.  Wastewater treatment. j.  Recreational usage consistent with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. (4)  Prohibited uses. In compliance with the Georgia "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. a.  Facilities or areas used for the handling, receiving, storing, or disposal of hazardous wastes. b.  Hazardous or solid waste landfills. c.  Septic tank drainfields within the one hundred (100) foot buffer area under any circumstance. d.  Septic tanks within the one hundred (100) foot buffer area, except as expressly provided for single-family dwellings which are permitted under and comply with subsection (h)(3)a. (i)  Variances. When due to a particular hardship or extraordinary circumstance of the property involved which is not easily corrected, it is impractical for an owner or developer to comply with all of the requirements of this section, the City of Vidalia shall be authorized to vary such requirements (under its jurisdiction) only to such extent as to provide fairness to the owner or developer and as to not violate the intent and purposes of this section. Such variances shall only be granted in an official public meeting, and the reasons for granting them shall be entered into the minutes of the public meeting. (j)  Violations and penalties. Violation of these provisions, prohibitions, and installation restrictions by any private individual, land owner, builder, remodeler, contractor, licensed electrician, licensed plumber, septic tank dealer or installer, mobile or manufactured home dealer or mover, or developer; or installation and delivery of any utility services by a public or private utility to any property which holds a septic tank system installed against these prohibitions and restrictions, shall be a violation of this section.     Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law. The City of Vidalia may take other actions or remedies as available at law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of provisions of this section. (k)  Court of jurisdiction. The City of Vidalia or the Toombs County Board of Health, as appropriate, may bring complaints of violation of any provision of this section before either the Magistrate Court of Toombs County, the State Court of Toombs County, or the Vidalia Municipal Court, as so desired. (l)  Legal status provisions. Should any subsection or provision of this section be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the section as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (m)  Conflicting ordinances. Whenever the provision of this section and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section, to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this section full force and effect. (n)  Effective date. This section shall take effect and be in force on the date that is enacted and ordained by mayor and council of the City of Vidalia, Georgia. APPENDIX 1MINIMUM LOT SIZING FORON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT 1.  Minimum lot size requirements for these lots utilizing on-site management systems are as follows for single family dwellings including but not limited to: manufactured or mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, etc., and individual lots in subdivisions or mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks. Area requirements for multiple dwellings on a single recorded lot, where not prohibited by local ordinance, must be provided in multiples of the following minimum lot sizes for each dwelling to be constructed on the recorded lot. See Table MT-1 as follows. These minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual For On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in Sections A-F of the DHR Manual. Table MT-1 Minimum (Min) Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum (Max) Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System. Type of Water Supply System Non-Public*(Individual) Public Min Lot Size 43,560 square feet 21,780 square feet Min Lot Width 150 ft. 100 ft. Max Sewage Flow 600 gpad** 1200 gpad  *In this context "Non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. ** gpad= gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 2.  Minimum lot sizing requirements for those lots utilizing on-site sewage management systems are as follows in Table MT-2 for multi-family residential dwellings, all other non-single family dwellings and commercial structures, and this also includes mobile home parks. These minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual For On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in Sections A-F of the DHR Manual. Table MT-2 Minimum (Min) Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum (Max) Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System. Type of Water Supply System Non-Public*(Individual) Public Min Lot Size 43,560 square feet 21,780 square feet Min Lot Width 150 ft. 100 ft. Max Sewage Flow 600 gpad** 1200 gpad  *In this context "Non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. ** gpad= gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. ( Ord. of 6-11-18(1) ) 
Secs. 12-64—12-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COLLECTION OF REFUSE[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Unlawful accumulations, littering, § 9-20 et seq.; spillage from vehicles, §§ 19-9, 19-10. State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq., 40-6-249. 
Sec. 12-70. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:     Brown goods: Such items as household furniture, yard equipment, etc.     Consignee: One (1) person, a family or a group of persons, to whom a refuse container is consigned.     Refuse: Paper, waste, trash, boxes, garbage, bottles, cans and any other debris, but not tree limbs, cuttings or leaves.     Refuse container: One (1) of the containers owned by the city and consigned to the owner, tenant or occupant of a private dwelling house located within the city for the purpose of containing and removing refuse from the private dwelling house of the consignee.     White goods: Household appliances. (Code 1968, § 9-13; Ord. of 6-12-95) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-71. - Refuse containers to be provided by city; responsibility of consignee. (a)  The city shall consign one (1) refuse container to each owner, tenant or occupant of a private dwelling house located in the city; however, only one (1) refuse container shall be issued per family unit or group of persons occupying a private dwelling house, one (1) refuse container shall be issued for each occupied apartment in a duplex or multiple-family building. (b)  Each consignee shall be responsible for such refuse container, shall use reasonable care to prevent such refuse container from being mutilated, abused or damaged, and shall return the refuse container to the city when the consignee vacates such dwelling house. Any person who deliberately mutilates, abuses or damages any refuse container shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (c)  If the polycart provided by the city shall be lost, damaged, or stolen, then it shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant or occupant of the private dwelling or business to pay for the replacement of the polycart. (Code 1968, § 9-14; Ord. of 4-13-92(1)) 
Sec. 12-72. - Placing of refuse containers for collection.     Refuse containers shall be kept in a place selected by the consignee, provided such location selected does not detract from the appearance of the area in which the private dwelling house is located; and wherever possible, the refuse container shall be kept in the rear of the private dwelling house, away from the street on which such private dwelling house fronts. On the day designated by the city as being the pickup day for refuse, each consignee shall be responsible for placing the refuse container adjacent to the street nearest the private dwelling house and used by the city refuse collection vehicle to remove the accumulated refuse. The refuse container shall be placed not less than two (2), nor more than five (5), feet from the curb or road pavement of the street or thoroughfare being used by the city refuse collection vehicle. After the refuse container has been emptied by the city sanitation department, the refuse container shall be removed by each consignee from such street or thoroughfare at the earliest convenience of the consignee; however, under no circumstances shall a refuse container be left adjacent to the street or thoroughfare for more than twelve (12) hours after pickup by the city sanitation department. (Code 1968, § 9-15) 
Sec. 12-73. - Trees, limbs, cuttings and leaves.     The refuse containers shall not be used to contain tree limbs, cuttings or leaves, and any such tree limbs, cuttings or leaves shall be placed on the edge of the street, clearly visible for pickup by the city at such times as are designated for such pickup.     Only yard trimmings generated from normal lawn maintenance will be picked up weekly. Normal lawn maintenance trimmings must be placed by the street and the total amount of yard trimmings shall not exceed ten (10) feet long by five (5) feet wide by four (4) feet high in any one (1) week. Trees and shrubs cannot exceed four (4) inches in diameter and must be cut in lengths not exceeding four (4) feet. (Code 1968, § 9-16; Ord. of 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-74. - Refuse at business establishments. (a)  All business establishments shall deposit cardboard, wooden boxes, paper, trash and other waste or debris to be collected for disposal in the enclosed container provided by the city for this purpose. Boxes shall be cut down or broken down prior to being placed in such containers for disposal. (b)  Containers for business establishments shall be placed as directed by the city sanitation department so that such containers shall be easily accessible to the city refuse collection vehicle. (Code 1968, § 9-17) 
Sec. 12-75. - Charges for collection; use of system required.     All residences and commercial businesses occupied shall pay an amount to defray the cost of their respective garbage collection according to the rate and schedule as may be now or hereafter set and established by the mayor and city council. The charge shall be assessed on a monthly basis against each resident and place of business regardless of whether they elect to utilize the garbage collection service or not. All residence and businesses are hereby prohibited from disposing of garbage and refuse within the city limits except by way of utilizing the authorized garbage disposal containers provided by the city and in accordance with all city ordinances, rules and regulations. (Code 1968, § 9-18; Ord. of 4-13-92(1)) 
Sec. 12-76. - Collections and disposals. (a)  All refuse as defined herein must be placed in the container provided by the city for collection purposes. (b)  The employees of the city sanitation department shall collect the refuse and dispose of it in the approved landfill not less often than once a week. (c)  All such refuse shall be taken to and deposited in such landfill by the employees of the city sanitation department, and it shall be unlawful to otherwise dispose of such refuse. (d)  Brown goods and white goods must either be delivered to the Toombs County Landfill or the Vidalia Recycling Center by the land owner or arrangements made with the city sanitation department for onsite removal. Onsite removal will result in an additional charge. (e)  Any and all debris placed on any city right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of this section, must be removed within ten (10) days or appropriate action will be taken and a penalty may be imposed. (Code 1968, § 9-19; Ord. of 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-77. - Burning trash in city containers.     It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash in city containers. (Code 1968, § 13-19) 
Sec. 12-78. - Waste generated by contractors, tree surgeons and landscapes.     Contractors, tree surgeons and landscapers providing services and work within the city limits shall be required to haul away and dispose of their own debris in an acceptable manner and in accordance with state and federal law and to pay whatever fees are required for disposal of their own debris and garbage related to their business activity. (Ord. of 4-13-92(3), § 9-20; Ord. of 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-79. - Private disposal by landowner.     Construction debris, demolition material and extensive debris from clearing activities exceeding the capacity outlined as acceptable per land owner, per lot and generated by activities undertaken by private property owners require arrangements made with the city sanitation department for removal and will result in additional charges. All landowners disposing of such refuse within the city shall pay for the disposal over and above the limitations outlined in section 12-73 as measured by the city sanitation department and in accordance with the assessments imposed upon disposal by the city sanitation department and county landfill. All disposal will be in accordance with state and federal law. (Ord. of 5-11-92; Ord. of 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-80. - [City to collect, transport, and dispose of solid waste.]     Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary herein, all solid waste generated or accumulated in the incorporated areas of the city shall be collected, transported, and disposed of by the city through its designated agents, employees or contract representatives. No other person shall collect, transport or dispose of any solid waste generated or accumulated in the city except as provided. (1)  Private solid waste contractors, operating within areas approved by the city manager, must comply with this chapter and all applicable ordinances, including licensing and franchising ordinances. (2)  Individual residents may transport their own solid waste to approved disposal sites, provided they comply with all applicable city, state and federal ordinances and laws. Any individual resident who chooses to transport their own solid waste to an approved disposal site will remain liable for any pertinent solid waste fees. (3)  For back door waste collection services for disabled residents or elderly residents with medical hardships, there will be no additional charge with proof of disability or hardship from a licensed medical professional or other proof as deemed by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. of 11-14-11) 
Secs. 12-81—12-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Sec. 12-91. - Drought contingency plan.     If due to severe drought, higher then normal demand, decree from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, or any other emergency situation, the available water supply is deemed insufficient by the mayor and city council, or threatens to be insufficient, to supply the total demand on the municipal water system, the mayor and city council may invoke emergency water shortage response restrictions regulating, limiting, or prohibiting the use of water as follows: (1)  Initial water use restrictions. In the event of an emergency situation requiring the curtailment of potable water use, the following emergency water use restrictions shall apply to all properties connected to the municipal water system: a.  Sprinkling/irrigation of lawns and landscaping shall be prohibited between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. b.  Sprinkling/irrigation of lawns and landscaping shall only be allowed for properties with an even numbered address on even numbered dates within the month and for properties with an odd numbered address on odd numbered dates within the month. c.  This restriction applies to all residential, commercial, government and institutional outdoor irrigation. (2)  Restrictions when subsection (1) is not sufficient. If in the opinion of the mayor and city council, and upon written notification from the city manager, the restrictions contained in subsection (1) are not sufficient, the emergency restrictions shall be imposed for all properties connected to the municipal water system. a.  Sprinkling/irrigation of lawns and landscaping and all other non-essential outdoor water use will be prohibited. b.  Businesses that use outdoor water that is essential in the daily conduct of business, such as commercial car washes, nurseries, commercial power washing, and commercial testing and repair of irrigation systems, will be exempt from these restrictions. (3)  Issuance of additional restrictions. During periods of severe drought or similar situations, the mayor and city council, upon recommendation of the city manager, may make and issue additional regulations and restrictions concerning water use restrictions not inconsistent with this article. (4)  Public announcement. The mayor and city council shall, within twenty-four (24) hours of approving the above water use restrictions, cause such restrictions to be publicly announced by means of broadcasting by stations with a normal operation range covering the city and may cause such announcement to be further published in the local newspaper. The restrictions shall become effective immediately following such announcement. Upon notification from the city manager and following a determination by the mayor and city council that the emergency restrictions are no longer necessary, the mayor and city council shall cause a public announcement declaring the cessation on said restrictions in a like manner. (5)  Inspection and enforcement. Inspection by duly authorized officers bearing proper credentials and identification during such periods of emergency water use restriction shall be permitted for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this article. a.  Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and shall be issued a warning ticket for said violation. b.  For a second violation, water service shall be terminated and, upon correction of the non-conforming condition or activity, a reconnect fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged. c.  For all subsequent violations, water service shall be terminated and, upon correction of the non-conforming condition or activity, a reconnect fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged. (Ord. of 7-9-01) 
Sec. 12-92. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. (a)  Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining groundcover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: (1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; (2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; (3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; (4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; (5)  Watering personal food gardens; (6)  Watering new and replanted plant[s], seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; (7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; (8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; (9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; (10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; (11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; (12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or (13)  Hydroseeding. (b)  Enforcement. (1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in section. (2)  The city shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The county/city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. (3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court/municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. (Ord. of 2-15-11) 
Secs. 12-93—12-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEWER USE ORDINANCE[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 10, 2003, §§ 1.1—15, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as art. VI at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 12-101. - Purpose.     This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for the City of Vidalia and enables the City of Vidalia to comply with all applicable federal and state laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this article are: (1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation; (2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; (3)  To protect both POTW personnel, who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and the general public; (4)  To improve opportunities for reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the POTW; (5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and (6)  To enable the City of Vidalia to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject.     This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
Sec. 12-102. - Applicability.     This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. 
Sec. 12-103. - Administration.     Except as otherwise provided herein, the control authority, as defined in this article, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to, or duties imposed upon, the control authority, may be delegated by the control authority to his/her authorized representative. 
Sec. 12-104. - Abbreviations.     The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand CFR Code of Federal Regulations EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency gpd gallons per day mg/L milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act TSS Total Suspended Solids USC United States Code  
Sec. 12-105. - Definitions.     Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.     Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.     Approval authority. The State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division     Authorized signatory of the user. (1)  If the user is a corporation: a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five (25) million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; (2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively; (3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee; (4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the control authority.     Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20)° Celsius usually expressed as a concentration of milligrams per liter (mg/l).     Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.     City of Vidalia. The City of Vidalia or the City Council of Vidalia or its authorized representative.     Composite sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time, as specified by the control authority.     Control authority. The City of Vidalia; the person(s) authorized by the City of Vidalia to supervise, administer, implement, or otherwise perform activities of the industrial pretreatment program, and who is charged with these duties and responsibilities by this article.     Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative.     Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.     Grab sample. An individual sample collected over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.     Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.     Industrial user. A discharger into the POTW of non-domestic wastewater.     Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal.     May. Discretionary or permissive.     Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. A permit issued to a POTW or other discharger pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.     New source. (1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. (2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. (3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program 1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment intended for use in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.     Non-contact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.     Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the State of Georgia in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of Vidalia's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).     Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental entities.     pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.     Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, or odor.     Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard).     Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement, other than a pretreatment standard, related to pretreatment and imposed on a user.     Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.     Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 12-121.     Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the City of Vidalia. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the City of Vidalia.     Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.     Shall. Mandatory.     Significant industrial user. (1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or (2)  A user that: a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or c.  Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. (3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in [subsection] (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.     Slug load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in this article or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.     Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.     User. A discharger into the POTW.     Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.     The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
Secs. 12-106—12-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 12-121. - Prohibited discharge standards. (a)  General prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. (b)  Specific prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: (1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140)°F (sixty (60)°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; (2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 10.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; (3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than ½ inch in any dimension; (4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; (5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150)°F, or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104)°F (forty (40)°C); (6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; (7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; (8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the control authority; (9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; (10)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations and approved by the control authority; (11)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the control authority; (12)  Sludges, screenings, or other residents from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; (13)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the control authority in a wastewater discharge permit; (14)  Any material into a manhole through its top unless specifically authorized by the control authority.     Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
Sec. 12-122. - Categorical pretreatment standards.     The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. (1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the control authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). (2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the control authority shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). (3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. (4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
Sec. 12-123. - State pretreatment standards.     State pretreatment standards and any other applicable state standards or requirements are hereby incorporated. 
Sec. 12-124. - Local limits.     The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits. Arsenic 1.792 mg/L Cadmium 0.008 mg/L Chromium 17.850 mg/L Copper 0.109 mg/L Cyanide 0.082 mg/L Lead 0.116 mg/L Mercury 0.002 mg/L Nickel 3.340 mg/L Silver 0.019 mg/L Zinc 1.880 mg/L      The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The control authority may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above.     No nonresidential user shall discharge wastewater containing restricted substances into the municipal wastewater system in excess of limitations specified in its wastewater discharge permit, or adopted by resolution by the city. The city shall publish and revise from time to time standards (local limits) for specific restricted substances. These standards shall be developed in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5 and shall implement the objectives of this article. Standards published in accordance with this Section will be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of Section 307(d) of the Act.     The city may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of concentration based limitations. The city may also revise or modify the standards (local limits) as required, or if deemed necessary, comply with the objectives presented in section 12-101 of this article or the general and specific prohibitions in section 12-121 of this article, or to insure compliance with federal, state, or local law. 
Sec. 12-125. - Right of revision.     The control authority reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
Sec. 12-126. - Dilution.     No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on users, which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
Sec. 12-127. - Application of most stringent limitations.     For a discharge regulated by categorical pretreatment standards or other federal, state, or local discharge limitations or requirements, the most stringent limitations and requirements will apply. 
Sec. 12-128. - Deadline for compliance with categorical standards.     Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.     New sources shall install, have in operating condition, and startup all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed ninety (90) days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
Secs. 12-129—12-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 
Sec. 12-141. - Pretreatment facilities.     Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all national pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 12-121 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the control authority, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the control authority for review, and shall be approved by the control authority before such facilities are constructed. The review and/or approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the control authority under the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 12-142. - Additional pretreatment measures. (a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the control authority may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with requirements of this article. (b)  The control authority may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. (c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the control authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the control authority and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at the user's expense. (d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
Sec. 12-143. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans.     At least once every two (2) years the control authority shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The control authority may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: (1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; (2)  Description of stored chemicals; (3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the control authority of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 12-206 of this article. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in section 12-121 of this article; and (4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas; handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations; control of plant site runoff; worker training; building of containment structures or equipment; measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents); and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. The review and/or approval of such plans will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such plans or facilities as necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 12-144. - Hauled wastewater. (a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations approved by the control authority and at such times as are established by the control authority. Such wastes shall not violate division 2 of this article or any other requirements established by the control authority. The control authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. (b)  The control authority shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The control authority may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The control authority also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. (c)  Industrial waste haulers may only discharge loads at locations designated by the control authority. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the control authority. The control authority may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The control authority may require the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. (d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
Secs. 12-145—12-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 
Sec. 12-161. - Wastewater analysis.     When requested by the control authority, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of the user's wastewater. The control authority is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update the information. Failure to provide the information shall be reasonable grounds for denying or terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this article. 
Sec. 12-162. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. (a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the control authority, except a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 12-163 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. (b)  The control authority may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. (c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in divisions 9 through 12 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
Sec. 12-163. - Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections.     Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the control authority for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 12-165 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred fifty (150) days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the control authority. 
Sec. 12-164. - Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections.     Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit that proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 12-165 of this article, must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
Sec. 12-165. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents.     All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The control authority may require a user to submit as part of an application the following information: (1)  The information required by subsection 12-201(b) of this article; (2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; (3)  Number of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; (4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; (5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); (6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, chemical storage areas, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; (7)  Time and duration of discharges; and (8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the control authority to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
Sec. 12-166. - Application signatories and certification.     All wastewater discharge-permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized signatory of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
Sec. 12-167. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions.     The control authority will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the control authority will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The control authority may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
Secs. 12-168—12-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 
Sec. 12-181. - Wastewater discharge permit duration.     Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the control authority. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
Sec. 12-182. - Wastewater discharge permit contents.     Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the control authority to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, protect the public, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. (1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable; c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. (2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; b.  Requirements for the installation and maintenance of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of accidental discharge/slug control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; e.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; f.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and g.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to ensure compliance with this article, and federal and state laws, rules, and regulations. 
Sec. 12-183. - Wastewater discharge permit appeals.     The control authority shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the control authority to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of issuance of the discharge permit. (1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. (2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. (3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. (4)  If the control authority fails to act within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request, the request for reconsideration shall be deemed as denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. (5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Superior Court for Toombs or Montgomery County within one (1) year. 
Sec. 12-184. - Wastewater discharge permit modification.     The control authority may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons: (1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; (2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; (3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; (4)  Information indicating the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, POTW personnel, the public, or the receiving waters; (5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; (6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; (7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; (8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
Sec. 12-185. - Wastewater discharge permit transfer.     Wastewater discharge permits may not be assigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator. 
Sec. 12-186. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation.     The control authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: (1)  Failure to notify the control authority of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; (2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the control authority of changed conditions pursuant to section 12-205 of this article; (3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; (4)  Falsifying self-monitoring or other reports; (5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; (6)  Refusing to allow the control authority timely access to the facility premises and records; (7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; (8)  Failure to pay fines; (9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; (10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; (11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; or (12)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.     Wastewater discharge permits shall be voided upon cessation of operations. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
Sec. 12-187. - Wastewater discharge permit re-issuance.     A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 12-165 of this article, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Sec. 12-188. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. (a)  If another jurisdiction, or user located within another jurisdiction, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the control authority shall enter into an interjurisdictional agreement with the contributing jurisdiction. (b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (a), above, the control authority shall request the following information from the contributing jurisdiction: (1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing jurisdiction; (2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing jurisdiction and discharging to the POTW; and (3)  Such other information as the control authority may deem necessary. (c)  An interjurisdictional agreement, as required by paragraph (a), above, shall contain, at a minimum, the following conditions: (1)  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 12-124 of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City of Vidalia's ordinance and/or local limits; (2)  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; (3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing jurisdiction; which of these activities will be conducted by the control authority; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing jurisdiction and the control authority; (4)  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to provide the control authority with access to all information the contributing jurisdiction obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; (5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing jurisdiction's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; (6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing jurisdiction's discharge; (7)  A provision insuring the control authority access to the facilities of users located within the contributing jurisdiction's boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the control authority; and (8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the interjurisdictional agreement. 
Secs. 12-189—12-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 12-201. - Baseline monitoring reports. (a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. (b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. (1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owner. (2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. (3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. (4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). (5)  Measurement of pollutants. a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the control authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 12-210 of this article. c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 12-211 of this article. (6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized signatory and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. (7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 12-202 of this article. (8)  Signature and certification. All baseline-monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 12-166 of this article. 
Sec. 12-202. - Compliance schedule progress report.     The following conditions shall apply to any schedule required by this article or the control authority: (1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine operation); (2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; (3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the control authority no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and (4)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority. (5)  No compliance schedule shall exceed eighteen (18) months. 
Sec. 12-203. - Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.     Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in section 12-201(b)(4)—(6) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 12-166 of this article. 
Sec. 12-204. - Periodic compliance reports. (a)  All significant industrial user(s) shall, at a frequency determined by the control authority but in no case less than every six (6) months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 12-166 of this article. (b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. (c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the control authority, using the procedures prescribed in sections 12-210 and 12-211 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
Sec. 12-205. - Report of changed conditions.     Each user must notify the control authority of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. (1)  The control authority may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 12-165 of this article. (2)  The control authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 12-167 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 12-184 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. (3)  No user shall implement the planned changed conditions(s) until and unless the control authority has responded to the user's notice. (4)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow changes of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. All users shall promptly notify the control authority in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
Sec. 12-206. - Reports of potential problems. (a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 12-121 of this article), the user shall immediately telephone and notify the control authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. (b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the control authority, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. (c)  Failure to notify the control authority of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a violation of this article. (d)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
Sec. 12-207. - Reports from unpermitted users.     All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports as may be required by the control authority. 
Sec. 12-208. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.     If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the control authority as soon as possible but no later than twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also immediately repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within the time period specified by the control authority but at no time greater than thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user may not be required to resample if the control authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the control authority samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
Sec. 12-209. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. (a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the control authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities (in writing) of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under section 12-205 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 12-201, 12-203, and 12-204 of this article. (b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. (c)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the control authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. (d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. (e)  This reporting provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
Sec. 12-210. - Analytical requirements.     All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
Sec. 12-211. - Sample collection. (a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportioned composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the control authority may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. (b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
Sec. 12-212. - Timing.     Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date post-marked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
Sec. 12-213. - Record keeping.     Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records or information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the control authority, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the U.S. EPA, state, or control authority. 
Secs. 12-214—12-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
Sec. 12-231. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling.     The control authority shall have the right upon presentation of proper credentials to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the control authority ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. (1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the control authority will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. (2)  The control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. (3)  The control authority may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least annually by a certified technician to ensure their accuracy. Calibration records shall be made available to the control authority upon request. (4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the control authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. (5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the control authority access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 12-232. - Search warrants.     If the control authority has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the control authority designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Superior Court of Toombs County or Montgomery County depending on the location of the user. 
Secs. 12-233—12-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 
Sec. 12-241. - Confidential information.     Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the control authority's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
Secs. 12-242—12-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE 
Sec. 12-251. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance.     The control authority shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: (1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; (2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria: 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH; (3)  Any other discharge violation that the control authority believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of City of Vidalia personnel or the general public); (4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the control authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; (5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; (6)  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; (7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or (8)  Any other violation(s) the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Secs. 12-252—12-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
Sec. 12-261. - Notification of violation.     When the control authority finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority shall serve upon a representative of the user, such representative meeting the criteria of authorized signatory, a written notice of violation. Within five (5) days of the receipt of this notice an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof to include specific required actions shall be submitted by the user to the control authority. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the control authority to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
Sec. 12-262. - Consent orders.     The control authority may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 12-264 and 12-265 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
Sec. 12-263. - Show cause hearing.     The control authority may order a user which has violated or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the control authority and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall be served on a representative of the user who meets the criteria of an authorized signatory. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Sec. 12-264. - Compliance orders.     When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing the user to achieve compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a national pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Sec. 12-265. - Cease and desist orders.     When the control authority finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the control authority may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: (1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and (2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.     Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Sec. 12-266. - Administrative fines. (a)  When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed based on per violation, per day. The control authority may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. (b)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of seven and one-half (7½) percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. (c)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the control authority to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the control authority shall convene a hearing on the matter within thirty (30) days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. (d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Sec. 12-267. - Emergency suspensions.     The control authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The control authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. (1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the control authority shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The control authority shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the control authority that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 12-268 of this article are initiated against the user. (2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the control authority within five (5) days.     Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
Sec. 12-268. - Termination of discharge.     Any user that violates the conditions in section 12-186 of this article is subject to discharge termination. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 12-263 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the control authority shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Secs. 12-269—12-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
Sec. 12-281. - Injunctive relief.     When the control authority finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may petition the Superior Court of Toombs or Montgomery County, depending on the location of the user, through the control authority's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The control authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
Sec. 12-282. - Civil penalties. (a)  A user, which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the control authority for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. (b)  The control authority may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages or fines incurred by the control authority. (c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. (d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
Sec. 12-283. - Criminal prosecution. (a)  A user which has willfully or negligently violated any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or both. (b)  A user which has willfully or negligently introduced any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or be subject to imprisonment for one (1) year. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. (c)  A user which knowingly made any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or both. (d)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or both. 
Sec. 12-284. - Remedies nonexclusive.     The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The control authority may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a non-compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the control authority's enforcement response plan. However, the control authority may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. 
Secs. 12-285—12-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION 
Sec. 12-301. - Performance bonds.     The control authority may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City of Vidalia, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the control authority to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
Sec. 12-302. - Liability insurance.     The control authority may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
Sec. 12-303. - Water supply severance.     Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
Sec. 12-304. - Public nuisances.     A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the control authority. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City of Vidalia Code [insert proper citation] governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City of Vidalia for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
Sec. 12-305. - Informant rewards.     The control authority may pay up to [zero dollars ($0.00)] for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the control authority may disperse up to [zero (0) percent] of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed [zero dollars ($0.00)]. 
Sec. 12-306. - Contractor listing.     Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City of Vidalia. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City of Vidalia held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the City of Vidalia. 
Secs. 12-307—12-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 
Sec. 12-321. - Upset. (a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset," means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. (b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c) are met. (c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: (1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; (2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and (3)  The user has submitted the following information to the control authority as soon as possible but no later than twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days: a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. (d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. (e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. (f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
Sec. 12-322. - Prohibited discharge standards.     A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in section 12-121 of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (a) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or (b) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the control authority was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
Sec. 12-323. - Bypass. (a)  For the purposes of this section: (1)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. (2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. (b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. (c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the control authority, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. (2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the control authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards as soon as possible, but no later than twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The control authority may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. (d)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. (2)  The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
Secs. 12-324—12-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Sec. 12-331. - Pretreatment charges and fees.     The control authority may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of the costs of development and administration of the control authority's pretreatment program, which may include: (1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; (2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; (3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; (4)  Fees for filing appeals; and (5)  Other fees as the control authority may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the control authority. 
Sec. 12-332. - Severability.     If any provision of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continued in full force and effect. 
Sec. 12-333. - Conflicts.     All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this article, are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. 
Sec. 12-334. - Effective date.     This article shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage, approval and publication, as provided by law. 
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; damaging fire apparatus, § 8-3; false fire alarms, § 8-4; abandoned refrigerators, § 9-5; gambling in pool room, § 10-33. 
Sec. 13-1. - Misdemeanors under state law.     Any act the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state is hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful and a violation of this Code of Ordinances if committed within the city; provided however, that the penalty for such act if committed within the city shall not exceed the penalty prescribed in section 1-8. (Code 1968, § 13-8) 
Sec. 13-2. - Resisting, interfering with officer.     It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any officer making an arrest in the city or in any way to molest or interfere with a person or property in the custody of an arresting officer in the city. (Code 1968, § 13-12) State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 13-3. - Confiscation of vehicles used for illegal transportation of liquor or drugs. (a)  Seizure, condemnation: All vehicles and other conveyances in the state which are used in conveying, removing, concealing or storing any liquors or beverages, or any narcotic drugs, the transportation, possession or storing of which is in violation of the laws of the state, are hereby declared to be contraband, and the same may be seized in the city and condemned by any police officer of the city. (b)  Provisions applicable to alcoholic beverages: In the event the vehicle or conveyance seized was being used in conveying, removing, concealing or storing alcoholic beverages in violation of subsection (a), the proceedings for condemnation, destruction and sale of such vehicle or other conveyance shall be governed by the provisions of state law. (c)  Provisions applicable to narcotic drugs: In the event the vehicle or conveyance seized was being used in conveying, removing, concealing or storing narcotic drugs in violation of subsection (a), the proceedings for condemnation, destruction and sale of such vehicle or conveyance shall be governed by the provisions of state law. (Code 1968, § 13-6) 
Sec. 13-4. - Loitering or prowling. (a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when such person is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. (b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. (c)  A person committing the offense of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of an offense against the city. (Code 1968, § 13-7) State Law reference— Loitering, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 13-5. - Interfering with or theft of utility service.     It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without authority damage or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to a person engaged in the manufacture or sale of public services, light, power, gas, water or communication, or intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from duly registering the quantity of services supplied, or in any way interfere with the proper action or just registration, or without the consent of such utility, or otherwise intentionally and without authority use or cause to be used, without the consent of such utility any services manufactured or distributed by such utility. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person receiving the benefit of the services without proper charge as a result of such tampering with a meter or such diversion of services shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. (Code 1968, § 13-7.1; Ord. of 8-8-88, § 1) State Law reference— Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 13-6. - Slot machines and similar devices.     The operation of slot machines and similar coin-operated devices is prohibited; provided however, that this prohibition shall not apply to the operation of coin-operated vending machines, nor to coin-operated music machines; provided further, that this prohibition shall not apply to the operation of pinball machines for amusement only. (Code 1968, § 13-14) State Law reference— Gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq. 
Sec. 13-7. - Weapons—Discharge in residential areas or business district.     It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms or other weapons, which include BB guns and pellet guns, within residential areas or the business districts. (Code 1968, § 13-15.1) State Law reference— Discharge of firearms on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge near street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103. 
Sec. 13-8. - Same—Taken from prisoners; custody, disposal.     All weapons taken from city prisoners shall be turned over to the chief of police to hold, to determine whether or not the weapons were legally seized and held, and after one month's period of time the weapons shall be escheated and sold at public outcry for the benefit of the city. (Code 1968, § 13-16) 
Sec. 13-9. - Wires strung on poles, clearance prescribed.     It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any new wires or replace any poles for telephone, telegraph or electric wires within the city which shall have a clearance of less than twenty-five (25) feet from the lowest wire on such poles to the ground. (Code 1968, § 13-18) 
Sec. 13-10. - Vandalism. (a)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Legal guardian means a person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor child by a court, but the term does not include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor under O.C.G.A. tit. 15, ch. 11, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq.), the juvenile circuit court.     Minor means a person who has obtained eleven (11) years of age but who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.     Parent includes the lawful mother or father of an unemancipated minor, whether by birth or adoption.     Property includes any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible personalty.     Vandalism means: (1)  The willful or malicious damaging or defacing, within the corporate limits of the city, of another person's real or personal property, without the other person's consent; or (2)  The willful or malicious entry into, or the obtaining control over any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft of another person, without the other person's consent. (b)  Prohibition: All acts of vandalism are hereby declared to be unlawful. (c)  Issuance of complaint: The city or any person whose property is damaged may make a complaint for the enforcement of this section, provided the proceedings are brought in the name of the city. (d)  Penalties: (1)  Any person found guilty of an act of vandalism as defined in this section shall be subject to penalties as follows: a.  A fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00); or b.  A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one year; and c.  Court costs. (2)  The conditions of a conditional discharge may include that the defendant: a.  Not violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal ordinance of any jurisdiction; b.  Periodically report to and appear in person before such person or agency as directed by the court for the purpose of reviewing the defendant's fulfillment of the conditions of the conditional discharge; c.  Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training; d.  Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, professional counseling, or treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism; e.  Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; f.  If the defendant is an unemancipated minor, reside with his parent or legal guardian or in a foster home; attend school; attend a nonresidential program for youth, or contribute to his own support at home or in a foster home. (3)  When a court orders restitution or reparation as a part of a conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of conditional discharge may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional period. (4)  When a charge is filed charging a violation of a condition imposed for conditional discharge, the court: a.  May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of such offender's fleeing the jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a summons. The issuance of a warrant for failure to answer a summons shall stay the sentence of conditional discharge until the final determination of the charge. The term of conditional discharge shall not expire if the hearing date is after the date previously fixed for expiration. b.  Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing. c.  Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of confrontation, cross examination and representation by counsel. The city has the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the preponderance of the evidence. d.  Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the offender unless such failure is due to his willful refusal to pay. e.  May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on the motion of the city or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to all parties and a hearing. (5)  If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may extend the time, with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of the initial penalty. (6)  A judgment revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final appealable order. (e)  Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender: The parent or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition or restitution imposed by a court upon an unemancipated minor for violation of this section, if the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further if the parent or legal guardian has been made a party defendant in all enforcement proceeding against the unemancipated minor for violation of this section and shall be served with all citations, summons, complaints, notice, and other documents required to be served on the unemancipated minor defendant. (Ord. of 8-13-90, § 5) 
Sec. 13-11. - Prisoners—Accepting bond to secure appearance.     No member of the police force except the chief or the chief's designee thereof shall be permitted to accept a bond for the appearance of a prisoner confined in the city jail. (Code 1968, § 13-9) 
Sec. 13-12. - Same—Permitting release from city jail.     No member of the police force except the chief or assistant chief thereof shall be permitted to release a prisoner from the city jail, whether the release be with or without bond to secure the prisoner's appearance. (Code 1968, § 13-10) 
Sec. 13-13. - Disorderly conduct. (a)  The term "disorderly conduct" shall mean the commission of such words, acts and conduct upon public property, upon private property that is open to the general public, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which under ordinary circumstances will naturally tend to disturb the public peace, tranquility or decorum, scandalize the community, or shock the public sense of morality. Any person who engages in an act of disorderly conduct shall be guilty of an offense against the city. (b)  For purposes of this section, the following specific acts and conduct shall be deemed a violation of this section: (1)  Fighting by two or more persons to the disturbance of the public tranquility; (2)  Use of obscene, vulgar, opprobrious or abusive language, without provocation, which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to another person in the presence of the speaker, tend to provoke violent resentment; that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; (3)  Being and appearing in an intoxicated condition which is outwardly made manifest by boisterousness; by indecent condition or act such as to offend sentiments of delicacy and modesty universally recognized in civilized society; or by loud, vulgar, profane, opprobrious, abusive or unbecoming language, which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; (4)  Any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, parade or procession; (5)  Obstruction of any highway, road, street, sidewalk, passage or parking area in such a way as to render it impassable without reasonable inconvenience or hazard and the failure or refusal to remove such obstruction upon being lawfully commanded to do so by a police officer; (6)  Engaging in boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing acts after receiving oral warning from a police officer that such activities have caused complaint or annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. (c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the peaceful assembly of citizens in a lawful manner, the free exercise of protected speech, nor shall the mere possibility of disorder justify the exclusion of persons otherwise entitled to be present. (Ord. of 11-29-05; Ord. of 6-11-12) 
Sec. 13-14. - Disorderly house. (a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. (b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. (Ord. of 11-29-05) 
Sec. 13-15. - Identity theft prevention. (1)  Short title. This section shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program. (2)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. (3)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: (Other than "city" and "personal identifying information", definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR § 681.2.)     City means the City of Vidalia.     Covered account means: (i)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks.     Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore.     Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies.     Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor.     Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority.     Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association.     Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth.     Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.     Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. (4)  Findings. (a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. (b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and sewer. (c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: None. (d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, or making changes to an existing account have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. (e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. (f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 1.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 2.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 3.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. (5)  Process of establishing a covered account. (a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer. This includes a valid drivers' license or valid government ID and social security number along with date of birth. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. (b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. (6)  Access to covered account information. (a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. (b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the IT manager on a regular basis. (c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. (d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. (7)  Credit card payments. In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. (8)  Sources and types of red flags. All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: (a)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 1.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 2.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 3.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 4.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 5.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. (b)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 1.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: i.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 2.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 3.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 4.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 5.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 6.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 7.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 8.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 9.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. (c)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 1.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 2.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 3.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 4.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 5.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 6.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. (d)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. (9)  Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. (a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 1.  Contact the customer; 2.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: i.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or ii.  Close the account; 3.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 4.  Notify a debt collector within twenty-four (24) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 5.  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; 6.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect [to] an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 1.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 2.  Deny the application for the new account; 3.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 4.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (10)  Updating the program. The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: (a)  The city's experiences with identity theft; (b)  Updates in methods of identity theft; (c)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; (d)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and (e)  Updates in service provider arrangements. (11)  Program administration. The finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. (a)  The finance director will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 1.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 2.  Service provider arrangements; 3.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 4.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. (b)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. (12)  Outside service providers. In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more covered accounts the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. of 10-28-08, § 1) 
Sec. 13-16. - Treatment of address discrepancies. (1)  Short title. [This section shall be known as the] treatment of address discrepancies. (2)  Purpose. Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. (3)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:     Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. (See 16 CFR § 681.1(b).)     City means City of Vidalia.     Policy. In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one (1) or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: (a)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 1.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 2.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 3.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or (b)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. (5)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. (a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 1.  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 2.  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 3.  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. (b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. (6)  Methods of confirming consumer addresses. The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one (1) or more of the following methods: (a)  Verifying the address with the consumer; (b)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; (c)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or (d)  Using other reasonable processes. (Ord. of 10-28-08, § 2) 
Sec. 13-17. - Indecent, evocative or provocative bodily exposure and dress in public. (a)  Title. The title of this section shall be "An Ordinance Prohibiting Indecent, Evocative or Provocative Bodily Exposure or Dress in Public." (b)  Definitions.     The term "public place" as used in this section shall mean any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access.     The term "evocative" as used in this section shall mean any display of any portion of the body which is normally covered by undergarments or clothing designed and intended to be worn as undergarments which convey an image that is lewd, indecent or sexually titillating to a person of ordinary and reasonable sensibilities.     The term "provocative" as used in this section shall mean any display of any portion of the body which is normally covered by undergarments or clothing designed and intended to be worn as undergarments which conveys an image that is lewd, indecent to a person of ordinary and reasonable sensibilities or is intended to convey membership in identifiable gangs which have been previously associated with unlawful acts.     The term "hips" as used in this section shall be defined as the crest of the ileum of the wearer.     The term "undergarment" as used in this section shall mean clothing worn at or below the waist and next to the skin that are designed, intended, marketed and sold to wear under the clothes to cover a person's intimate parts.     The term "pants" as used in this section shall mean a usually loose-fitting outer garment for the lower part of the body, having individual leg portions that reach typically to the ankle but sometimes to any of various other points from the upper leg down. (c)  Indecent, evocative or provocative acts prohibited. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place or on public place or on public property wearing pants below the hips which expose the person's skin or undergarments. (2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place or on public property wearing his or her undergarments which are designed and intended to cover a person's intimate parts, or to display skin under which said undergarments are designed and intended to cover. (d)  Penalties. (1)  A conviction for violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and up to twenty (20) hours of community service. (2)  Any violation of this section shall be cited by the law enforcement officer by issuance of a citation and summons to appear before the municipal court of the City of Vidalia, or in the case of a juvenile, the juvenile court of Toombs County, Georgia. (3)  This section shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for an arrest or for search of the person cited. (e)  Repeal of conflicting ordinances and effective date. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby waived to the extent of any such conflict. (Ord. of 8-25-09(3)) 
Sec. 13-18. - Penalty for failure of person cited to appear.     The willful failure of any person to appear in accordance with the written promise contained on the citation and complaint and served upon such person shall constitute an offense which shall be punishable by fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by confinement in jail for a period not to exceed three (3) days. ( Ord. of 5-12-14 ) 
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 14-1—14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION BOARD 
Sec. 14-20. - Creation; purpose.     A recreation board is created. (Code 1968, § 2-115) 
Sec. 14-21. - Membership.     The recreation board shall consist of seven (7) members who reside within the city. (Code 1968, § 2-116) 
Sec. 14-22. - Appointment, terms of members.     The term of office of the members of the recreation board shall be for five (5) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that for and at the pleasure of the council any member of the board may be dismissed from office and a new member appointed to fill the unexpired term, and except that the members of such board first appointed shall be for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually thereafter. The members of the recreation board shall be appointed by the council, and vacancies shall be filled by the council by appointment for the unexpired term. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms on the board. (Code 1968, § 2-117) 
Sec. 14-23. - Organization.     Immediately after their appointment, the members of the recreation board shall meet and organize by electing one of their members president and such other officers as may be necessary. (Code 1968, § 2-118) 
Sec. 14-24. - Adoption of bylaws, rules and regulations.     The recreation board shall have power to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the conduct of its affairs and for the proper conduct of recreation in the city. (Code 1968, § 2-119) 
Sec. 14-25. - Advisory function.     The recreation board shall advise the city on public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities. (Code 1968, § 2-120) 
Chapter 15 - PERSONNEL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— List of city employees to be kept, § 2-43(5). State Law reference— Authority to establish merit system, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority to establish compensation and benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; joint municipal retirement system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; authority to provide group hospitalization and life insurance, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2(4), 36-35-4(a). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 15-1—15-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OLD AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Social security coverage, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq. 
Sec. 15-100. - Statement of purpose.     It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal social security administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this article, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act, the state enabling act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Code 1968, § 2-79) 
Sec. 15-101. - Execution of agreements, amendments thereto.     The mayor or other chief executive officer of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state employees' retirement system for coverage of such employees and officials as provided for in this article. (Code 1968, § 2-80) 
Sec. 15-102. - Withholding from salaries and wages authorized.     Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in this article are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. (Code 1968, § 2-81) 
Sec. 15-103. - Appropriations from general funds.     There shall be appropriated from the city general fund such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal law and regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in this article. Such funds shall be paid over to the state employees' retirement system in accordance with regulations established by such agency. (Code 1968, § 2-82) 
Sec. 15-104. - Records; reports.     The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. (Code 1968, § 2-83) 
Sec. 15-105. - Exclusion from provisions.     There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal law or regulation. (Code 1968, § 2-84) 
Chapter 16 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Land clearing and tree protection, § 6-81 et seq.; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 16-1—16-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2 et seq. 
Sec. 16-20. - Creation, purpose.     In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the municipality which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the city planning commission, hereinafter referred to as "the planning commission," is hereby created and established as authorized by law. (Code 1968, § 2-95) 
Sec. 16-21. - Scope of article.     The planning commission provided for herein shall be organized and empowered as provided in this article. (Code 1968, § 2-96) 
Sec. 16-22. - Appointment, term of members; filling vacancies.     The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the council. The terms of the members shall be for four (4) years, except that in the appointment of the first planning commission under the terms of this article, two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one year each, the third and fourth members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years each, the fifth member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, and the sixth and seventh members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years each. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the council. (Code 1968, § 2-97) 
Sec. 16-23. - Removal of members.     The council shall have the authority to remove any member of the planning commission for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing. (Code 1968, § 2-98) 
Sec. 16-24. - Compensation, expenses of members.     All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. (Code 1968, § 2-99) 
Sec. 16-25. - Organization.     The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members, whose term of office shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection; and shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. (Code 1968, § 2-100) 
Sec. 16-26. - Public nature of meetings, records.     All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be public. (Code 1968, § 2-101) 
Sec. 16-27. - Expenditures.     Expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the council. (Code 1968, § 2-103) 
Sec. 16-28. - Powers, duties and responsibilities.     The planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the law. (Code 1968, § 2-104) 
Chapter 17 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Land clearing and tree protection, § 6-81 et seq.; restoration of surface after excavating for sewer installation, § 12-56(k). State Law reference— Municipal authority as to improvement of streets and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 17-1. - Building numbering—Grid system; responsibility for compliance. (a)  All buildings in the city shall be numbered in accordance with the following plan: A grid system will be used. Grid numbers for all streets running north and south shall commence at the Seaboard Coastline Railroad. On all streets running south, odd numbers will be on the west side (or right side) and even numbers on the east side (or left side). On all streets running north, odd numbers will be on the east side (or right side) and even numbers on the west side (or left side). Grid numbers for all streets running east and west shall commence at Church Street and McIntosh Street. On all streets running east, odd numbers will be on the south side (or right side) and even numbers will be on the north side (or left side). On all streets running west, odd numbers will be on the north side (or right side) and even numbers will be on the south side (or left side). (b)  On all occupied buildings the occupant will be responsible, for compliance herewith; on unoccupied buildings the owner will be responsible for compliance herewith. (Ord. of 9-9-85, § 1) 
Sec. 17-2. - Same—Grid maps, indexed plats; assignment of numbers.     The city manager shall keep on file at all times a grid map showing the proper grid numbers for each street within the city. Also, filed with the grid map will be indexed copies of plats of all city streets, showing proper grid number and proper building number, along with proper number assignment for each vacant site. Upon request by an owner or occupant, the city manager or designee will assign a number to any building which does not have a number. (Ord. of 9-9-85, § 2) 
Sec. 17-3. - Same—Failure to correct number.     If any existing building number is found to be incorrect, based on the plan outlined in section 17-2, any person responsible for the numbering of the building fails to correct the number after receiving written notice to do so from the city clerk, penalty shall be imposed as outlined in section 17-5. (Ord. of 9-9-85, § 3) 
Sec. 17-4. - Same—Altering grid map.     The grid map shall be altered or modified from time to time when necessary in order to meet the requirements of newly developed areas and maintain a uniform and congruous numbering system. These changes will include the opening and closing, widening and narrowing of grids when appropriate. (Ord. of 9-9-85, § 4) 
Sec. 17-5. - Same—Placement of numbers. (a)  It shall be the duty of the occupant, if the property is occupied, or the owner if the property is not occupied, of every building in the city to have placed thereon, or adjacent thereto, in a place visible from the street, figures at least two and one-half (2½) inches high, showing the number of the building. (b)  Any person failing to so number any building occupied or owned by such person, if after receiving notice to do so from the clerk, shall continue in the failure to so number each building, shall be fined one dollar ($1.00) for each day during or on which a failure to so number continues. (Ord. of 9-9-85, § 5) 
Sec. 17-6. - Street lighting—Adoption of code.     Streets lights will be installed based upon a determination of need by the council. 
Secs. 17-7—17-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-10. - Obstruction—General.     It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city, except in a rare case to be decided upon by the council, where there is apparent necessity for such obstruction, temporarily; and in such case only after obtaining the permission and consent of the council, assembled in regular session, which shall prescribe the nature of and restrictions upon such obstruction, and the extent of its duration. (Code 1968, § 15-1) Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 19. State Law reference— Authority as to permitting obstructions on public ways, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10. 
Sec. 17-11. - Same—Visibility at intersections. (a)  Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain on the property owned or occupied by such person, or on the public right-of-way adjacent thereto, any sign, billboard or advertising matter, tree, shrub, structure or other matter or object, which obstructs the lateral view of vehicular traffic at intersections within the triangle formed by measuring fifteen (15) feet along the curblines from the intersection of such curblines and then connecting in a straight line such fifteen (15) foot distance points, and such obstruction shall be set back from the intersection such distance as not to be in such triangle. (b)  Abatement: In the event an obstruction is permitted or maintained in violation of subsection (a), and the violator fails or refuses to abate the condition within five (5) days after written request by the city to do so, the city shall have the power and authority to abate the condition. In such case, if the obstruction is within the public right-of-way, the abatement thereof by the city may be accomplished by the city summarily; however, if the obstruction exists on private property, the request shall be to appear at a hearing before the judge of the municipal court to be held five (5) days after the date of mailing such notice to the violator, and if the owner or occupant of the property, as the case may be, does not appear at such hearing the matter may proceed ex parte and the condition ordered abated by the city at the property owner's expense. (c)  Costs: The cost of abatement shall be collected in the same manner as unpaid taxes are collected. (Code 1968, § 15-4) Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 19. 
Sec. 17-12. - Encroachments. (a)  Permit required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, build upon, connect to or otherwise project over any public street, right-of-way or sidewalk in the city, any awning, post, or similar obstruction or encroachment of any kind, without first obtaining permission to do so from the mayor and council; provided, however, when anyone desires to encroach upon or otherwise access a public right-of-way, the public works director may approve such request by issuance of a permit for construction or access to a residential dwelling only subject to the homeowner meeting any requirements as may be specified by the public works director. (b)  Manner of doing work: In case such permission is granted, such encroachment shall be built or erected according to specifications and instructions of the council, as to the kind, material and manner of erection. (c)  Authority to require removal: If at any time the council shall, in its discretion, deem it necessary or advisable for any cause whatever, to remove any such encroachment already erected upon or projecting over any public street or sidewalk in the city, the city shall have the power and authority, under the direction of the council, to cause such encroachment to be removed, after giving oral or written notice to the owner of such encroachment. If such owner is unknown, or inaccessible for any reason, or is absent from the city, then this notice shall be served upon the owner of the land adjacent thereto, or to the tenant in possession. (d)  Noncompliance with notice: In case such encroachment is not removed within five (5) days from the giving of such notice, the city authorities shall remove the same at the expense of the owner, such expense to be collected from the parties owning the same, by execution and levy, as in case of collection of taxes for the city. (e)  Violations and penalties: Any person guilty of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8, and in addition thereto, the encroachment built or erected in violation of this section may be summarily removed under the direction and instruction of the council, with or without notice to the person so erecting same, and the expense of removing the same shall be collected as provided in subsection (d). (Code 1968, § 15-3; Ord. of 4-13-92(4)) 
Sec. 17-13. - Applications for franchises; easements; rights-of-way.     All applications for franchises, easements or rights-of-way, in, on, over or under the streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes and other public places in the city shall be in writing, directed to the council, and shall state the nature of the franchise, easement or right-of-way, and the purpose for which it is to be used. (Code 1968, § 15-2) 
Sec. 17-14. - Excavations. (a)  Permit required: It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation of any kind on, across or under any street, alley or sidewalk in the city for any purpose whatsoever, without first filing with the city clerk an application for a permit so to do, and without first having been granted such permit by the council. (b)  Supervision: Such interference with the streets, alleys and sidewalks in such manner shall be done only under the supervision and direction of the public works director and with such department head's approval. (c)  Fee: Any person obtaining a permit for such work as described in subsection (a) hereof, and performing such work under the supervision of the department head, shall pay to the city clerk a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for such permit and supervision. (d)  Bond, other security: In addition to the fee for permit provided for in subsection (c), before a permit is issued the person requesting the same shall deposit with the city cash or a surety bond in an amount sufficient to assure the restoration of the surface of the street, alley or sidewalk upon completion of the work contemplated by the permittee. (Code 1968, § 15-5) 
Sec. 17-15. - Pavement of sidewalks by abutting owners. (a)  Authority: All sidewalks to be paved by the abutting property owners shall be paved according to regulations prescribed by the council. (b)  Permit requirements: Each permit therefor shall be signed by the public works director. Any person who may contemplate laying sidewalk paving shall apply to the council as aforesaid, and obtain the required permit for laying such paving. (c)  Permit restrictions: Such permit shall stipulate the manner in which the paving shall be laid, the location of same on the sidewalk, and the kind of material to be used. (d)  Materials, location, etc.: The council shall require all paving on any particular sidewalk in the city to be constructed of the same kind of material throughout the whole length of the street on both sides, and shall require that all paving shall have the same relative location and shall be laid in the same manner throughout the whole length of such street, it being the purpose of this section to have each street paved in a uniform manner its whole length with respect to material used, location, manner in which laid, and width of paving. (Code 1968, § 15-6) 
Sec. 17-16. - Driving on streets being paved. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any kind of vehicle over, upon or across any of the streets of the city during the period of paving thereof, until the public works director shall open the same to traffic. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive over any of the curbing or to remove any of the barricades from such streets. (Code 1968, § 15-8) Cross reference— Authority to close streets and divert traffic, § 19-6; using closed streets, § 19-8. 
Sec. 17-17. - Displays of merchandise, wares, similar items.     It shall be unlawful to display for advertising or sale, merchandise, goods, wares, furniture, hardware, groceries, clothing, peanut roasters, popcorn machines, merchandise dispensers, and similar items and articles on any street or sidewalk of the city. (Code 1968, § 15-10) Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 
Sec. 17-18. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 13, 2016 , repealed § 17-18, which pertained to carts, stands for sale of merchandise and derived from the Code of 1968, § 15-11. 
Sec. 17-19. - Materials delivered on street, removal required.     All persons having material delivered to them on the street shall remove or cause the same to be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after same has been deposited on the street; all rubbish shall be removed and the street left in the same condition as before such delivery. (Code 1968, § 15-12) 
Secs. 17-20, 17-21. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 23, 2004 repealed §§ 17-20, 17-21 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to parades and causing crowds to assemble as enacted by Code 1968, § 15-14. 
Sec. 17-22. - Skating on pavement.     It shall be unlawful for any person to skate on any street or the sidewalk in the central business district within the city. (Code 1968, § 15-15) Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 19. 
Sec. 17-23. - Posting bills, posters on poles, posts or signs.     It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills, posters, or like material of any kind or description upon any poles, posts, signs, or the like located upon any highway, street, or alley right-of-way within the city. (Code 1968, § 15-16) Cross reference— Littering by handbills, § 10-45. 
Sec. 17-24. - Improvements for curbing, gutters, and drainage. (a)  Determination to make by city council: The city council shall upon its own motion, discuss and determine whether, when and what improvements, extensions, etc., shall be made to the streets, curbing, gutters and on-site drainage system in the city. (b)  Determination to make on petition of property owners: If the owner of a majority of the lineal feet of the frontage of the land liable to assessment, or a numerical majority of the owners of such property as would be liable to assessment for such improvement shall petition the city council for such improvement, then such request shall be placed upon the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the council. At such meeting, the council shall consider such presentations for and against such request as interested parties shall care to present and upon consideration of these presentations, the council shall determine whether or not such improvements shall be made. (c)  Determination and levy of assessments: The amount of assessment for paving, curb, and gutter assessed against each piece of real estate shall be determined by the city, and in no case shall such assessment be greater than a pro rata share of one-half (½) of the total cost of such improvements, one-fourth (¼) to be assessed against the abutting property owner on one (1) side of the street and one-fourth (¼) against the owner on the opposite side of the street. (d)  Due date and payment of assessments: Assessments in conformity with such appraisal and apportionment as confirmed by the city council shall be payable to the city in cash within fifteen (15) days from the date of billing from the city clerk, without interest. (Code 1968, § 15-17; Ord. of 10-10-87) 
Secs. 17-25—17-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PICKETING 
Sec. 17-31. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Picket or picketing, means to make a public display or demonstration of sentiment for or against a person or cause, including protesting, street preaching or other demonstrations, which may include the distribution of leaflets or handbills, the display of signs and any oral communication or speech, which may involve an effort to persuade or influence, including all expressive and symbolic conduct, whether active or passive.     Sidewalk means that portion of the street right-of-way which is designated for the use of pedestrians and may be paved or unpaved and shall include easements and rights-of-way.     Street means the entire width between property or right-of-way of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter or right, for the purposes of vehicular traffic, including that portion that is known as the shoulder of the roadway and the curb. The terms "highway and street" and their cognates are synonymous as used herein. (Ord. of 11-23-04) 
Sec. 17-32. - Notice of intent to picket. (a)  Notification required for groups of seven (7) or more. The organizer of a picket that the organizer knows, or should reasonably know, that will be by a group of seven (7) or more individuals shall give notice of intent to picket to the chief of police or designee at least forty-eight (48) hours before the beginning of the picket. The notice of intent to picket shall include the following information: (1)  The name, address and contact telephone number for the organizer of the picket; (2)  The name, address and contact telephone number of the person giving notice of intent to picket if different from the organizer; (3)  The name of the organization or group sponsoring the picket; (4)  The location where the picket is to take place; (5)  The date and time the picket will begin and end; and (6)  The anticipated number of participants, and the basis on which this estimate is made. (b)  Receipt of notification. Upon notice of intent to picket given in accordance with subsection (a), the chief of police or designee shall immediately issue a receipt of notice. The receipt shall contain all information stated in the notice. The organizer of a picket shall be responsible for maintaining the receipt, and shall present it when so required by a law enforcement officer or other city official. (c)  Notification required for group of less than seven (7). The organizer of a picket that the organizer knows, or should reasonably know, that will be by a group of less than seven (7) shall give notice of intent to picket to the chief of police or designee at least forty-eight (48) hours before the beginning of the picket. The notice of intent to picket shall include the following information: (1)  The name, address and contact telephone number for the organizer of the picket; (2)  The name, address and contact telephone number of the person giving notice of intent to picket if different from the organizer; (3)  The name of the organization or group sponsoring the picket; (4)  The location where the picket is to take place; (5)  The date and time the picket will begin and end; and (6)  The anticipated number of participants, and the basis on which this estimate is made. Receipt of notification or permit will not be required for crowd of less than seven (7). (4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. (Ord. of 11-23-04) 
Sec. 17-33. - Picketing regulations. (a)  Picketing may be conducted on public sidewalks, any other city-controlled park, or other city-owned areas normally used or reserved for pedestrian movement, including easements and rights of way, and shall not be conducted on the portion of the public roadway used primarily for vehicular traffic or within four (4) feet of any paved street surface or the back side of curb and gutter. (b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), picketing may not be conducted: (1)  At any city controlled property, or other city-controlled park during a festival that has been permitted at that particular property or when that property has been otherwise reserved for private use; (This does not prohibit hand to hand free literature distribution.) (2)  On a median strip or within four (4) feet of any paved street surface or the back side of curb and gutter; and (3)  At a location directed, focused, or targeted at a particular private residence. (c)  Picketing shall not disrupt, block, obstruct or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic into any driveway, pedestrian entrance, or other access to buildings, which abut the public sidewalks. (d)  Written or printed placards or signs, flags, or banners carried by individuals engaged in picketing shall be of such a size and/or carried on the sidewalks or other city-owned areas, as to allow safe and unobstructed passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The staff or pole on which a sign, flag, or banner may be carried shall be made of corrugated material, plastic, or wood, and shall not exceed forty (40) inches in length and shall not be made of metal or metal alloy. If made of wood, the staff or pole shall be no greater than three-fourths (¾) inch in diameter at any point. A staff or pole must be blunt at both ends. (e)  If more than one (1) group of picketers desire to picket at the same time at or near the same location, law enforcement officers may, without regard to the purpose or content of the message, assign each group a place to picket in order to preserve the public peace. Members of a group shall not enter an area assigned to another group. Priority of location shall be based upon which group of picketers arrived first. (f)  Spectators of pickets shall not physically interfere with individuals engaged in picketing. Picketers and spectators of pickets shall not speak fighting words or threats that would tend to provoke a reasonable person to a breach of the peace. (g)  Picketers and picketing shall be subject to all applicable local, state and federal laws including, but not limited to: (1)  The city's noise ordinance; § 9-1 (2)  The city's handbill ordinance; § 10-40 and § 17-23 (3)  Obstructing justice; § 13-2 and O.C.G.A. 16-10-24 (4)  Weapons; O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120—16-11-134 (5)  Disorderly conduct; O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. (h)  Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a command to disperse in accordance with Georgia General Statute in the event of a riot or disorderly conduct by an assemblage of three (3) or more persons. (i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. (Ord. of 11-23-04) 
Secs. 17-34—17-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES 
Sec. 17-39. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Appeals official means the city manager, or his designee who shall be a deputy or assistant city manager.     Demonstration means a public display of sentiment for or against a person or cause, including protesting.     Festival means a concern, fair, exhibit, promotion, community event, block party, or similar event.     Parade means an athletic event, march, ceremony, pageant, procession or other similar activity consisting of persons, animals, vehicles or things, or any combination thereof, that disrupts the normal flow of traffic upon any public street. A funeral procession is not a parade.     Permit official means the person or persons designated by the city manager as being responsible for issuing permits under this article. The city manager may designate different persons as the permit official for different categories of permitted events and for different facilities or locations.     Public assembly means: (a)  A festival or demonstration which is reasonably anticipated to obstruct the normal flow of traffic upon any public street and that is collected together in one (1) place; and (b)  A festival on city school, city-owned property or any other city-controlled park. (Ord. of 11-23-04) 
Sec. 17-40. - Public assembly and parade permits. (a)  Permit required. No public assembly or parade is permitted unless a permit allowing such activity has been obtained pursuant to this section. (b)  Permit application. An application for a public assembly or parade permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the permit official at least thirty (30) days before the commencement of the event. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the permit official shall consider an application that is filed less than thirty (30) days before the commencement of the proposed event where the purpose of such event is a spontaneous response to a current event, or where other good and compelling causes are shown.     The application must contain the following: (1)  The name, address, and telephone number for the person in charge of the proposed event and the name of the organization with which that person is affiliated or on whose behalf the person is applying (collectively "Applicant"); (2)  The name, address, and telephone number for an individual who shall be designated as the responsible planner and on-site manager for the event; (3)  The date, time, place, and route of the proposed event, including the location and time that the event will begin to assemble and disband, and any requested street closings; (4)  The anticipated number of persons and vehicles, and the basis on which this estimate is made; (5)  A list of the number and type of animals that will be at the event and all necessary health certificates for such animals; (6)  Such other information, attachments, and submissions that are requested on the application form; and (7)  Payment of application fee is not required. (c)  Permitting criteria. An application may be denied for any of the following reasons: (1)  The application is not fully completed and executed; (2)  The applicant has not tendered required user fees, indemnification agreements, insurance certificates, or security deposits within times prescribed; (3)  The application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; (4)  The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued; (5)  The applicant has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event; (6)  The applicant has previously permitted a violation or has violated the terms of a public assembly or parade permit issued to or on behalf o the applicant; (7)  The applicant has on prior occasions damaged city property and has not paid in full for such damage; (8)  A fully executed prior application for the same time and place has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple simultaneous events; (9)  The proposed event would conflict with previously planned programs organized, conducted, or sponsored by the city and previously scheduled at or near the same time and place; (10)  The proposed event would present an unreasonable danger to the public health or safety; (11)  The proposed event would substantially or unnecessarily interfere with traffic; (12)  The event would likely interfere with the movement of emergency equipment and police protection in areas contiguous or in the vicinity of the event; (13)  There would not, at the time of the event, be sufficient law enforcement and traffic control officers to adequately protect participants and non-participants from traffic related hazards in light of the other demands for police protection at the time of the proposed event; (14)  The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable licensure requirements, ordinances or regulations concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services; (15)  The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law; (16)  For non-First Amendment protected public assemblies or parades, the following criteria shall also apply: a.  the cultural and/or educational significance of the event; b.  the extent to which the event contributes to the economic revitalization and business development of the city; c.  the impact and/or cost of the event to city support services; d.  the impact of the event to the public health, safety and welfare; e.  the impact of the event on business and resident populations within or adjacent to the proposed event site; f.  the evaluation of any previous event produced by the event organizer with regard to planning, quality, public safety and payment of invoices; g.  the frequency and timing of the event or similar events. Unless subject to 17-40(c)(16), nothing in this section shall authorize the permit official to deny a permit based upon political, social or religious grounds or reasons, or based upon the content of the views expressed. The permit official may attach reasonable conditions to any permit approval. (d)  Costs and fees. The applicant shall be responsible for hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement officers, or reimbursing the city for the costs of providing on-duty law enforcement officers, to appropriately police street closures. For festivals, the applicant shall be additionally responsible for hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement officers, or reimbursing the city for the costs of providing on-duty law enforcement officers, to provide internal festival security and for hiring and paying necessary emergency medical technicians. The permit official, in consultation with the Vidalia Police Department, shall determine the number of officers needed to appropriately police street closures and for internal security, and the number of emergency medical technicians needed, and the time when such services shall commence and end, taking into consideration the following: (1)  The proposed location of the special event or route of the parade; (2)  The time of day that the public assembly or parade is to take place; (3)  The date and day of the week proposed; (4)  The general traffic conditions in the area requested, both vehicular and pedestrian. Special attention is given to the rerouting of the vehicles or pedestrians normally using the requested area; (5)  The number of marked and unmarked intersections along the route requested, together with the traffic control devices present; (6)  If traffic must be completely rerouted from the area, then the number of marked and unmarked intersections and the traffic control devices are to be taken into consideration; (7)  The estimated number of participants; (8)  The estimated number of viewers; (9)  The nature, composition, format and configuration of the special event or parade; (10)  The anticipated weather conditions; (11)  The estimated time for the special event or parade; (12)  For festivals, whether alcohol will be served, live music offered, or retail sales stations provided, and the number and location of alcohol service stands, music stages, and retail stands. In addition, for festivals located within the city limits, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the costs of providing street and sidewalk cleaning, trash receptacle placement, trash removal, and trash disposal. Not withstanding the foregoing, the city may provide the services required by this subsection at no cost or at a reduced cost, to the applicant should the city desire to provide such support to the public assembly or parade. Such action is not a waiver of a regulatory requirement based upon political, social, or religious grounds or reasons, or based upon the content of the views expressed, but instead is an affirmative act of city association or speech. (e)  Time and notice of decision. The permit official shall approve or deny an application within ten (10) days of receipt. A notice of denial shall clearly set forth the grounds upon which the permit was denied and, where feasible, shall contain a proposal for measures by which the applicant may cure any defects in the application or otherwise procure a permit. Where an application is denied because the proposed event would conflict with another event that has or will be approved, the permit official shall propose an alternative place, if available for the same time, or an alternative time, if available for the same place. (f)  Appeals. (1)  An applicant may appeal the denial of an application in writing within ten (10) days after notice of the denial has been received. Within five (5) business days, or such longer period of time agreed to by the applicant, the appeals official shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing on whether to issue the permit or uphold the denial. The applicant shall have the right to present evidence at said hearing. The decision to issue or uphold the denial shall be based solely on the approval criteria set forth in this section. The appeals official shall render a decision on the appeal within five (5) business days after the date of the hearing. In the event that the purpose of the proposed event is a spontaneous response to a current event, or where other good and compelling causes are shown, the appeals official shall reasonably attempt to conduct the hearing and render a decision on the appeal as expeditiously as is practicable. (2)  The decision of the appeals official is subject to review in the Superior Court Toombs County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari for review shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within thirty (30) days after the Applicant has received notice of the decision. Unless good cause exists to contest a petition for writ of certiorari, the city shall stipulate to certiorari no later than five (5) business days after the petitioner requests such a stipulation. The city shall transmit the record to the court no later than five (5) business days after receiving the order allowing certiorari. Notwithstanding the provisions of any local rule of the reviewing court that allows for a longer period of time, the city shall file its brief within fifteen (15) days after it is served with the petitioner's brief. If the petitioner serves his or her brief by mail, the city shall add three (3) days to this time limit. If the local rule is subsequently amended to provide for a shorter time period for the filing of any brief, then the shorter time period shall control. The Georgia Rules of Appellate Procedure shall govern an appeal by an applicant from the Superior Court of Toombs County. (g)  [Violation]. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section or to violate any term or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this section. (Ord. of 11-23-04) 
Sec. 17-41. - Same—Regulations. (a)  It shall be unlawful to unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with a public assembly or parade, or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in the public assembly or parade. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to drive between vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. (c)  Spectators of a public assembly or parade and persons attending or participating in a public assembly or parade picketing shall be subject to all applicable local, state and federal laws including, but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127 (weapons). (d)  Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a command to disperse in accordance with Georgia Statute in the event of a riot or disorderly conduct by an assemblage of three (3) or more persons. (Ord. of 11-23-04) 
Secs. 17-42—17-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 25, 2009(1) did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article IV, §§ 17-50—17-145, is at the discretion of the editor. 
DIVISION 1. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 17-50. - Intent and purpose.     The City of Vidalia (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, § 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(10), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-51. - Scope.     The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-52. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.     City means the City of Vidalia, Georgia.     Codified ordinances means the Codified Ordinances of the City of Vidalia, Georgia.     Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way.     Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way.     Director means the city manager of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, or his or her designee.     Emergency means a sudden or unforeseen occurrence involving a clear and immediate danger to life, health, property or interruption of utility services that requires immediate attention.     Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city.     Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one (1) of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations.     FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto.     Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code.     Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities.     Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two (2) or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public.     Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city.     Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof.     Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than fifty (50) percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than fifty (50) percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert.     Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will he actively using the facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities.     Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Secs. 17-53—17-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 
Sec. 17-61. - Registration required.     Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article derives, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-62. - Registration procedure.     The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: (1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; (2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; (3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; (4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-63. - Incomplete registration.     If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-64. - Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way.     Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-65. - Facilities in place without registration.     Beginning one (1) year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Secs. 17-66—17-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
Sec. 17-71. - Permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the department of administration in accordance with the terms of this article. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-72. - Permit procedure.     Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the department of administration. The written application shall include the following: (1)  The name and address of the utility; (2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; (3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; (4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s); (5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; (6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; (7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and (8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-73. - Permit fees.     Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-74. - Issuance of permit.     If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit: (1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; (2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and (3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-75. - Emergency situations. (a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonable practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. (b)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-76. - Effective period of permit. (a)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. (b)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: (1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; (2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; (3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or (4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-77. - Cancellation for cause.     If a utility fails to cure a default within twenty (20) working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: (1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days to cure its breach. (2)  If the utility fails to cure within fifteen (15) calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-78. - Expiration of permit.     If work is not begun within six (6) months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Secs. 17-79—17-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 
Sec. 17-91. - Utility accommodation manual adopted.     The "Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards, 2009", including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix A ("Permit Forms and supporting Documents"), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-92. - Protection of traffic and roadway.     Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-93. - Grading.     If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-94. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation.     Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wircholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-95. - Locate request required prior to blasting or excavation.     As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended. No utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given forty-eight (48) hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Secs. 17-96—17-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 
Sec. 17-101. - Utility responsible for cost of repair.     Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-102. - Utility liable for damage.     A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that ensued such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after twenty (20) working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Secs. 17-103—17-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTION 
Sec. 17-111. - Construction site availability.     The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-112. - Cessation or correction of work.     At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-113. - Notification of completion.     When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Secs. 17-114—17-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS 
Sec. 17-121. - Additional permits required.     The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way may obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Secs. 17-122—17-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 
Sec. 17-131. - Penalties.     Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Secs. 17-132—17-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - OTHER PROVISIONS 
Sec. 17-141. - Severability.     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-142. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers.     The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the city Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-143. - Compliance.     No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-144. - Appeal of administrative decisions.     All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this article. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Sec. 17-145. - Article headings.     Article headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article. (Ord. of 8-25-09(1)) 
Chapter 18 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 18-1—18-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 
Sec. 18-11. - Chief of police designated city marshal.     The chief of police of the city shall act as the city marshal for the purposes of this article. (Code 1968, § 17-1) Cross reference— Duties of city marshal as prescribed, § 2-6. 
Sec. 18-12. - Sales of real property for unpaid taxes—Advertising.     Sales of real property for unpaid taxes shall be made pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359 or other applicable state law. (Code 1968, § 17-4) 
Sec. 18-13. - Same—Location.     Sales for unpaid taxes shall be held on the steps of the city hall. (Code 1968, § 17-5) 
Sec. 18-14. - Same—Conduct.     Sales of real estate for unpaid taxes shall be held on the first Tuesdays as are sheriff's sales and as prescribed by general law; sales of personal property shall be as prescribed by general law. (Code 1968, § 17-6) State Law reference— Manner of making sale, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359. 
Sec. 18-15. - Same—Execution of tax deeds.     The city marshal shall have the power and authority to execute tax deeds in the name of and for the city after having advertised and sold to the highest and best bidder as prescribed by law, fees being the same as allowed sheriffs for levies and sales. (Code 1968, § 17-7) 
Sec. 18-16. - Same—Possession of property purchased by city.     The marshal shall take possession of property sold for taxes when the redemption period has passed and the property has become the property of the city. (Code 1968, § 17-8) 
Sec. 18-17. - Delinquency interest.     Taxes owed to the city shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. For the purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. (Code 1968, § 17-9B; Ord. of 8-8-83) Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4. 
Sec. 18-18. - Delinquency penalty.     In any instance in which any person wilfully fails to pay, within ninety (90) days of the date when due, any ad valorem tax, except where the tax is five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less on homestead property as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 5, art. 2, pt. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40 et seq.), owed the local government, such person shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of tax due and not paid on or before the time prescribed by law, together with interest as specified by law. (Code 1968, § 17-9A; Ord. of 8-8-83) 
Secs. 18-19—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— An ordinance of August 25, 2009(4) amended article III in its entirety, which previously pertained to lodging tax and derived from an ordinance of December 9, 1991, §§ 1—9, 11, 12, and an ordinance of May 9, 2005. 
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows:     City: The City of Vidalia and, variously, the incorporated territory of Toombs/Montgomery County, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq.     City clerk: The duly appointed city clerk of the city or his designee.     Due date: The twentieth (20th) day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed.     Estimated tax liability: The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel.     Folio: Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment.     Guest room: Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use.     Hotel: Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Such facilities are required to be licensed, or to pay a busines or occupation tax to the city. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint.     Lodging provider: Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations.     Monthly period: The calendar months of any year.     Occupancy: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room.     Occupant: Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise.     Permanent resident: Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than thirty (30) continuous days next preceding such date.     Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax.     Rent: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction there from whatsoever.     Tax: The tax on occupants imposed by this ordinance, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq., specifically § 48-13-51(a)(3). (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-32. - Tax rate.     There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight (8) percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 18-34. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4); Ord. of 6-8-15(2) ) 
Sec. 18-33. - Collection of tax by lodging provider.     Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of eight (8) percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 18-34. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately; and must remit to the city any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4); Ord. of 6-8-15(3) ) 
Sec. 18-34. - Exceptions.     No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-35. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority.     Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date that this ordinance becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-36. - Determination generally; returns; payments. (a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth (20th) day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the failure is for one (1) month or less; and an additional five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent or twenty-five dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. (c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten (10) days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. (d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia commissioner of revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. (e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be assessed. (f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in any three (3) consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than fifty (50) percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth (20th) day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth (20th) day of the succeeding month. (g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than thirty (30) days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than twelve (12) consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than one hundred (100) percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten (10) days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one (1) percent per month. (h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three (3) percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-37. - Deficiency determinations. (a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 18-36. (c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. (d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth (20th) day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-38. - Determination if no return made. (a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subection 18-37(c). (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 18-36. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-39. - Collection of tax by city. (a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. (c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. (e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-40. - Administration of article; record keeping. (a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. (b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. (c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. (d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-41. - Violations.     Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 18-33 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 18-36, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Sec. 18-42. - Effective date.     This article and the tax levied hereby shall become effective upon its adoption by the mayor and council of the city. (Ord. of 8-25-09(4)) 
Chapter 19 - TRAFFIC[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Obstructing streets, § 17-10; visibility at intersections to be unobstructed, § 17-11; merchandise carts on streets, § 17-18; provisions pertaining to parades, § 17-20; skating on pavement, § 17-22. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 19-1. - Adoption of state law by reference. (a)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372, and O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, containing definitions, and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road," are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if recited herein. (b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1968, § 12-88; Ord. of 12-13-82) 
Sec. 19-2. - Scope, purpose of provisions.     This chapter is adopted in the interest of public safety and convenience and is designed to promote the general peace, health, safety, welfare and good government of the city. (Code 1968, § 12-2) 
Sec. 19-3. - Authority of police.     The police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and the rules adopted hereunder. Subject to the provisions hereof, it shall be the duty of the police department to direct and control traffic of vehicles and pedestrians. (Code 1968, § 12-6) 
Sec. 19-4. - Direction of traffic by voice, hand or mechanical signal.     Traffic shall be directed by officers of the police department by voice, hand or mechanical signal or shall be directed by automatic signal; but such officers or signal shall not prevent anyone from proceeding or standing in the manner required or permitted by law. In case of a fire or other emergency, or in case of a parade or other concourse of people, traffic may be directed as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of any ordinance. (Code 1968, § 12-7) 
Sec. 19-5. - Temporary regulations authorized.     In cases where the traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested, or upon occasions of parades, or at theaters, churches, or schools, or any public gathering or assemblage at any park, building or public place, the police may make temporary rules regulating the traffic, and any person who violates such regulations, after having been warned of such temporary traffic regulations, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. (Code 1968, § 12-13) 
Sec. 19-6. - Authority to close streets, divert traffic.     The police shall have authority, in the interest of public safety or convenience, temporarily to close any street, alley or portion of the same to vehicular or foot traffic or divert such traffic therefrom. (Code 1968, § 12-16) Cross reference— Driving on streets being paved, § 17-16. 
Sec. 19-7. - Parades and processions. (a)  Permission for all parades and processions must be obtained as provided in section 17-20. (b)  No vehicle shall be driven through a parade or procession except with the permission of a police officer in attendance. (Code 1968, § 12-14) 
Sec. 19-8. - Using closed streets.     Whenever any street, alley, or sidewalk, or any portion thereof, is closed by order of the city authorities, whether the closing thereof is for repairs, improvements, protection against danger, or for any other purpose, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter, cross or travel upon the portion so closed except by permission of the authorities closing the same. (Code 1968, § 12-17) Cross reference— Driving on streets being paved, § 17-16. 
Sec. 19-9. - Spillage from vehicles—Generally.     It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to haul trash, refuse, ashes, dirt, sand, gravel, stone, coal, brick, steel shavings or other material, in such a manner as to cause such material to be scattered over any street of the city. (Code 1968, § 12-138) Cross reference— Littering, § 9-20 et seq.; collection of refuse, § 12-70 et seq. 
Sec. 19-10. - Same—Remedial requirements. (a)  Every operator of an automobile, truck or trailer, containing or hauling any property including trash of any type or description within the city shall secure such property in such a manner as to keep such property or trash from falling from the vehicle. (b)  Every covered-body vehicle shall have its load secured by closing the rear doors to such vehicle. All operators of open-bodied vehicles, which are vehicles designed in such a manner that the cargo area is not completely enclosed (to include the top, sides, front, rear and floor), shall cover and secure the load with a tarpaulin or other similar cover that will secure the load in such a manner that the load will not fall or be blown from the vehicle. (c)  All vehicles used to haul equipment or property which will not fall or be blown from such vehicle while such vehicle is under way are hereby excluded. Examples of excluded loads are building supplies such as lumber and bricks, automobiles and earth-moving equipment, as long as such loads are secured and will not fall or be blown from the hauling vehicle. (d)  Vehicles hauling gravel, sand and trash are included. (Code 1968, § 12-80) Cross reference— Littering, § 9-20 et seq.; collection of refuse, § 12-70 et seq. 
Sec. 19-11. - Investigation of accidents.     In case of an accident the police department, if it deems the public interest so requires, shall cause an investigation to be made and shall give proper and sufficient notice of the time and place of holding such investigation. The department shall tabulate all data, statistics, and other pertinent information obtained through such investigation and make reports of the same to the city council with its recommendation as to means and methods whereby such accidents may be averted or minimized. (Code 1968, § 12-36) 
Sec. 19-12. - Ratification of existing signs, signals, markings and devices.     All of the existing traffic control signs, signals, markings and devices erected and maintained throughout the city pursuant to lawful directions of the council from time to time, are hereby ratified and confirmed as fully as if they were erected, installed and maintained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Code 1968, § 12-49) 
Sec. 19-13. - Vehicle equipment generally.     It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on the streets of the city which does not comply in all respects with O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq., relating to equipment of vehicles. (Code 1968, § 12-71) 
Sec. 19-14. - Speed limit—Generally.     Except as otherwise provided in section 12-15 et seq., and in the absence of signs indicating a greater or lesser permissible speed, within a business district as such district is fixed and defined by the zoning regulations of the city now in effect or hereafter adopted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the city at a greater rate of speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour; or in a residential district fixed and defined as provided above, at a greater rate of speed than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. (Code 1968, § 12-91) State Law reference— State speed limit in urban and residence districts, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181. 
Sec. 19-15. - Same—On-system streets.     Based on engineering and traffic investigation, when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, the following maximum speed limits shall be in effect upon the designated streets or parts of streets: LOCATION   FROM    TO LENGTH SPEED State route 15 M.P. 18.57 S. city limits M.P. 19.34 Pinecrest St. 0.77 mi. 45 mph State route 15 Jackson St. M.P. 19.34 Pinecrest St. M.P. 20.60 First St. 1.26 mis. 35 mph State route 15 First St. M.P. 20.60 Jackson St. M.P. 21.86 Darby Drive 1.26 mis. 35 mph State route 15 M.P. 21.86 Darby Drive M.P. 22.19 Sunset Drive 0.33 mi. 45 mph State route 15 M.P. 22.19 Sunset Drive M.P. 22.45 W. city limits 0.26 mi. 55 mph State route 30 M.P. 4.76 E. city limits M.P. 4.20 0.56 mi. 55 mph State route 30 M.P. 4.20 M.P. 2.63 Broadfoot Blvd. 1.57 mis. 45 mph State route 30 M.P. 2.63 Broadfoot Blvd. M.P. 1.85 Jackson St. 0.78 mi. 35 mph State route 130 M.P. 2.86 NW city limits M.P. 4.17 Ninth St. 1.31 mis. 45 mph State route 130 Adams St. M.P. 4.17 Ninth St. M.P. 5.05 First St. 0.88 mi. 35 mph State route 130 M.P. 4.87 First St. M.P. 5.08 Pine St. 0.21 mi. 35 mph State route 130 M.P. 5.08 Montgomery St. M.P. 5.26 McIntosh St. 0.18 mi. 35 mph State route 130 McIntosh St. M.P. 5.26 Pine St. M.P. 5.63 S.R. 292 0.37 mi. 35 mph State route 130 M.P. 5.63 S.R. 292 M.P. 6.73 Calhoun St. 1.10 mis. 35 mph State route 130 M.P. 6.73 Calhoun St. M.P. 7.44 NE city limits 0.71 mi. 45 mph State route 292 M.P. 0.00 Toombs Co. line M.P. 0.62 Todd St. 0.62 mi. 50 mph State route 292 M.P. 0.62 Todd St. M.P. 1.51 Orange St. 0.89 mi. 40 mph State route 292 M.P. 1.51 Orange St. M.P. 2.97 Broadfoot Blvd. 1.46 mis. 35 mph State route 292 M.P. 2.97 Broadfoot Blvd. M.P. 4.18 Stockyard Rd. 1.21 mis. 45 mph State route 292 M.P. 4.18 Stockyard Rd. M.P. 4.99 E. city limits 0.81 mi. 55 mph State route 297 M.P. 0.00 S.R. 292 M.P. 0.73 Tommine Drive 0.73 mi. 35 mph State route 297 M.P. 0.75 Tommine Drive M.P. 1.57 N. city limits 0.90 mi. 45 mph  SCHOOL ZONE LOCATION   FROM   TO LENGTH TIME SPEED State route 130 M.P. 4.85 W. Third St. M.P. 5.05 First St. 0.20 mi. 7:30 a.m. 8:30 a.m. 2:30 p.m. 3:30 p.m. 25 mph State route 292 Vidalia H.S. M.P. 0.73 Lowery Place M.P. 1.20 Piggly Wiggly 0.47 mi. 7:30 a.m. 8:30 a.m. 2:30 p.m. 3:30 p.m. 30 mph State route 292 J.D. Dickerson Elementary School M.P. 2.57 Symonds M.P. 2.81 Jefferson St. 0.24 mi. 7:30 a.m. 8:30 a.m. 2:30 p.m. 3:30 p.m. 25 mph  (Code 1968, § 12-93; Ord. of 10-12-87(1)) State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 19-16. - Same—Off-system streets.     Based on engineering and traffic investigation, when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, the following maximum speed limits shall be in effect upon the designated streets or parts of streets: LOCATION   FROM   TO LENGTH SPEED Aimwell Rd. City limits Cheney Dr. 1.20 mis. 45 mph Broadfoot Blvd. Fifth St. SR 292 0.90 mi. 30 mph Church St. Dogwood Dr. Church St. 1.25 mis. 30 mph Clyde Blvd. N. Maple Dr. Laurel Dr. 0.90 mi. 30 mph Donovan St. SR 292 Orange St. 0.63 mi. 25 mph Durden St. Pinecrest Dr. SR 30 0.63 mi. 30 mph Estroff Dr. SR 15 Aimwell Rd.  0.553 mi. 35 mph Green St. Pinecrest Dr. SR 30 0.71 mi. 30 mph Maple Dr. Laurel Dr. SR 30 0.62 mi. 30 mph McIntosh St. First St. Pine St. 0.21 mi. 30 mph Meadows Lane Broadfoot Blvd. Maple Dr. 0.70 mi. 30 mph Mosley St. Pinecrest Dr. SR 30 0.66 mi. 30 mph N. Maple Dr. Aimwell Rd. Clyde Blvd. 0.40 mi. 30 mph Old Vidalia- Lyons Rd. N. Main St. SR 292 0.43 mi. 35 mph Orange St. Pine St. SR 292 0.40 mi. 35 mph Oxley Blvd. SR 292 SR 292 1.25 mis. 35 mph Peachtree St. Orange St. McIntosh St. 0.47 mi. 30 mph Pinecrest Dr. SR 15 SR 15 0.66 mi. 30 mph Slayton St. Cheney Dr. SR 30 0.65 mi. 35 mph S. Maple Dr. Aimwell Rd. Clyde Blvd. 0.45 mi. 30 mph Thompson Pond Rd. SR 292 Cadillac Dr. 0.30 mi. 35 mph Thompson Pond Rd. Cadillac Dr. City limits 0.80 mi. 45 mph Walters Dr. Halway Broadfoot Blvd. 0.50 mi. 30 mph Washington St. Main St. SR 292 0.45 mi. 30 mph Winona St. Smith St. SR 30 0.60 mi. 30 mph  SCHOOL ZONE LOCATION FROM TO TIME LENGTH SPEED Slayton St. 1,000 ft. N of Cheney Dr. Fifth St. 7:30 a.m.—8:30 a.m. 2:30 p.m.—3:30 p.m. 0.20 mi. 25 mph  (Ord. of 10-12-87(2)) State Law reference— Authority to establish speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(10). 
Sec. 19-17. - "U" turns.     It shall be unlawful to turn a vehicle on a street, so as to proceed in the opposite direction, commonly known as making a "U" turn, at any intersection at which a traffic-control signal is in place or at any other intersection or place where signs have been erected by the police department prohibiting such turns. (Code 1968, § 12-114) State Law reference— U-turns, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-121. 
Sec. 19-18. - No thru trucks.     It shall be unlawful for any truck and/or truck and trailer with over six (6) wheels to drive thru the following designated area except for the purpose of delivering or receiving product or materials within the area defined as being bordered on the north from South Main Street to the north side of Highway 280 on the south and from the west side of Leader Street on the west to the east side of Jackson Street on the east. All said trucks otherwise passing through this designated area shall be in violation of said section and may be fined up to one hundred ten dollars and thirty-six cents ($110.36), plus the cost of any and all repairs for damages caused by said truck passing through said area. (Ord. of 8-28-01; Ord. of 9-10-09(2)) 
Secs. 19-19—19-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading, App. A, art. XX. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 19-30. - Duty to remove disabled or stalled vehicle.     Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled upon a street or when, because of damage or other reason, it cannot be moved by its own power and consequently blocks the street or interferes with the use of same by other vehicles, it shall be the duty of its owner or operator to remove the same, by towing or otherwise within a reasonable time. (Code 1968, § 12-154) 
Sec. 19-31. - Vehicles left on city parking lots to be towed away at owner's expense.     Any vehicle not in operating condition and without proper license and stickers left on city parking lots over twenty-four (24) hours will be towed away at the owner's expense. (Code 1968, § 12-154.1) 
Sec. 19-32. - Authority of police to remove illegally stopped vehicles. (a)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street in violation of any of the provisions of this article such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of such highway. (b)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (Code 1968, § 12-155) Cross reference— Abandoned vehicles, § 9-40 et seq. State Law reference— Authority to remove illegally stopped vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206. 
Sec. 19-33. - Regulations at specific locations.     The city council may from time to time regulate, restrict or prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles on specified streets or parts of streets or in specified areas. Signs or markings shall be installed and maintained giving notice of such regulations, restrictions and prohibitions, and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with the directions of any such sign or marking. (Code 1968, § 12-157) 
Sec. 19-34. - Standing, parking in front of public buildings.     When appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, no vehicle shall be permitted to park or stand in front of the entrance of any theater, church, office building, post office or other building in which a large number of people are accustomed to gather, except for the purpose of stopping to take on or discharge passengers or merchandise. (Code 1968, § 12-158) 
Sec. 19-35. - Parking in alleys.     Vehicles shall not park in public alleys; provided however, that vehicles may park in public alleys not longer than necessary to load and unload, and when so parked, such vehicles shall stand as close as possible to one side of such alley in order to permit other vehicles to traverse such alley. Alley shall not be blocked while unloading for more than two (2) hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. (Code 1968, § 12-159; Ord. of 3-27-02) 
Sec. 19-36. - Diagonal parking restrictions.     For the purpose of this section, any motor vehicle allowed to park diagonally in the city, shall not have an overall length of more than two hundred twenty-two (222) inches. (Code 1968, § 12-161) 
Sec. 19-37. - Maximum parking time limit.     It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor or other vehicle on any street in the city and leave it so parked for a period of time longer than twelve (12) hours. (Code 1968, § 12-162) 
Sec. 19-38. - Manner of loading, unloading freight, merchandise.     When practicable, merchandise and freight shall be discharged and loaded from the side of the vehicle nearest the curb. When such handling is impracticable because of the size or weight of the merchandise or freight, the vehicle may back to the curb but it shall not stand at any angle which will interfere with the operation of other vehicles. (Code 1968, § 12-163) 
Sec. 19-39. - Loading, unloading at safety zones.     Nothing contained in this chapter nor any rule of the chief of police shall be deemed to prohibit a vehicle from parking at the curb of any street while taking on or discharging passengers, freight or merchandise, but no vehicle shall be parked, nor shall take on or discharge merchandise or passengers, between a safety zone and the curb nearest thereto at any time. (Code 1968, § 12-164) 
Sec. 19-40. - Parking for sale of wares, merchandise from vehicles.     There shall not be conducted from any truck, motor vehicle, wagon, trailer or other similar type of conveyances, any merchandise business on the streets of the city within a business district, as defined herein, except with special permission from the council, in writing. (Code 1968, § 12-165) 
Sec. 19-41. - Using streets, sidewalks to repair or store vehicles.     It shall be unlawful for any person operating and maintaining a garage in the city for the purpose of repairing or storing motor vehicles to use any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks for the purpose of parking such motor vehicles or for the purpose of washing, painting or repairing them. (Code 1968, § 12-166) 
Sec. 19-42. - Boarding, alighting from vehicles.     So far as practicable, all persons shall alight from vehicles and board the same upon the side nearest to the curb. (Code 1968, § 12-167) 
Sec. 19-43. - Truck tractors in residence district.     It shall be unlawful to operate or park any truck tractor in any residence district, except for the purposes of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street or parked on such street for not more than the minimum distance or time necessary the purpose. (Code 1968, § 12-156(c); Ord. of 10-12-87(3)) 
Secs. 19-44—19-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING ZONES 
Sec. 19-50. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed herein:     Holiday: The Fourth of July, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving, and any other day declared a holiday by the council.     Operator: Any individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or in actual physical control of a vehicle.     Parking space: Any space laid out, marked off and established under the provisions of this ordinance for individual vehicle parking in any parking zone.     Parking zone: The parking zones named, designated and established pursuant to this ordinance. (Code 1968, § 12-178; Ord. of 10-21-85; Ord. of 3-27-02(2)) Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-51. - Designation of parking zones.     The council shall have the authority to designate streets or parts of streets in the city as parking zones and to erect and maintain appropriate signs or other devices giving notice of such designation. When such signs or other devices have been erected or installed, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to disobey the directions thereof. (Code 1968, § 12-179; Ord. of 10-21-85) 
Sec. 19-52. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance of March 27, 2002, repealed section 19-52 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to designation of two hour parking zones as adopted by Code 1968, § 12-180, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 19-53. - Designation of parking spaces.     The chief of police is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in the two-hour parking zones designated as provided in section 19-51, such parking spaces to be designated as described in section 19-51. (Code 1968, § 12-181; Ord. of 10-21-85; Ord. of 6-2-03(2)) 
Sec. 19-54. - Parking to be diagonal unless otherwise provided.     Parking spaces shall be diagonal to the curb in all parking areas, unless such areas have been designated and appropriately signposted or otherwise marked for diagonal parking. (Code 1968, § 12-182; Ord. of 10-21-85; Ord. of 3-27-02(2)) 
Sec. 19-55. - Days, hours of two hour parking zones.     Two (2) hour parking shall be in effect every day between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. (Ord. of 6-2-03(2)) 
Sec. 19-56. - Violations enumerated.     In addition to the other violations of this division specified herein, it shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to do any of the following: (1)  Overtime parking: To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by, such person, to be parked in any parking space beyond the period of lawful parking time established for such space in this division; (2)  Parking across lines, markings: To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated such lines of marking; (3)  Defacing, tampering with: To deface, damage, tamper with or destroy, or impair the usefulness of, any parking sign installed under the provisions of this division. (Code 1968, § 12-184; Ord. of 10-21-85; Ord. of 3-27-02(2)) 
Sec. 19-57. - Penalties. (a)  Generally: Any person guilty of any violation of this division shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00) for the first offense, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the second offense, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the third or additional offense in a twelve-month period. (b)  Summons; issuance, effect: When any police officer finds any vehicle parked in any parking space in any parking zone in violation of the provisions of this division, such officer shall issue a summons to the operator of the vehicle requiring the operator to appear at the next session of the court to answer the charge of violating this division, which summons shall be served personally upon the operator of the vehicle if such operator is present. If the operator is not present, the summons shall be attached to and left on the vehicle. Such summons shall also contain notice to the operator that such operator may be relieved of the charge of violation of this division by payment of a fine as defined in section (a) above. Nothing in this section would limit the officer's ability to issue a warning where deemed appropriate. (c)  Effect of multiple violations: In the event any person shall be guilty of three (3) or more violations of this division within any thirty (30) day period of time, then such person for such third or later violation shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1968, § 12-185; Ord. of 10-21-85, § 12-185; Ord. of 3-27-02(2); Res. of 6-2-03(2)) 
Sec. 19-58. - Enforcement of provisions.     It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this division. (Code 1968, § 12-186; Ord. of 10-21-85) 
Sec. 19-59. - Reservation of powers to city.     Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the council from providing for bus stops, taxicab stands, loading and unloading spaces, limited or restricted parking spaces, or no-parking spaces within any parking zones. (Code 1968, § 12-187; Ord. of 10-21-85) 
Sec. 19-60. - Erasing marking; penalty fixed. (a)  Any person who shall attempt to evade or evades the parking regulations of the city by erasing any marking placed on any portion of any motor vehicle for the purpose of hindering or preventing city authorities from ascertaining the length of time such vehicle has been parked shall be guilty of a violation of this section and upon conviction shall be fined the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) and/or imprisoned for fifteen (15) days. (b)  Any person who shall remove such person's vehicle from one public parking place to another for the purpose of hindering or preventing the proper city authorities from enforcing the city's parking regulations shall likewise be guilty of a violation of this section and upon conviction shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) and/or imprisoned for fifteen (15) days. (Code 1968, § 12-188; Ord. of 10-21-85; Res. of 6-2-03(2)) 
Chapter 20 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 9, 2007, amended ch. 20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 20, §§ 20-1, 20-2, 20-20—20-41, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1968, §§ 18-1, 18-12—18-22, 18-24, 18-25, 18-27—18-34; Ord. of 11-11-96; Ord. of 5-10-99; Ord. of 2-14-00; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. of 8-27-02(2). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 20-1. - Definitions.     Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this article the following words shall have the meanings given them by this section:     Cruising means the operation of a taxicab upon public streets, when not employed by a passenger and when it is by words or actions seeking patronage.     Driver's permit means permission granted by the city to any person to drive any licensed taxicab upon the streets of the city.     Operator means any person owning or having control of the use of one or more taxicabs used for hire on the streets of the city, or engaged in the business of operating a taxicab.     Police or police department mean the police or police department of the city under the supervision and authority of the chief of police or his designated representative, who may be any employee of the police department or the license inspector.     Private livery cab means any vehicle carrying persons at rates at special instance and request, per unit of time, by the hour, day, week or fraction thereof.     Street means any street, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane, or public right-of-way in the city.     Taxicab means any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons for hire except vehicles under control of the state public service commission. No vehicle less than an intermediate size four-door sedan or station wagon shall be licensed as a taxicab.     Taxicab driver means any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person is the owner of such taxicab or employed by a taxicab owner or operator.     Taxicab license means permission granted by the city to any person to operate or keep for hire any taxicab in the city. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-2. - Compliance and fee payment prior to permit issuance; term of permit; proration of fees, no refund. (a)  Before a permit shall be granted, the applicant shall comply with all city rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of a taxicab, and each applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per vehicle. (b)  All permits shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a permit before July first shall pay the full permit fee without proration. Permit fees for permits granted on or after July first shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. (c)  Permit fees are not refundable. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Secs. 20-3—20-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS/VEHICLES FOR HIRE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages in taxicabs, § 4-5; taxicab licenses not to be transferred, § 10-8; license fee for vehicles for hire, § 10-14. 
Sec. 20-20. - Compliance with provisions.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating taxicabs on the highways of the city until the provisions of this article shall have been complied with as herein set forth. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-21. - Operator's permit—Required; application. (a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating taxicabs as an operator within the city shall first obtain a permit therefor. (b)  Such person shall make written application to the council for a permit to operate taxicabs on the highways of the city, which application shall be in writing, addressed to the council and shall be filed with the city clerk. The written application shall contain the full name and address of the person and the principal location from which the business is to be operated, (if a corporation, the application shall set forth the names of the officers of such  corporation), the number of taxicabs to be operated under the permit if granted, and such other information as may be required by the council. All applications shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the permit fee. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the permit fee (without interest) shall be refunded. (c)  Every person applying for a taxicab driver's permit must be the possessor of a state driver's license in full force and effect under the motor vehicle laws of this state. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-22. - Same—Action upon application.     Upon the filing of an application for an operator's permit, the council shall make or cause to be made such investigation thereon as it may deem advisable and may in its discretion fix a time and place for the holding of a public hearing upon such application. Such application may be acted upon either at a regular or special meeting of the council. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-23. - Same—Indemnity bond; insurance. (a)  Bond: No permit to an operator or owner shall be issued or continued in operation and force unless there is on file with the city clerk, and in full force and effect, an indemnity bond for each vehicle authorized in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for bodily injury to any one person; fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident. The bonds shall insure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of an operator, the operator's servants, agents or employees. The bonds shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall have as surety thereon a surety company authorized to do business in the state. (b)  Insurance: The city clerk may in such clerk's discretion allow an operator to file, in lieu of a bond, an automobile liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. The policy shall conform to the provisions of this section pertaining to bonds. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-24. - Same—Not construed as franchise or vested right; revocation.     Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a franchise or to give any vested right to any operator or to anyone else, and the right is reserved in the council to revoke any permit to an operator under this article. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-25. - Same—Transferability.     Permits to engage in the taxicab business as an operator, when issued, shall not be transferable without the consent of the council; provided, however, that holders of permits may make replacements and substitutions of taxicabs, provided the number of taxicabs operated does not exceed the number provided for in the permit already issued to such holder. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-26. - Operator to maintain regular office or place of business.     In addition to all other qualifications specified in this article, an operator shall maintain a regular office or place of business satisfactory to the council, as headquarters for such operations. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-27. - Driver's permit—Required; application. (a)  Any person desiring to operate taxicabs as a driver shall first obtain a driver's permit from the Vidalia Police Department. (b)  Such person shall make written application for a driver's permit to the Vidalia Police Department, which shall maintain a file on all permitted drivers. (c)  Any conviction or plea as referenced in code section 20-28 shall mean automatic revocation of a driver's permit under this code section. (d)  Upon receipt of written application for a driver's permit, the issuing authority may take a minimum of seventy-two (72) hours for investigation and response. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-28. - Same—Action upon application.     The chief of police shall cause to be conducted such investigation of an applicant for a taxicab driver's permit as deemed necessary, and if the applicant is approved the chief of police shall issue to the applicant an original permit and one copy thereof. There shall be no such approval if the applicant has been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to driving under the influence or a crime involving moral turpitude or a violation of a controlled substances law within the last five (5) years of application. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-39. - Same—Annual fee.     The annual fee for a taxicab driver's permit shall be two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50). (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-30. - Same—License and photograph to be posted in vehicle.     A taxicab driver shall keep posted inside the taxicab, in a place that is visible to all passengers, such driver's operator's license, original permit and photograph. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-31. - Temporary replacement vehicles.     In the event a licensed vehicle shall become temporarily unusable due to a wreck, needed repairs or emergency breakdown, the licensee may contact the police department and obtain permission to use a substitute vehicle for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, provided signs showing it is a temporary taxi are posted on the front door panel on each side of the vehicle. The sign for putting on each side shall be furnished by the police department at actual cost and shall have entered thereon the expiration date; and provided further, that written notice is submitted by the insurance company through the local agent that such temporary vehicle is fully covered with all insurance as specified and required for the regularly licensed taxi vehicle. In extreme emergency the chief of police may approve extension of the substitute vehicle for more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-32. - Disapproval of license.     The chief of police and the city manager may disapprove an application for a taxicab license if, in their discretion, they determine that: (1)  The applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with his application. (2)  The applicant was the former holder, or was an officer, or partner in a corporation or partnership which was the former holder of a taxicab license which has been revoked or is in suspension. (3)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony, or any crime involving violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy, gambling or moral turpitude. (4)  The applicant is not the true owner of the vehicle or of the taxicab business. (5)  If the applicant is also to be the driver and has been convicted of: a.  Drunk driving within the last twenty-four (24) months. b.  Public drunkenness or under the influence two or more times within the last twelve (12) months, or one time within the last six months. c.  Quarreling and fighting, disorderly conduct or any misdemeanor within the last six months. d.  Three or more traffic violations within the last twelve (12) months. (6)  No license or driver permit for any licensed owner will be issued to anyone who owes any taxes, licenses or fees of any kind to the city or county. Character, general reputation and physical condition may also be grounds for disapproval of a license applicant. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-33. - Limit on number of taxicabs licensed.     No person shall be granted a license to operate a taxicab without it being determined by the police department approving authority that public convenience and necessity requires further taxicab service. Public convenience and necessity shall be limited based on ratio of number of cabs per population of the county. The maximum number of taxicabs which shall be licensed to operate within the city shall be limited to one taxicab for each one thousand (1,000) persons living in the county according to the decennial census of 2000 or any future census plus any estimated increase in population which the city council may from time to time determine to have occurred. This estimated increase shall be taken from the state department of labor or other reliable source. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-34. - Suspension or revocation of license, permit. (a)  Where it is not specifically stipulated elsewhere in this article, suspension or revocation of a taxicab license or a driver's permit shall be as follows for the various charges: (1)  Drunk driving or driving under the influence in taxicab, private car or any other vehicle: Automatic suspension of driver's permit only, unless driver is also the licensee, pending the outcome of any charges in court. If convicted and it is the first offense since passage of this article, suspension of driver's permit or license (if driver is licensee) for a period of six (6) months. (2)  Any disorderly conduct (including drunk or under the influence) charge, no action pending outcome in court. If convicted and it is the first offense since passage of this article, suspension of driver's permit or license (if driver is the licensee) for a period of thirty (30) days. (3)  Any offense other than first offense under subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, to be immediately suspended by the police chief pending any court action. If convicted, suspension to remain in effect and holder of driver's permit or taxicab license (if license is the driver) shall be notified of a hearing before the city council as covered in subsection (b) of this section. (4)  Conviction of three (3) traffic violations within a six-month period shall mean automatic suspension of driver's permit for a period of thirty (30) days. If suspended twice in a twelve-consecutive-month period, the driver's permit only shall be revoked unless the driver is also the licensee. (5)  Felony charge: The driver's permit only, unless the driver is also the licensee, suspended immediately pending outcome in court. If convicted the driver's permit or taxicab license (if driver is the licensee) shall be revoked. (6)  Charge involving transporting, possessing, selling or delivering any beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage: Immediate suspension pending outcome of case in court. If convicted and is first offense since passage of this article, suspension of driver's permit and taxicab license for a period of four (4) months; second offense after passage of this article, regardless of the time lapse, suspension of driver's permit and license for twelve (12) months; third offense, regardless of time lapse, permanent revocation of driver's permit and license, even if licensee is not the driver. (7)  Any violation of this taxicab article (not covered above and not stipulated elsewhere in this article), or any other violations of the laws of this state or the city: Up to thirty (30) days suspension by the chief of police. If longer than thirty (30) days is recommended by the chief of police, a hearing shall be held before the city council as provided in subsection (b) of this section. (b)  Wherever a hearing is provided in this section before the city council, the license holder or the driver permit holder shall be given written notice of the hearing. Notwithstanding the requirement for a hearing, the chief of police, with approval of the city manager, may suspend any license pending a hearing and, after the hearing the license or driver's permit may be revoked, remain in suspension or be reinstated. (1)  The hearing shall be held as soon as a quorum of the city council is available. (2)  At the hearing, the police and other witnesses and the accused shall present any evidence or facts they desire. The appearance of the accused shall be voluntary. Without any attempt to determine a verdict of guilty or not guilty on any pending court action, the board shall decide what to do or not do regarding the status of the taxicab license or the driver's permit. The action of the board to suspend, revoke or reinstate such license or driver's permit is independent of the outcome of any possible court action. (3)  Immediately upon any conviction in court, if necessary, the city council shall again convene to decide if the license or driver's permit involved should be restored, revoked or remain in suspension; and if suspension is continued, for what length of time. a.  If a not guilty verdict should result in court, any suspension shall be automatically and immediately lifted by the chief of police. b.  Any bond forfeiture or nolo contendere plea, for the purpose of this article, shall be construed in the same light as a conviction by the court. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-35. - Character of service to be rendered. (a)  All operators and drivers engaged in the taxicab business in the city, operating under the provisions of this article, shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for service inside the city as soon as they can do so, and if such service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered, and give the reason therefor. (b)  Any operator or driver who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the city at any time when such person has a taxicab available, or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this article and the permit or license granted such holder shall be revoked at the discretion of the chief of police. (c)  No license or permit shall be issued to an operator or to a driver who is not in a position to render fulltime service to the exclusion of any other business, except with the approval of the council. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-36. - Requirements as to vehicles. (a)  Be painted in one uniform color or combination of colors, adopted by the owner and reported to the marshal; (b)  Have four (4) doors, unless such type vehicle cannot be obtained by the owner because of a national emergency or because of other circumstances beyond his control and this requirement waived by resolution of the city council. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-37. - Identification of vehicles. (a)  Every taxicabs shall have a sign plainly indicating on the rear door on each side of the vehicle, in letters not less than four inches high, the full name of the taxicab company operating the vehicle, including words such as "taxicab," "taxi," or "cab." Such sign shall be professionally applied and shall be either painted or permanently affixed to each side of the vehicle. There shall be no outside advertising of any kind on taxicabs. (b)  The taxicab telephone number may also be used if desired. (c)  Each taxicab shall have a taxicab style dome light installed on top of the vehicle. Such light shall be lighted whenever the taxicab is in use at night. The telephone number or the word taxi or taxicab may be printed on the light globe. (d)  No taxicab shall be operated without being properly marked as required by the provisions of this article. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-38. - Maintenance of vehicles; inspections. (a)  No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab until it has been found to be in a thoroughly safe condition, clean, fit, of good appearance, safe mechanical condition and well painted. The police department shall make, or cause to be made, such examination and inspection before a license is issued. (b)  The operator shall have each taxicab thoroughly inspected annually by an authorized mechanic permitted to do business in the city using the form provided by the city and shall present proof of such inspection showing the vehicle to be in a safe condition to the city clerk or his/her designee prior to the issuance or renewal of the license or permit. (c)  A list of authorized mechanics shall be maintained by the police department and said list is incorporated herein and made a part of this section. Said list may be updated annually by the mayor and city council. (d)  Prior to issuance of permit, the operator under this section shall also provide proof of a tag receipt verifying purchase of a motor vehicle tag issued in Toombs or Montgomery County with tag attached to vehicle. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-39. - Monthly inspection of vehicles; certificates of inspection. (a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any taxicab operated in the city to present such vehicle to the chief of police at the police station of the city, on or before the fifth day of each month, for the purpose of permitting the chief of police or some person designated or approved by him to make a full and complete inspection of such vehicle, especially of the brakes thereof, for the purpose of determining whether such may safely be permitted to operate upon the streets of the city. (b)  The chief of police, or person designated or approved by him, shall inspect the vehicles so presented and test the brakes thereof. If the vehicle is found to be in such condition that it can safely be operated upon the streets of the city, the chief of police, or person designated or approved by him, shall issue to the owner thereof a certificate of inspection allowing the operation of such vehicle for one month. It shall be unlawful for any owner to operate any taxicab upon the streets of the city without a currently valid certificate of inspection. (c)  It shall be the duty of the person making the inspection to refuse to issue a certificate of inspection to any owner of a taxicab when he shall find the vehicle to be unsafe for operation upon the streets of the city. (d)  During the inspection herein provided for, an inspection shall also be made with reference to the requirements of section 20-38 and an entry made on the certificate of inspection as to compliance or noncompliance with such requirements. (e)  The driver of any taxicab shall at all times carry in such vehicle the certificate of inspection issued for that vehicle, which certificate he shall exhibit to any police officer of the city upon demand.     The city specifically disclaims any and all liability for any claims or damages that may be connected to these inspections. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-40. - Inspection fee.     The owner of any taxicab operated within the city shall pay an annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each vehicle for all required inspections. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-41. - Carrying additional passengers.     No taxicab driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in the taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of the additional passengers. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-42. - Receipt for fare.     Whenever a taxicab passenger asks for a receipt, it shall be given to such passenger by the driver. Such receipt shall show the amount of fare collected, the name of the driver, the name of the owner of the taxicab, and the beginning point and ending point of the trip of such passenger. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-43. - Charging excessive fare.     No taxicab driver or operator shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a rate of fare greater than that to which the taxicab driver or operator is entitled under the ordinances or regulations of the council. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-44. - Transport of passengers for unlawful purposes. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed driver of a taxicab to misrepresent the name of such driver's employer, or knowingly to receive or transport any person who intends to commit an unlawful act in such vehicle, during the voyage or at the termination thereof, whether within such vehicle or not. (b)  It shall also be unlawful for any driver to solicit or procure or to aid or assist in soliciting or procuring any person to ride in a licensed taxicab with the intent to commit an unlawful act therein at any time during the voyage or at the termination thereof, whether within the vehicle or not. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-45. - Alcoholic beverage licensees, alcoholic beverage establishment employees not to be licensed or permitted.     No alcoholic beverage license or any employee of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall be a concurrent holder of a taxicab license or a taxicab driver's permit or a dispatcher of taxicabs. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-46. - Driver's permit required; state driver's license. (a)  No person shall operate a taxicab upon the streets of the city and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit a taxicab to be driven at any time for hire unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and be the holder of a taxicab driver's permit, which is then in full force and effect, from the police department; and provided, further, that such driver shall be an employee or agent of the licensee or the holder of the taxicab license. (b)  Every person applying for a taxicab driver's permit must be the possessor of a state driver's license in full force and effect under the motor vehicle laws of this state. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-47. - Qualifications of applicants for drivers' permits.     Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit under the terms of this article must conform to the following regulations: (1)  Must be twenty-one (21) years of age or over. (2)  Must be of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind, which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle. (3)  Must be able to read and write. Reading of this article and copying of any parts of it may be required. (4)  Must be clean in dress, neat in personal appearance, and not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor or drugs. (5)  Must not owe the city any delinquent taxes, licenses or fees of any kind whatsoever. (6)  Must fill out, upon a blank form provided by the city, giving full and truthful information as required. Any false statement by the applicant shall be considered cause for denial of driver's permit. Application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. (7)  Must not have any conviction of a felony, or any crime involving violence, dishonest, deceit, indecency, degeneracy or moral turpitude. (8)  Must not have been convicted of: a.  Drunk driving within the last twenty-four (24) months. b.  Public drunkenness or being under the influence two (2) or more times within the last twelve (12) months, or one time within the last six (6) months. c.  Quarreling and fighting, disorderly conduct or any misdemeanor within the last six months. d.  Three (3) or more traffic violations within the last twelve (12) months. (9)  Character, general reputation or physical condition may reflect grounds for disapproval of a driver's permit. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-48. - Application for driver's permit required.     An application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be filed with the police department on forms provided by the city. All information requested on the form must be full and truthful. False or omitted information by the applicant may be considered cause for denial of driver's permit. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-49. - Photograph of applicant for driver's permit.     Each applicant for a driver's permit must file with his application three (3) unmounted photographs of himself, taken within thirty (30) days preceding the filing of his application and of such size as may be easily attached to his permit and application. If approved, each driver must display his permit and photograph in the taxicab he drives. If permit is denied, two (2) copies of the photograph shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-50. - Fingerprinting of driver's permit applicant.     After filling out the application, the applicant for a driver's permit shall be fingerprinted. A set of the fingerprints with one photograph shall be kept on file at the police headquarters. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-51. - Conviction of felony excludes person from driver's permit.     No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony, except by the majority vote of the city council of the city. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-52. - Renewal of driver's permit.     A driver's permit shall be filed annually for renewal during the month of January. Any driver's permit not renewed by February 1 shall be considered revoked. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-53. - Examination of applicant for driver's permit by police.     Each applicant for a driver's permit shall be examined by some police personnel, designated by the chief of police, as to the applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this article, the traffic regulations of the city, the vehicle and traffic laws of the state, and the geography of the city. If the results of any of the examinations are unsatisfactory in the opinion of the examiner, the applicant shall be refused the permit by the chief of police or his designated representative. 
Sec. 20-54. - Issuance of driver's permit; photograph and signature required thereon.     An approved applicant for a driver's permit shall be issued a permit of such form as to contain a photograph and signature of the applicant. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-55. - Fee for driver's permit.     A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be paid for a driver's permit or renewal thereof. Provided, however, that this permit fee is included in the license fee paid by an individual who is the holder of a taxicab license; but the licensee, if he is also the driver, must meet all requirements for a driver's permit as called for in this article. 
Sec. 20-56. - Defacing driver's permit.     Any driver who defaces, removes or obliterates any official entry made on his permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and the permit shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-57. - Hearing on appeal.     Except where a refusal to approve an application for a driver's permit or a taxicab license or an application for a renewal thereof or revocation thereof or suspension of such permit or license is based solely on a judicial conviction or convictions, a licensee, permit holder, or applicant shall have an opportunity to be heard. Such hearing shall be held by the city council of the city at such time and place as the chairman shall prescribe. A driver's permit or a taxicab license, however, may be temporarily suspended by the chief of police or the city manager without notice pending any criminal proceeding, investigation or hearing. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-58. - Taxicab rates; maximum rates of fare; posting required. (a)  Maximum meter rates. As a condition of licensing by the city and operating within the city, all taxicab companies and drivers shall charge no more than the following schedule of fares for all trips originating or terminating within said city, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b): (1)  The maximum meter rate shall be as follows: a.  A rate of two dollars ($2.00) for the first one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of a mile; b.  A rate of thirty cents ($0.30) per one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of a mile thereafter; c.  Should a taximeter charge for increments of a mile differently from those in subsections a. and b., the maximum rates shall nevertheless not exceed three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) for the first mile and one dollar and eighty cents ($1.80) per mile thereafter. (2)  One dollar ($1.00) for each passenger in excess of one riding in the vehicle on the same trip. (3)  Twenty-one dollars ($21.00) per hour waiting time; thirty-five cents ($0.35) per minute for traffic delays. (4)  There shall be no charge for baggage which can be transported within the interior and/or cargo area of any taxicab. (5)  Taxi fuel surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) surcharge for each trip with a fare equal to or less than five dollars ($5.00), a one dollar and fifty cent ($1.50) surcharge for each trip with a fare of more than five dollars ($5.00) and less than ten dollars ($10.00), and a two dollar ($2.00) surcharge for each trip with a fare of more than ten dollars ($10.00). The surcharge must be posted in all taxicabs. (b)  Travel to passenger location. No charge shall be made for time and/or mileage for traveling to the location of a prospective passenger. (c)  Posting rates required. No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater amount for the use of a taxicab than the published and printed rates which shall be displayed within and on each vehicle, as provided below: (1)  Each taxicab operating within Savannah shall have a rate card setting forth its rates for mileage, waiting time, extra passengers, excess baggage, and airport flat rates. Said rate card shall be printed in standard block letters showing the taxicab company name not less than three-quarters (¾) inch in height, and the rates not less than three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch in height. The rate card shall be displayed within the vehicle in such place as to be conspicuous and in view of all passengers, subject to the approval of the transportation services coordinator. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-59. - Payment of fares. (a)  Prepayment. Every driver of a taxicab shall have a right to demand payment of a legal fare in advance, and may refuse employment unless so prepaid, but no driver shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request anywhere in the city, unless previously engaged or unable to do so. No driver of a licensed taxicab shall carry any other person than the passenger first employing a taxicab, without the consent of such passenger. (b)  Receipt. Any taxicab driver must give a passenger a receipt when they ask for it and such receipt shall show the amount, the trip made, and the signature of the driver, number of the taxicab and the time and date. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-60. - Cruising.     No driver of a vehicle for hire shall cruise in search of passengers or other business at any time, but shall proceed from an origin by the most convenient and direct route to the required destination. When a vehicle for hire has completed a trip it shall, if awaiting a call for another trip, remain parked at a convenient location on the general area of the last destination, or if not awaiting a call it shall proceed directly to its headquarters or to a stand designated for such vehicles, without soliciting passengers or other business en route. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-61. - Double-parking, waiting in loading zone.     No taxicab is authorized to double-park or to wait in a loading zone. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-62. - Allowing passengers in front seat.     No person shall be allowed to ride in the front seat of a taxicab with the driver except a paying customer, unless such passenger is a member of the driver's or operator's immediate family. Any driver who violates this section shall have his permit revoked. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-63. - Delivering alcoholic beverages.     It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to deliver alcoholic beverages in such taxicab. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-64. - Misplaced articles in taxicabs.     Every driver of a taxicab must make a diligent effort to return to the rightful owner any property lost or left in his taxicab. If such owner is not found and properly returned within twenty-four (24) hours, the driver of such taxicab shall report such finding to the police department with a description of the article found. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-65. - License and permit not assignable.     Every person to whom a license, or permit has been issued, shall return the license or permit to the police department upon discontinuing or abandoning the operation or driving of a taxicab. Such licenses, or permit shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person or be applicable to any other vehicle than the one specified on original application. Any person who allows his permit or license to be used by any other person, or any person who uses such permit or license, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-66. - Use for unlawful purposes.     It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab to knowingly receive or transport any person or persons who intend to commit any unlawful act during the voyage or at the destination or termination thereof, whether within such vehicle or not. No driver of any taxicab shall use such vehicle himself in the commission of any act that violates any local ordinances or state laws. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-67. - Cleanliness of vehicle.     Every holder of a taxicab license shall at all times keep the inside and outside of the cab operated by him in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-68. - What constitutes operation in city.     The taking on or discharging a passenger within the city shall be deemed operating a taxicab within the city. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-69. - Visibility from vehicle.     All windows of taxicabs shall be kept in condition for clear vision. Nothing shall be put on or over windows, including the back glass, to mar any vision at any time. This also includes tinting or glazing that can be attached to the windows. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-70. - Licensees, permittees to give notice of change of address.     Changes of address of owners of licenses or drivers' permits shall be reported to the police department within three (3) days. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-71. - Notice of drivers changing employers.     Persons holding drivers' permits who change employment from one company to another company shall notify the police department before starting to drive for the new employer. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-72. - Political or business advertising prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a taxicab licensed by the city to place, display, affix or allow to be placed, displayed or affixed upon either the exterior or interior of any such licensed taxicab any political or business advertising signs or devices, including bumper strips. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-73. - Waiting list for license applications; procedure. (a)  Any applicant to be placed on the waiting list for a taxicab license shall file a regular application form with the police department, together with a deposit in amount of the required license fee. (b)  The application will be processed and: (1)  If turned down, the deposit will be immediately returned. (2)  If approved, the deposit will be held to pay the license fee when the applicant becomes eligible for a license. (3)  If an applicant should become disqualified while on the waiting list due to misconduct, law violations, or any other cause, the deposit shall be immediately returned and the applicant removed from the waiting list. (4)  An applicant may withdraw from the waiting list and request refund of his deposit at any time. (c)  Applicants shall appear on the waiting list in order of priority in which they are filed. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
Sec. 20-74. - Fee for driver's permit application; fee for renewal photographs.     A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges is to be paid with each initial applicant for a taxi driver's permit. This fee is to cover the cost of processing, investigating, fingerprinting, etc., and will also include furnishing the photographs required. If the applicant is turned down, the fee is forfeited. If the applicant is approved, he will be issued a permit upon payment of the prescribed permit fee. A fee as set out in the schedule of fees and charges will be charged for renewal photographs when necessary. (Ord. of 4-9-07) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— The zoning ordinance, enacted on June 10, 1969, and amended through May 9, 1988, is set out herein as it appears in the pamphlet thereof, except that the editor has inserted words and figures in brackets, where appropriate, for clarification. Amendatory enactments will be cited in parentheses following amended provisions. Cross reference— Zone in which horses permitted, § 5-4(a)(2); land clearing and tree protection, § 6-81 et seq.; wellhead protection zone, § 7.5-41 et seq.; home occupations, § 10-241 et seq.; planning and development, ch. 16; planning commission, § 16-20 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE, EFFECTIVE DATE AND DECLARATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT 
Section 100. - Short title and effective date.     This Ordinance shall be effective May 9, 1988 and shall be known, referred to and cited as, "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Vidalia." 
Section 101. - Declaration of legislative intent. (a)  Authority. The City Council of Vidalia, Georgia, in accordance with the authority granted them by the State of Georgia's General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, hereby ordains, and enacts into law the following articles and sections. (Current authority—Georgia Constitution of 1983, Article IX, Section 11, Paragraph IV.) Editor's note— Such act was not carried forward from the 1933 Code to O.C.G.A. (b)  Purpose. The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have been prepared in accordance with an adopted future land use and major thoroughfare plan for the city to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city, to facilitate orderly and harmonious development, and to regulate the density of population and intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and air. In addition, this ordinance has been prepared to provide for vehicle off-street parking to prevent the over-crowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in the circulation of people and the loss of life, health or property from flood or other dangers. The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are also employed to protect transportation facilities, public facilities, residential areas, recreation and open space and the natural resources of the City of Vidalia, Georgia. 
Section 102. - Interpretation.     In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health and welfare. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the building, structures or premises, upon heights of buildings or structures or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by any other ordinance, rates, codes, permits, or regulations, or by easements, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements, the provision of this ordinance shall govern. 
Section 103. - Conflict.     It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere with any existing ordinance or enactment, or with any rule, regulations or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, provided that where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height and bulk of buildings, or prescribes larger open spaces than are required by the provisions of such ordinance, enactment, rule, regulation or permit, then the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
Section 104. - Validity.     Should any section or provision of this ordinance by declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole, or of any other part thereof. 
Section 105. - Repealer.     All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
Section 106. - Permit or license in violation.     If any permit or license is issued in violation of any provision of this ordinance or purports to authorize the doing of any act not permitted by any provision of the ordinance, said permit or license shall be void. (Ord. of 10-9-89) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
Section 200. - [Rules of construction.]     Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall have the meaning herein indicated: (1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. (2)  Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural number include the singular. (3)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, political governing body, trust and company as well as an individual. (4)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." (5)  The word "building" includes the word "structure." (6)  The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory. (7)  The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." (8)  The words "planning commission" shall refer to the planning commission of the City of Vidalia, Georgia. (9)  The words "city council" or "council" shall refer to the city council of the City of Vidalia, Georgia. (10)  The words "map," "zoning map" or "Vidalia Zoning Map" shall mean the official zoning map of the City of Vidalia, Georgia. (11)  The word "constructed" shall mean to form by putting together parts. 
Section 201. - Definition of terms.     Accessory use or building: A use or building, located on the same lot as the principal building, which is clearly incidental and secondary to permitted use or building and which does not change the character of such use or building, including, but not limited to, private garages, living quarters for servants, bath-houses, greenhouses, tool sheds, storage buildings, animal shelters.     Aggregate sign area: The combined sign area of all signs or all signs of a particular category on a single parcel. For example, the aggregate sign area of all freestanding signs on a parcel is the sum total of the sign areas of all freestanding signs on such parcel.     Alley: A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulations.     Alterations: The term "alterations" shall mean any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed."     Animated sign: A sign that has moving parts or includes action, motion, or color changes, or the optical illusion of action, motion, or color changes, including signs using electronic ink, signs set in motion by movement of the atmosphere, or made up of a series of sections that turn, including any type of screen using animated or scrolling displays such as an LED (light emitting diode) screen or any other type of video display, even if the message is stationary.     Awning sign: See canopy sign.     Banner: Any sign of fabric, thin plastic or similar lightweight material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one (1) or more edges. Flags shall not be considered banners.     Beacon: A stationary or evolving light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner which is intended to attract or divert attention; except, however, this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar agencies.     Billboard: A freestanding sign with a sign area of more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet.     Board: The Zoning Board of Appeals.     Boarding house: A building where for compensation lodging and/or meals are provided for not more than ten (10) persons.     Buffer strip: A piece of land, varying in length and width, lying between two (2) incompatible uses of land and containing open space, plantings, trees, a wall, fence, or other suitable enclosures which provide proper screening.     Building: (1)  For residential, commercial or industrial use: A structure constructed in accordance with the Standard Building Codes and local codes; situated on a permanent foundation and having electrical and plumbing services. (2)  Temporary and commercial use building: A structure used or built for seasonal commercial use which shall be removed within one hundred twenty (120) days. Such a temporary building cannot be used or occupied without first obtaining a building permit from the city building inspector certifying what temporary seasonal use will be conducted and to what specific location. Only one (1) permit per individual, business and/or location per year.     Example: To sell Vidalia Onions, vegetables, produce and/or Christmas trees.     Building, main or principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.     Building height: The term "building height" shall mean the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall.     Building inspector: The building inspector of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, as designated by the Vidalia City Council.     Building line: A line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this ordinance, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line.     Building marker: Any sign made of bronze, stone or other permanent material and permanently installed as a portion of the exterior wall of the building in such manner it cannot be removed or replaced without substantial damage to the building surface.     Building inspector: An agent of the city authorized to permit, inspect, approve or deny construction within the city and designated as the enforcement authority for this article.     Building setback lines: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of the building and the street right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto. Covered porches, whether enclosed or not, shall be considered as a part of the building and shall not project into the required yard.     Building sign: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. For the purpose of this article, any sign face that is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be considered a wall sign. Any sign that is affixed to the building marquee, building awning, a building canopy or a fence shall be considered a wall sign.     Canopy sign: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. Canopy signs are considered building signs.     Center line: A line of a street is surveyed and monumented by the city council or a line midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street.     Changeable copy sign: A sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the sign. Tri-vision signs and LED signs are specifically excluded from the definition of changeable copy sign.     Church: For the purpose of this ordinance a church shall include but not be limited to at least the following requirements: A voluntary association of Christians (Roman Catholic, Protestant, or Eastern Orthodox) united for discipline and regular worship services, connected with, and forming a part of, some religious society, having a legal existence. Any other non-Christian religious organization must provide equal documentation under the law for their respective synagogue, temple or mosque.     City council: The City Council of the City of Vidalia, Georgia.     Club: Building or facility owned or operated by a nonprofit corporation, association or persons.     Common entrance sign: A sign located at the entrance or entrances to a group of structures or a single structure that is situated on a minimum site of five (5) acres, such as a residential subdivision, apartment complex, industrial park, or shopping center.     Convalescent home: A place to recover health and strength gradually after sickness or weakness.     Day care: (1)  Family day care homes: A private residence operated by any person who receives therein pay for supervision and care for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three (3), but not more than six (6), children under the age of eighteen (18) and who are not related to such persons and whose parents are not residents of the private residence. (2)  Group day care homes: Any place operated by any person or group wherein are received for pay not less than seven (7), nor more than eighteen (18), children under eighteen (18) years of age for care and supervision for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. (3)  Day care centers: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or [for] group care, for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, nineteen (19) or more children under the age of eighteen (18).     Display surface area: See sign face.     Disposable sign: Any sign designed for one time use to be placed on wire or similar structure and intended to be removed after use (example-laminated political signs, cardboard signs, plastic covered signs). These signs will be utilized to advertise one time events/activities and will be allowed for no more than thirty (30) days per year. They are subject to permit procedures. They are allowed on the public right-of-way.     District or zoning district: A section or sections of the incorporated area of the city for which the then-effective zoning ordinance governing the use of buildings and land is uniform for each class of use permitted therein.     Dwelling, one-family: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family.     Dwelling, two-family: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families independent of each other, such as a duplex dwelling unit.     Dwelling, multiple family: A building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.     Dwelling unit: A building, or a portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one (1) family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities.     Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and shall also include the painting of wall and window signs.     Family: One (1) or two (2) persons or parents, with their direct lineal descendants and adopted children (and including the domestic employees thereof) together with not more than two (2) persons not so related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of two (2) or less persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of this ordinance.     Flag: A sign consisting of any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, logos or symbols, used as a symbol of a government or any other entity or organization.     Flashing sign: An illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when lighting is in use.     Floor area: Total gross area on all floors as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding crawl spaces, garages, carports, breezeways, attics without floors and opened porches, balconies and terraces.     Floor space: Floor area of all floors, as measured from the inside surfaces of the walls enclosing the part of a building occupied by a single occupant or shared by a distinct group of occupants, excluding therefrom common halls, stairwells, sanitary facilities and storage and other areas to which patrons do not have regular access.     Freestanding sign: A sign which is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure, whether portable or stationary. Freestanding signs must meet the standards of either stanchion signs or monument signs.     Front lot line: A line dividing a lot from any public highway, except a limited or controlled access highway to which the lot has no access.     Garage: A fully enclosed building for the storage of motor vehicles, not including buildings in which fuel is sold or repair or other services performed.     Gas station: A place where motor vehicle fuels are sold at retail.     Height: The vertical distance from the highest point on a structure, excepting any chimney or antenna on a building, to the average ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural elements intersect the ground.     Home occupation: A use conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling, employing only the inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to residential occupancy and does not change the character thereof. Specifically excluded is the storage and display of merchandise not produced by such home occupations, any activity involving any building alterations, window display, construction features, equipment, machinery or outdoor storage, any of which is visible from off the lot on which located.     Hotel: A structure designed, used or offered for residential occupancy for any period less than one (1) month, including tourist homes and motels, but not including hospitals or nursing homes.     Illuminated sign: Any sign or portion thereof which is illuminated by artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including outline, reflective or phosphorescent light, whether or not the source of light is directly affixed as part of the sign, and shall also include signs with reflectors that depend upon sunlight or automobile headlights for an image.     Illuminated, external: Illumination so arranged that the light source is external to the sign and directed toward the sign.     Illuminated, internal: Illumination so arranged that the light is contained behind the face of the sign and no lighting source is directly visible exterior to the sign.     Incidental sign: A sign of no more than two (2) square feet that serves the purpose of guiding safe traffic movements onto, from or on property, and without which there is an increased risk of incompatible traffic movements or obstructions. Examples of incidental signs include but are not limited to "stop," "no parking," "entrance," "loading zone" and other similar traffic-related directives.     Industrialized building: (1)  Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. (2)  No industrialized building shall be sold, offered for sale or installed in the State of Georgia unless it bears an insignia of approval issued by the commissioner or it has been inspected by the local jurisdiction in accordance with chapter 110-2-17, Georgia Law 1982, pp. 1637—1643 [O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.].     Joint sign: A sign which serves as a common or collective sign for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same parcel (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.).     Laundromat: A place where patrons wash, dry or dry-clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron.     Lease: An agreement by which a property owner conveys, usually for a specified rent, to other persons, permission to erect and maintain a sign upon his property.     LED sign: Any sign or portion thereof that uses light emitting diode technology or other similar semiconductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface-mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. For purposes of this article, a LED sign is not considered a form of changeable copy sign.     Loading space: An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.     Lot: See parcel.     Lot area: The area of land within the boundary of a lot, excluding any part under water, and, in addition, excluding the area of land bounded by any front lot line, the center line of the highway on which it fronts and the side lot lines from their intersection with the front lot line at their ends extended to the center line of the highway.     Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot line.     Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein: (1)  Front lot line: In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, "front lot line" shall mean that line separating said lot from either street. (2)  Rear lot line: That lot line opposite the front lot line. In case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line not less than ten (10) feet in length and parallel to the front lot line, that when measured from a point farthest from the front lot line shall lie wholly within the lot. (3)  Side lot line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.     Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the recorder's office at the Toombs or Montgomery county courthouse.     Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the building line.     Major street: A street designed as a major thoroughfare on the major thoroughfare plan of the City of Vidalia, Georgia.     Mall: Any concentration of retail stores and/or service establishments which share customer parking areas and are located within an enclosure having public walkways whereby a customer in one (1) store or establishment may walk to another store or establishment without leaving the enclosure.     Mansard roof: Any roof that has an angle greater than forty-five (45) degrees and which derives part of its support from the building wall and is attached to (but not necessarily a part of) a low slope roof and which extends along the full length of the front building wall or three-quarters (¾) of the length of a side building wall. For purposes of this article, a low slope roof shall mean any roof with a pitch less than three (3) inches rise per twelve (12) inches horizontal.     Marquee: Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.     Marquee sign: Any sign attached in any manner to or made a part of a marquee. Marquee signs are considered building signs.     Mobile home: Any structure designed or used for residential occupancy built upon or having a frame or chassis to which wheels may be attached by which it may move or be moved upon a highway, whether or not such structure actually has, at any given time, such wheels attached, including any such vehicle which has been placed on a masonry or other stationary foundation. This definition shall not include travel trailers or recreational vehicles when such vehicles are not used for permanent or semi-permanent living or sleeping quarters.     Mobile home or trailer park: Any lot, tract or parcel of land used, maintained or intended to be used, leased or rented for occupancy by one (1) or more trailers together with accessory structures provided in connection therewith. This definition shall not include trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for the purpose of inspection and sale.     Monument sign: A freestanding sign which forms a solid structure from the ground to the top of the sign.     Nonconforming building: A building or portion thereof, existing at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments hereto, and that does not conform to the height, area or yard regulations for the district in which it is located.     Nonconforming use: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.     Nonconforming sign: A sign legally existing at the time of erection that could not be built under the terms of this article.     Nursing home: A structure designed or used for residential occupancy and providing limited medical or nursing care on the premises for occupants, but not including a hospital or mental health center.     Off-street parking lot: A facility other than for single-family dwellings providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three (3) vehicles.     Parcel: Any piece or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, which is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership, is separately taxable and of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other space as required by the zoning regulations.     Parking space: An area of definite length and width; said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles.     Person: "Person" means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization, singular or plural, of any kind.     Personal care home: "Personal care home" or "home" means a building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two (2) or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care, for nonfamily ambulatory adults. For the purpose of these rules, personal care homes shall be classified as: family personal care home, group personal care home, or congregate personal care home. This term does not include buildings which are devoted to independent living units which include kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care.     Planning commission: The planning commission of the City of Vidalia, Georgia.     Pole sign: See stanchion sign.     Portable sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs posted on the roofs or trucks beds of vehicles, signs converted to A-frames or T-frames; balloons used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business for purposes other than signage.     Principal building: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.     Projecting sign: Any sign that is affixed at an angle or perpendicularly to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicularly or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted.     Public utility: Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation of water.     Restaurant: A lot on which food or beverages are cooked or prepared and offered for sale and where consumption is permitted on the premises whether or not entertainment is offered, and includes establishments commonly known as bars, grills, cafes, taverns, nightclubs, drive-ins and any fast food establishment permitting consumption on the premises.     Roof sign: A sign erected and constructed wholly on or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, or extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.     Sanatorium: An institution for rest and recuperation (as of convalescents); an establishment for the treatment of the chronically ill.     Setback: The distance from the property line to the nearest plane of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line.     Shopping center: In areas of the city outside the C-1 Central Business District, two (2) or more retail stores and/or service establishments, or one (1) retail store combined with one (1) or more service establishments, sharing customer parking areas, regardless of whether said stores and/or service establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership.     Sign: The term "sign" means and includes every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stroke, stripe, trademark or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public. Also, the above, when near the inside surface of a window in such a way as to be in the view of the general public and used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information to the public.     Sign face: That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two (2) or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, including, but not limited to, channel letters.     Sign height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a sign structure. The height is measured from the center line of the nearest adjacent street.     Single-family dwelling: A structure, except a mobile home, designed or used for residential occupancy by one (1) family.     Special event sign: See standard informational sign.     Special promotion sign: See standard informational sign.     Spot light illumination: Illumination which comes from lamps, lenses or devices designed to focus or concentrate the light rays of the source.     Stanchion sign: A freestanding sign that is mounted on a pole or other vertical support such that the bottom of the sign face is more than six (6) feet above the ground and there is no visual obstruction other than the vertical support between the ground and the bottom of the sign face.     Standard informational sign: A sign with an area not greater than four (4) square feet, with a sign face for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags, or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height not greater than two and one-half (2½) feet, and is mounted on a wooden stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half (1½) inches.     Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.     Street frontage: The distance for which a lot line of a parcel adjoins a public or private street, from one (1) lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distance lot line intersecting the same street.     Streets and sidewalks: A strip of land or accessway subject to vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian traffic that provides direct or indirect access to property including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, sidewalks, terraces, trails or other thoroughfares.     Story: That portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. The first floor or a two- or multi-story building shall be deemed the story that has no floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy. Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered consecutively.     Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground.     Suspended sign: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.     Temporary sign: See standard information sign.     Temporary/portable sign: Any sign which is not permanently erected, affixed and maintained on a premises and in compliance with the existing permanent sign ordinance or a sign designed to be transported by wheels or trailer. These signs will be utilized to advertise one time events/activities and will be allowed for no more than thirty (30) days per year. They are subject to the permit procedures. They may not be located on public right-of-way.     Townhouse: A single family dwelling constructed adjacent and connected to other single-family dwellings separated by a common firewall.     Tri-vision sign: A sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three (3) different sign messages in rotation. For purposes of this chapter, a tri-vision sign is not a changeable copy sign.     Use: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied.     Variance: The term "variance" shall men a modification of the literal provisions of the zoning ordinance granted when strict enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. A departure from the provisions of a zoning ordinance relating to setbacks, side yards, frontage requirements, and lot size, but not involving the actual use or structures. Comment: The hardship variance is granted because strict enforcement of the zoning ordinance as it applies to a specific lot would work an undue hardship and present practical difficulties. It is usually granted to decrease the dimension requirements, and the applicant generally must demonstrate the hardship is peculiar to his property and not to other properties in the zone. The city council must find that the variance can be granted without any adverse impact on the public good (the negative criteria).     Wall sign: Any sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall or printed on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on which it is mounted; provided, however, said wall sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building.     Window sign: Any sign placed inside or upon a window.     Yard: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and as defined herein: (1)  Front yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest line of the main building. (2)  Rear yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the main building. (3)  Side yard: An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot to the nearest point of the main building. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4; Ord. of 11-11-91; Ord. of 10-12-92; Ord. of 9-9-02; Ord. of 10-13-08, § 1) 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
Section 300. - Classes of districts.     For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Vidalia is hereby divided into fourteen (14) districts which shall be designated as follows: A-1 Agricultural District R-1 Single-Family Residential District—Low Density R-1A Single-Family Residential District—Low Density R-2 Single-Family Residential District—Medium Density R-3 Multi-Family Residential District RM-3 Multi-Family Residential District R-4 Apartment District OR Office Residential District C-1 Central Business District C-2 Commercial Retail District C-3 Highway Oriented Commercial District I-1 Light Industrial District I-2 Heavy Industrial District PUD Planned Unit Development District 
Section 301. - Zoning map.     The location and boundaries of such districts shall be as shown on the map attached to and hereby made a part of this ordinance, which shall be designated "Zoning Map of the City of Vidalia, Georgia." The said map and all the notations, references and other data thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein. 
Section 302. - District boundaries.     The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the center lines of streets, lanes, watercourses, rights-of-way of power lines and other public utilities or such lines extended or lines parallel thereto. Where the boundaries of a single district are indicated as including directly opposite sides of a street, lane, lake or watercourse, or right-of-way of a power line of other public utility, for any portion of its length, the district so indicated shall be construed to apply to the entire bed of such street, lane, lake or water course, or right-of-way of such power line, railroad or other public utility, lying within such portion of its length. Where uncertainty exists as to the location of any said boundaries as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: (1)  Where a district boundary is indicated approximately following the center line of a street, lane, lake or watercourse, or right-of-way of a power line or other public utility, such center line shall be construed to be such boundary. (2)  Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot line or other property line, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundary. (3)  Where a district boundary divides a lot or runs through undivided property, the location of such boundary, unless otherwise specified by figures on the zoning map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on said map. (4)  Where figures are shown on the zoning map between a street and a district boundary, there [they] shall indicate that the district boundary runs parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated, unless specified. Where scaled distances do not agree within such figures, the figures shall control. 
Section 303. - Federal and state owned property.     Whenever federal or state owned property is included in one (1) or more zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance only insofar as permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America and the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE IV. - A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
Section 400. - Declaration of legislative intent.     The purpose of continuing an agricultural district shall be to allow the preservation of agricultural pursuits currently in the city, to assure the protection of the existing natural resources of the city, and to allow those agricultural activities that exist prior to January 1, 1997 in A-1 zones to continue. Once the activity is discontinued for a period of at least twelve (12) months, the property shall be rezoned in compliance with state and city statutes. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 401. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot may be used or occupied, for any of the following purposes, and no other: (1)  Agriculture. (2)  Single-family detached dwelling units, excluding mobile homes. (3)  Educational, religious, philanthropic use, excluding correctional or penal institutions. (4)  Day camp, summer camp, private swimming club, provided that no year-round dwellings are permitted in connection therewith except for caretaker's cottage, provided that its lot area is in accordance with the nonagricultural lot size requirements of this district. (5)  Hospital, sanatorium, convalescent home, personal care home, nursing home, and family day care home. (6)  Municipal county, state or federal use, excluding sanitary landfill. (7)  Passenger station for public transportation, telephone central office, other public utility use. (8)  Cemetery, provided the land devoted to this use is not less than ten (10) acres in size. (9)  Noncommercial recreational uses, such as totlots, playgrounds, and ballfields. (10)  Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of the foregoing permitted uses. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4) 
Section 402. - Height regulations.     The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged in this district shall be: (1)  For any other nondwelling building or other structure, thirty-five (35) feet, except that such height may be increased to a maximum of sixty-five (65) feet or such increased height as may be warranted when approved by the board of appeals for such structures as barns, water towers, silos, chimneys, and stacks, provided that for every foot in height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet there shall be added to each yard requirement one (1) corresponding foot of width or depth. (2)  For any dwelling, thirty-five (35) feet, not to exceed three (3) stories. (3)  For any building accessory to any dwelling use, fifteen (15) feet, not exceeding one (1) story. 
Section 403. - Area, width and yard requirements. (a)  Lot area and width: For agricultural uses there shall be no minimum lot size or width. For nonagricultural use a lot area of not less than two (2) acres and a lot width of not less than two hundred (200) feet at the building line shall be provided for every nonagricultural structure erected or used for any use permitted in this district. (b)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall be not less than fifty (50) feet in depth from the right-of-way. (c)  Side yards: (1)  On each lot there shall be two (2) side yards having an aggregate width of not less than fifty (50) feet, neither side yard having a width of twenty (20) feet; except that no farm building or other structure for keeping or raising or livestock or poultry shall be erected or used nearer to any lot line than fifty (50) feet. (2)  On each corner lot there shall be two (2) side yards, the side abutting the street having a width of not less than fifty (50) feet from the ultimate right-of-way, and the side yard not abutting the street having a width of not less than twenty (20) feet; except that no farm building or other structure for keeping or raising of livestock or poultry shall be erected or used nearer to any lot line than fifty (50) feet. (d)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard on each lot the depth of which shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet, except that an accessory use structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer to the rear property line than forty (40) feet, and no farm building or other structure for keeping or raising of livestock or poultry shall be erected or used nearer to any rear lot line than fifty (50) feet. (e)  Building coverage: Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of any lot shall be occupied by buildings. 
Section 404. - Environmental protection.     All buildings and uses shall conform to regulations adopted by the state and county board of health and shall be made for the proper disposal of organic wastes, fertilizers, pesticides, and other chemicals so as to avoid pollution of the air, ground, or water. 
ARTICLE V. - R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Section 500. - Declaration of legislative intent.     It is hereby declared to be the intent of this article with respect to R-1 Residential Districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of uses permitted therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single-family detached residential uses have throughout the community. 
Section 501. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other. (1)  Single-family detached dwelling units, excluding mobile homes. (2)  Family day care. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4) 
Section 502. - Height regulations.     The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged in this district shall be: (1)  For any dwelling, thirty-five (35) feet and not to exceed three (3) stories. (2)  For any building accessory to any dwelling twenty-four (24) feet and not exceeding two (2) story[ies]. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 503. - Area, width and yard regulations. (a)  Lot area: A lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet per dwelling unit, the lot having a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet at the building line shall be provided for every building hereafter erected, altered or used in whole or in part as a dwelling, provided that in the case of a lot held in single and separate ownership, at the effective date of this ordinance, having an area of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, or a width less than one hundred (100) feet, a dwelling may be built thereon when authorized as a variance. (b)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard the depth of which shall be at least forty (40) feet provided that a lot held in single and separate ownership not in conformance with the provisions of this section may be granted a variance by the board of appeals. In the case of a corner lot, a front yard shall be required on each street on which the lot abuts; provided that any corner lot in single and separate ownership not in conformance with the provision of this section may be granted a variance by the board of appeals. (c)  Side yards In the case of a single-family dwelling, there shall be two (2) side yards, one (1) on each side of the building, together having an aggregate width of not less than thirty (30) feet, but neither having a width of less than ten (10) feet, provided that in the case of a lot held in single and separate ownership not in conformance with the provisions of this section may be granted a variance by the board of appeals. (d)  Rear yard: See section 1706, Table 1. (e)  Building coverage: The building area shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the lot area. (f)  Accessory structure: An accessory use structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer than (5) five feet to the rear property line or not closer than ten (10) feet of either side property lines except on a corner lot the accessory structure must be no closer than twenty (20) feet to any street right-of-way and not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. (Ord. of 4-8-96(2)) 
ARTICLE VI. - R-1A LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Section 600. - Declaration of legislative intent.     It is hereby declared to be the intent of this article with respect to R-1 Residential Districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of uses permitted therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single-family detached residential uses have throughout the community. 
Section 601. - Use regulations.     Any use permitted in section 501 and no other [unless specified in this section]. (1)  Family day care home. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4) 
Section 602. - Height regulations.     The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged in this district shall conform to the provisions of section 502. 
Section 603. - Area, width and yard regulations. (a)  Lot area: A lot area of not less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet per dwelling unit, the lot having a minimum width of ninety (90) feet at the building line shall be provided for every building hereafter erected, altered or used in whole or in part as a dwelling, provided that in the case of a lot held in single and separate ownership, at the effective date of this ordinance, having an area of less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet, or a width less than ninety (90) feet, a dwelling may be built thereon when authorized as a variance. (b)  [ Minimum yard requirements. ] The minimum front yard, side yard, rear yard and building coverage requirements shall conform to section 503. (Ord. of 4-8-96(2)) 
ARTICLE VII. - R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Section 700. - Declaration of legislative intent.     It is hereby declared to be the intent of this article with respect to R-2 Residential Districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of uses permitted therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single-family detached residential uses have throughout the community. 
Section 701. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected, altered, or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other: (1)  Any use permitted in the R-1A Residential District. 
Section 702. - Height regulations.     The maximum height and [of] buildings and other structures erected or enlarged in this district shall be: (1)  For any dwelling, thirty-five (35) feet and not to exceed three (3) stories. (2)  For any building accessory to any dwelling fifteen (15) feet and not exceeding one (1) story. 
Section 703. - Area, width and yard regulations. (a)  Lot area: A lot area of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet per dwelling unit, the lot having a minimum width of eighty (80) feet at the building line shall be provided for every building hereafter erected, altered or used in whole or in part as a dwelling, provided that in the case of a lot held in single and separate ownership, at the effective date of this ordinance having an area of less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet, or a width less than eighty (80) feet, a dwelling may be built thereon when authorized as a variance. (b)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard the depth of which shall be at least forty (40) feet, provided that a lot held in single and separate ownership not in conformance with the provisions of this section may be granted a variance by the board of appeals. In the case of a corner lot, a front yard shall be required on each street on which the lot abuts; provided that any corner lot held in single and separate ownership not in conformance with the provisions of this section may be granted a variance by the board of appeals. (c)  Side yards: In the case of a single-family dwelling, there shall be two (2) side yards, one on each side of the building, together having an aggregate width of not less than thirty (30) feet, but neither having a width of less than ten (10) feet, provided that in the case of a lot held in single and separate ownership not in conformance with the provisions of this section may be granted a variance by the board of appeals. (d)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be at least twenty (20) feet, provided that in the case of a lot held in single and separate ownership not in conformance with the provisions of this section may be granted a variance by the board of appeals. An accessory use structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer than five (5) feet to the rear property line and ten (10) feet to the side property line. On a corner lot an accessory use structure must be no closer than twenty (20) feet of the street line and ten (10) feet to the rear property line. (e)  Building coverage: The building area shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 
ARTICLE VIII. - R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Section 800. - Declaration of legislative intent.     It is hereby declared to be the intent of this article with respect to R-3 Residential Districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of permitted uses therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single, twin and duplex residential uses have throughout the community. 
Section 801. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other. (1)  Single-family detached dwelling, excluding mobile homes. (2)  Two (2) family—twins. (3)  Two (2) family—duplexes. (4)  Any use permitted in the R-1A and R-2 districts. (5)  Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use. (6)  Reserved. (7)  Nursery, greenhouses and noncommercial recreational use including totlots, playgrounds and ballfields. (8)  Educational, religious or philanthropic use, excluding correctional or penal institutions. (9)  Hospital, sanatorium, convalescent home, personal care home, nursing home, and family day care home. (10)  Public utility facility, excluding storage yards. (11)  Cemetery, provided that the parcel devoted to this shall contain not less than ten (10) acres. (12)  Municipal, county, state or federal use, excluding sanitary land fills and storage yards. (13)  Animal hospital, or kennel provided there is a minimum lot size of two (2) acres. (14)  Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4; Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 802. - Height regulations.     The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged in this district shall be: (1)  For any dwelling, thirty-five (35) feet and not to exceed three (3) stories. (2)  For any building accessory to any dwelling twenty-four (24) feet and not exceeding two (2) story[ies]. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 803. - Area, width and yard regulations. (a)  Single-family detached dwelling: (1)  Minimum lot area and width: A lot area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet and a lot width of not less than seventy (70) feet at the building line shall be provided for every building or other structure erected or used for any use permitted in this district. (2)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth from the street line. (3)  Side yards: a.  On each interior lot there shall be two (2) side yards, each having a width of not less than ten (10) feet. b.  On each corner lot there shall be two (2) side yards, the side yard abutting the street having a width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the street lines, and the side yard not abutting a street having a width of not less than ten (10) feet. (4)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard in each lot the depth of which shall not be less than twenty (20) feet, except that an accessory use structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer than five (5) feet to the rear property line and ten (10) feet to the side property line. On a corner lot an accessory use structure must be no closer than twenty (20) feet of the street line and ten (10) feet to the rear property line. (5)  Building coverage: Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of any lot shall be occupied by buildings. (b)  Two-family—Twin dwelling: (1)  Minimum lot area and width: A lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet per two-family twin dwelling and a lot width of not less than eighty (80) feet at the building line shall be provided. (2)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth from the street line. (3)  Side yards. a.  On each interior lot there shall be two (2) side yards, each having a width of not less than ten (10) feet. b.  On each corner lot there shall be two (2) side yards, the side yard abutting the street having a width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the street line, and the side yard not abutting a street having a width of not less than ten (10) feet. (4)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard in each lot the depth of which shall not be less than twenty (20) feet, except that an accessory use structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer than five (5) feet to the rear property line and ten (10) feet to the side property line. On a corner lot an accessory use structure must be no closer than twenty (20) feet of the street line and ten (10) feet to the rear property line. (5)  Building coverage: Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of any two-family-twin building lot may be occupied by buildings. (c)  Two-family—Duplex dwelling: (1)  Minimum lot area and width: A lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet per two-family duplex dwelling and lot width of not less than eighty (80) feet at the building line shall be provided. (2)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth. (3)  Side yards: a.  On each interior lot there shall be two (2) side yards, each having a width of not less than fifteen (15) feet. b.  On each corner there shall be a side yard abutting the street having a width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the street line, and the side yard not abutting the street having a width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. (4)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard in each lot the depth of which shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet, except that an accessory use structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer than five (5) feet to the rear property line and ten (10) feet to the side property line. On a corner lot an accessory use structure must be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the street line and ten (10) feet to the rear property line. (5)  Building coverage: Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of any two-family-duplex building lot may be occupied by buildings. 
Section 804. - Utilities.     Public water and a public sewer system shall be required when available as determined by the city manager. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 805. - Off-street parking.     Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 806. - Open space.     In order to provide playground area and open space when practicable and upon the approval of the board of appeals the developers may reduce the lot area by ten (10) percent in order to provide this area. 
ARTICLE IX. - RM-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Section 900. - Declaration of legislative intent.     It is hereby declared to be the intent of this article with respect to RM-3 Residential Districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of permitted uses therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single, twin, duplex, and mobile home residential uses have throughout the community. 
Section 901. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other: (1)  Any use permitted in the R-3 districts. (2)  Singe-family detached mobile homes or individual lots. (3)  Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4) 
Section 902. - Height regulations.     The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged in this district shall conform to the provisions of section 802. 
Section 903. - Area, width and yard regulations.     The minimum lot area, front yard, side yard, rear yard and building coverage requirements shall conform to the provisions of section 803. 
Section 904. - Utilities.     Public water and sewer shall be required as provided for in subdivision regulations. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 905. - Off-street parking.     Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 906. - Anchoring and support systems provisions.     Each mobile home shall have provisions for support and anchoring systems in accordance with section 1805. 
ARTICLE X. - R-4 APARTMENT DISTRICT 
Section 1000. - Declaration of legislative intent.     The purpose of establishing apartment districts shall be to encourage the logical and timely development of land for apartment purposes in accordance with the objectives, policies, and proposals of the future land use plan; to permit a variety of housing; to assure the suitable design of apartments in order to protect the surrounding environment of adjacent and nearby neighborhoods; and to insure that the proposed development will constitute a residential environment of sustained desirability and stability and not produce a volume of traffic in excess of the capacity for which access streets are designed. 
Section 1001. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes, and no other, provided that the requirements of the following sections are met: (1)  Apartment house or group of apartment houses which constitute a single operating or proprietary unit. (2)  Any use permitted in an R-3 District, excluding detached mobile homes, not within a mobile home park. (3)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4; Ord. of 12-14-98) 
Section 1002. - Height regulations.     The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged in this district shall be: (1)  For any dwelling, thirty-five (35) feet and not to exceed three (3) stories. (2)  For any building accessory to any dwelling, fifteen (15) feet and not exceeding one (1) story. 
Section 1003. - Area, width and yard regulations. (a)  The lot area, lot width, yard requirements and building coverage requirements for single-family dwellings, two-family—twins and two-family—duplexes shall be the same as required in the R-3 High Density Residential District, article VIII. (b)  Apartment building: (1)  Building coverage: Not more than fifteen (15) percent of the lot area shall be occupied by a building or buildings. (2)  Dwelling units per acre: There shall be not more than ten (10) dwelling units per developable acre. (3)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall be not less than fifty (50) feet in depth. (4)  Side and rear yards: No building shall be located closer than thirty (30) feet to a side or rear property line adjacent to a residential district, or within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line. (5)  Distance between buildings: The distance, at the closest point, between any two (2) buildings of a group of apartments shall not be less than ten (10) feet. (6)  Paving: All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks shall be constructed in accordance with city specifications. All drives and parking areas shall be curbed. (7)  Access: Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from vehicle streets and highways serving the apartments without undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. (8)  Utilities: No development shall be permitted unless public water supply and sanitary sewerage is supplied. (9)  Plan: The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with appropriate landscaping. (10)  Recreation: The developer shall be encouraged to give consideration to the provision of community areas, laundry facilities, playground and totlots and other services necessary for the comfort and convenience of apartment residents. 
ARTICLE XI. - OR-OFFICE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Section 1100. - Declaration of legislative intent.     To provide for a mixture of restricted type office and business development with existing high density residential development, to protect existing residences, and to provide for their orderly development. 
Section 1101. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other. (1)  Any use permitted in the R-4 District. (2)  Professional or business offices, family day care home. (3)  Agencies, studios, schools. (4)  Social or fraternal lodge or club. (5)  Financial institutions, undertaking establishments. (6)  Municipal, county, state or federal use. (7)  Public utility facilities. (8)  Retail establishments which are found to be complimentary to the surrounding uses as permitted in this district. (9)  Group day care homes. (10)  Day care centers. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4; Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 1102. - Height, area, width and yard regulations.     Minimum regulations for building heights, lot area, yards, building line and building coverage shall be in conformity with the requirements of the adjoining residential zone, provided that in the case of two (2) or more surrounding zones of the lot area, yard size and setback distances of the least restrictive residential zone shall apply. 
ARTICLE XII. - C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
Section 1200. - Declaration of legislative intent.     It shall be the purpose of the C-1 District to provide for the orderly development of a major business and commerce area of the City of Vidalia in accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals of the future land use plan of the city. The development of this district shall be directed as to the plans and redevelopment proposals heretofore shown in the future land use plan and studies which may subsequently follow. The logical and timely development of land for business purposes is herein a stated purpose of this district. The district proposes to permit a uniformity of design to ensure the orderly arrangement of buildings, land uses and parking areas, and all construction hereafter proposed for this area shall be related to this objective. The architectural and design arrangement of buildings are encouraged to conform to the general character and plans of the Central Business District. 
Section 1201. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other. (1)  Retail establishment for the sale of dry goods, variety and general merchandise, clothing, food, drugs, furnishing, or other household supplies, sale and repair of jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods or musical, professional or scientific instruments. (2)  Business or professional office, studio, bank, savings and loan association, financial institution, municipal use excluding dump. (3)  Office buildings. (4)  Restaurant, tearoom, retail bakery, confectionery or ice cream shop, or other places serving food or beverages. (5)  Florist shop or family day care home. (6)  Personal service shop, including tailor, barber, beauty salon, shoe repair, dressmaking or similar shop. (7)  Indoor theater or other place of indoor amusement or recreation. (8)  Newspaper publishing, job printing. (9)  Hotel or motel. (10)  Parking lot, not to include automobile junk yard or salvage yards. (11)  Signs subject to the provisions of article XIX. (12)  Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of the foregoing permitted uses. (13)  Residential dwellings, but only on the second story and above, or in the basement level of a structure. At least fifty (50) percent of the ground floor of the building shall be leasable commercial space not used for parking or self-service storage. All residential units shall have a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet, and shall contain their own full bathroom with a sink, toilet and tub or shower, and separate kitchen area with a sink, stove and refrigerator. Each unit must have at least one (1) off-street parking space. Each residential dwelling plan submitted is required to include a map detailing the location of the off-street parking space which may be in any of the city public parking areas and must be approved by the city. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4; Ord. of 12-10-12 ; Ord. of 4-11-16 ) 
Section 1202. - Height regulations.     The maximum height of any building or other structure erected or used in this district shall be forty (40) feet except that the height of any such other building or structure may be increased to a maximum of sixty-five (65) feet when approved by the board of appeals. Said board of appeals shall make a finding that any excess height over forty (40) feet will not be detrimental to the light, air, privacy or architectural scheme of any other structure or use currently existing or anticipated. 
Section 1203. - Site plan.     A site plan must be submitted to the city building inspector and approved prior to issuance of a building permit. The site plan shall include the following: (1)  Parking (2)  Landscaping (3)  On site loading/unloading (4)  Ingress and egress from street (5)  Storm water drainage (6)  Lot coverage by building (7)  Conformity with existing structures in zone (8)  Commercial/industrial developments shall be permanently screened from adjoining residential districts by a wall, fence, evergreen hedge, and/or other suitable enclosure of minimum height of five (5) feet and maximum height of seven (7) feet, placed at least two (2) feet inside the commercial/industrial district property line. The area between such enclosures and the property line shall be landscaped to form a permanent screening area. This requirement may be waived or altered if equivalent screening is provided by existing parks, parkways, recreational areas or by topography or other natural conditions. (9)  Building/site designs developed by an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering who shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data as outlined in section 104.2.3, design professional, contained in the Southern Standard Building Code adopted by the Vidalia City Council. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 10, 1997(2), deleted § 1203 in its entirety. Formerly, § 1203 pertained to area and yard regulations and derived from the 1968 Code. Said ordinance added new provisions as herein set out. 
ARTICLE XIII. - C-2 COMMERCIAL RETAIL DISTRICT 
Section 1300. - Declaration of legislative intent.     It shall be the purpose of the C-2 District to establish and preserve areas for those commercial facilities which are especially useful in close proximity to residential areas while minimizing the undesirable impact of such uses on the surrounding neighborhood. 
Section 1301. - Use regulations.     A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may be used or occupied, for any of the following purposes and no other. (1)  Any use specifically permitted in a C-1 District; (2)  Retail sales and pawn shops; (3)  Taxi businesses; (4)  Automobile recovery or towing services, provided any storage yard much [must] be fenced and screened from public sight; (5)  General contractor operations; and (6)  Mini storage warehouses. ( Ord. of 12-10-12 ; Ord. of 7-8-13 ) 
Section 1302. - Height regulations.     The maximum height of any building or other structure erected or used in this district shall be thirty-five (35) feet except that the height of any such other building or structure may be increased to a maximum of fifty (50) feet when approved by the board of appeals. Said board shall make a finding that any excess height over thirty-five (35) feet will not be detrimental to the light, air, privacy or architectural scheme of any other structure or use currently existing or anticipated, provided that for every foot in height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet there shall be added to each yard requirement one (1) corresponding foot of width or depth. 
Section 1303. - Area regulations, store area, and lot area. (a)  Lot area: Site plan shall ensure that lot size is adequate to meet requirements of proposed development. (b)  Building area: For every lot used in whole or in part for commercial purposes, not more than eighty-five (85) percent of the area may be occupied by buildings. (c)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot abuts which shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (d)  Side yards: Side yards shall be no less than five (5) feet, however, a one (1) foot setback is permitted provided ten (10) feet are provided on the opposite side yard. On a lot the interior side lot line of which abuts a residential district, the side yard abutting such district shall have a width not less than that required in such adjoining district. (e)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard not less than fifteen (15) feet in width. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 1304. - Site plan.     Must comply with site plan as described in section 1203. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 10, 1997(2), deleted § 1304 in its entirety. Formerly, § 1304 pertained to development requirements and derived from the 1968 Code. Said ordinance added new provisions as herein set out. 
ARTICLE XIV. - C-3 HIGHWAY ORIENTED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
Section 1400. - Declaration of legislative intent.     The C-3 Highway Oriented Commercial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for establishments offering accommodations, supplies, or services to motorists, and for certain specialized uses such as retail outlets, extensive commercial amusements and service establishments which, although serving the entire community and its trading area, do not and should not be encouraged to locate in the retail commercial or nonretail commercial districts. The C-3 Highway Oriented Commercial Districts ordinarily will be located along state and federal roads designed in the major thoroughfare plan as major highways. For the C-3 District, the specific intent of this section is: (1)  To encourage the logical and timely development of land for purposes in accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals of the future land use plan, the location of the C-3 District shall be in accordance with the said city plan. (2)  To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of land for commercial, service and amusement serving both local and long distance travelers. (3)  To provide for orderly development and concentration of such uses within the C-3 District as designated in the future land use plan. (4)  To provide appropriate space, and in particular, sufficient depth from the street, to satisfy the needs of modern commercial development where access is entirely dependent on the automobile. (5)  To encourage the development of the district with such uses and in such a manner as to minimize traffic hazards and interference from highway oriented businesses. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 1401. - Reversion.     When available frontage on state and federal highways is depleted, with the exception of an access corridor not less than forty-five (45) feet, the remaining C-3 property that is located behind the frontage shall automatically revert to a C-2 designation. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 1402. - Use regulations.     In a C-3 Highway Oriented Commercial District, a building or combination of buildings may be erected or used, and a lot area may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes, and no other: (1)  Services to traveling public: Service stations, diners, restaurants, taverns, ice cream stands, motels, inns, souvenir shops. (2)  Commercial recreation: Bowling alleys, skating rinks, theaters, amusement parks, golf driving ranges, drive-in theaters. (3)  Automotive and allied sales and services: Service stations and repair shops, used car and truck sales, automotive parts and accessories, new car and truck sales, boat and marine sales, trailer and mobile home sales, heavy equipment and/or farm implement sales, bicycle shops. (4)  Miscellaneous sales: Heating and plumbing shops, building material sales, monument sales, nurseries, greenhouses, garden stores, fruit and/or vegetable and/or produce structures, furniture and appliance stores, farm supply and feed stores. (5)  Family day care home. (6)  Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with article XIX of this ordinance. (7)  Group day care homes. (8)  Day care centers. (9)  Mini storage warehouses. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4; Ord. of 2-10-97(2); Ord. of 7-8-13 ) 
Section 1403. - Area regulations. (a)  Minimum district area: Not less than one (1) acre. (b)  Building area: No more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area shall be occupied by buildings. (c)  Building setback from street line: There shall be a minimum setback of seventy-five (75) feet from the street right-of-way. This distance may be reduced to forty (40) feet if no front of structure parking is contemplated, however, in any case a unified setback for the entire C-3 District is encouraged. (d)  Setback from district and property lines: There shall be a setback of fifty (50) feet from any district line and twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. (e)  Side yard: Side yards shall be no less than five (5) feet, however, a one (1) foot setback is permitted provided ten (10) feet are provided on the opposite side yard. (f)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (g)  Parking ration: Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for each lot or property. No on-street parking will be permitted on any street abutting the district. Parking areas shall be so placed so as not to interfere with any service area and shall not be less than twenty (20) feet from the street line, or district boundary line. All pertinent sections of the off-street parking provisions shall be enforceable. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
Section 1404. - Site plan.     Must comply with site plan as described in section 1203. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 10, 1997(2), deleted § 1404 in its entirety. Formerly, § 1404 pertained to height regulations and derived from the 1968 Code. Said ordinance added new provisions as herein set out. 
Section 1405. - Development requirements.     The general plan for new Highway Oriented Commercial Districts shall include evidence and facts showing that it has considered and made provision for, and the development shall be executed in accordance with the following essential conditions: (1)  It shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses (see section 1402) and grouping of buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and open spaces, planned and designed as an integrated unit (or to facilitate the ultimate creation of an integrated unit) in such a manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and convenient highway oriented commercial district. (2)  The proposed development or lot shall be constructed in accordance with an over-all plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with appropriate landscaping. (3)  Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles, servicing by refuse collection, fuel, fire and other vehicles, automobile accessways, and pedestrian walks. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks shall be constructed in accordance with Georgia Highway Department specifications. Service areas shall be screened from view from any abutting roadway and from within the parking area. (4)  Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from public highways serving the district without undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. (5)  Access barrier: Each lot or center with its buildings, other structures, and parking and loading areas, shall be physically separated from each adjoining highway or street by a curb or other suitable barrier including a landscape bufferstrip against unchanneled motor vehicle ingress or egress. Such a barrier shall be located at the edge of the street line unless suitable curbs and gutters are provided within the highway or street right-of-way. Except for the accessways permitted below, such barrier shall be continuous for the entire length of any lot line adjoining a street or highway. (6)  Accessways: All permanent points of vehicular access to and from the public streets shall be located not less than two hundred (200) feet from the intersection of any public street lines; except that access may be permitted to a minor or secondary street within not less than one hundred (100) feet of its intersection with the major highway. All accessways shall comply with the following requirements: a.  Width of accessway: The width of any accessway leading to or from a street or highway shall not exceed thirty-six (36) feet nor be less than fifteen (15) feet in width at the right-of-way. The alignment of accessways and curb dimensions shall be determined through architectural and site approval. b.  Spacing of accessways: In C-3 Districts no parts of any accessway shall be nearer than twenty (20) feet to any other accessway on the same lot, nor shall any part of an accessway be nearer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear property line at its intersection with a street line. Insofar as practicable, the use of common accessways by two (2) or more permitted uses shall be encouraged in order to reduce the number of closeness of access points along highways. c.  Marginal access drives (or service streets): A twenty (20) foot wide marginal access drive may be required so as to reduce the number of accessways and improve vehicular circulations within the C-3 District. This drive would be located adjacent to the landscaped buffer area and extended parallel to the street line of the major highway. Access to this facility from the parking areas of the commercial establishments shall be so located as to facilitate traffic movement between the major highway (or intersecting road), the marginal access drive, and the parking area. Prior to granting of approval of a development plan, the city shall ensure that adequate legal provisions are considered concerning the use, ownership, and responsibility of the marginal access drives. (7)  Parking areas shall be located and designed so as to facilitate the interchange of vehicular movement between the major highway, the marginal access drive, and the parking area as well as from one parking area to another provided the second lot is located on adjacent C-3 District zoned land. C-3 uses which do not require patron parking facilities in the normal sense (such as service stations, and drive-in theaters) are encouraged to locate at the extremities of the district so as to insure the continuity of the parking facilities. (8)  No on-street parking is allowed on any public highway, road, or street upon which a C-3 District abuts. (9)  Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. (10)  The C-3 District shall be permanently screened from adjoining and contiguous residential districts by a wall, fence, evergreen hedge and/or other suitable enclosure of minimum height five (5) feet and maximum height [of] seven (7) feet, placed at least two (2) feet inside the C-3 District property line. The area between such enclosure and the property line shall be landscaped to form a permanent screening area. The board of appeals may waive the requirement for a screening enclosure and/or screening area if equivalent screening is provided by existing parks, parkways, recreational areas, or by topography or other natural conditions. (11)  No facility permitted in a C-3 District shall be erected or used that is not adequately served with both sanitary sewers and public waters unless authorized as a special exception and upon submission of satisfactory evidence to the fact that sanitary sewers and public water supply are not feasible in the particular location in question. Such evidence may include, but not be limited to a specific recommendation from the city engineer, local health officer, official representative of the state health department and/or sewer authority. (12)  For the purpose of calculating the minimum area, lot dimensions and yard requirements established by this section, a C-3 District cannot lie on two sides of a public street or alley. Any area designated as being a C-3 District and lying on both sides of a public street shall be deemed to be two (2) C-3 Districts, and all minimum requirements shall be met by buildings on each side of said public street as separate districts. (12)  The development plan shall include provisions for handling surface water drainage compatible with the topography of the lot and surrounding development. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
ARTICLE XV. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
Section 1500. - Declaration of legislative intent.     To establish and preserve areas for industrial and related uses of such a nature that they do not create serious problems of compatibility with other kinds of uses. 
Section 1501. - Use regulations.     The specific uses, permitted in this district, shall be the erection, construction, alteration or use of buildings for the following uses and no other. (1)  Any individual use not specifically excluded, which meets the provisions of sections 1502 to 1512 inclusive of this article. (2)  Agriculture and family day care home. (3)  Dwelling quarters for watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises shall be permitted in connection with any industrial establishments. (4)  The following uses shall not be permitted unless proof is shown that the use meets the performance standards identified in sections 1502 through 1512: Abattoir Acetylene gas manufacture and/or storage Acid manufacture (hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulfuric, sulphaneous, carbolic) Ammonia, bleaching power or chlorine manufacture Ammunition manufacture and/or storage Arsenal Asphalt manufacture or refining Blast furnace Bone distillation Celluloid manufacture Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture Coal distillation Coke ovens Creosote treatment or manufacture Dead animal and offal reduction Distillation of bones, coal, petroleum, refuse, grain, or wood (except in the manufacture of gas) Distillation of tar Explosives, fireworks and gunpowder manufacture or storage Fat rendering Fertilizer manufacture Forge plant Hog farm Incineration, reduction, storage, or dumping of slaughterhouse refuse, rancid fats, garbage, dead animal or offal Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture Ore reduction Petroleum or kerosene refining, distillation or derivation of by-products and/or storage Potash works Power forge (riveting, hammering, punching, chipping, drawing, rolling or tumbling of iron steel, brass, or copper except as a necessary incident of manufacture or which these processes form a minor part, and which are carried on without objectionable noise outside the plant) Rolling mill Steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill Stock yards Tar manufacture (5)  Mini storage warehouses. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4; Ord. of 7-8-13 ) 
Section 1502. - Air quality control. (a)  No person owning, leasing or controlling the operation of any air contaminant sources shall willfully, negligently, or through failure to provide necessary precautions, cause, permit, or allow emission, from said air contamination source or sources, of such quantities of air contamination as will cause, or tend to cause, by themselves or in conjunction with other air contaminants, a condition of air pollution. (b)  Release of air contaminants including particulate matter, dust, fumes, gas, mist, smoke, vapor, or any combination thereof shall be governed by chapter 391-3-1, "Rules and Regulations for Air Quality Control," Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, however, in cases where the aforementioned regulations are in conflict with ordinances of the City of Vidalia, the regulations allowing the least emission of air contaminants to the atmosphere shall prevail. 
Section 1503. - Control of dust and dirt, fly ash, and fumes, vapors and gases. (a)  No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to the health or vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling at any point. (b)  No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney shall exceed three-tenths (0.3) grain per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point. (c)  For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack temperature of five hundred (500) degrees F. and fifty (50) percent excess air. 
Section 1504. - Control noise.     At no point on the boundary of a Residential or Commercial District shall the sound pressure level of any operation exceed the described levels in the octave band shown below for the districts indicated:   Octave Bank in Cycles per Seconds Along Residential District Boundaries—Maximum Permitted Sound Level In Decibels At Any Other Point on the Lot Boundary—Maximum Permitted Sound Level in Decibels   0 to 75 72 79   75 to 150 67 74   150 to 300 59 66    300 to 600 62 59    600 to 1200 46 53    1200 to 2400 40 47    2400 to 4800 34 41   Above 4800 32 39  Cross reference— Noise, § 9-1. 
Section 1505. - Control of odors.     There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at lot boundary lines. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system shall fail. There is hereby established as a guide to determining such quantities of offensive odors table 111 (Odor Thresholds) in chapter 5 "Air Pollution Abatement Manual" copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C. 
Section 1506. - Control of glare or heat.     Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the lot lines. 
Section 1507. - Control of vibration.     No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling shall be perceptible without instruments at any point beyond the lot line. 
Section 1508. - Control of radioactivity or electrical disturbances.     There shall be no activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the property of the creator of such disturbances. 
Section 1509. - Outdoor storage and waste disposal. (a)  No flammable or explosive liquids, solid, or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground; provided however, that tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with energy devices, heating devices, or appliances located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision. (b)  All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all fuel; and all raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a fence adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties. (c)  No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that [they] may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces. (d)  All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers. 
Section 1510. - Electric, diesel, gas or other power.     Every use requiring power shall be so operated that the service lines, substation, etc., shall conform to the most acceptable safety requirements, shall be so constructed, installed, etc., to be an integral part of the architectural features of the plant, or if visible from abutting residential properties shall be concealed by coniferous planting. 
Section 1511. - Industrial waste or sewage.     No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any treated or untreated sewage or industrial waste treatment and disposal except as shall be provided by sanitary engineers or other qualified persons employed by the city at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
Section 1512. - Provision and use of water.     All water requirements shall be stated in the application. The water supply and quality shall comply with the requirements established within chapter 270-5-15, "Rules and Regulations for Water Supply Quality Supply" and chapter 391-3-6, "Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Contract" as published by the environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Section 1513. - Area, width and yard regulations. (a)  Front yard: There shall be a minimum setback of sixty (60) feet from the street line. This distance may be reduced to twenty (20) feet if no front of structure-parking is contemplated, subject to exception hereinafter set forth in section 1515. (b)  Side yards: There shall be two (2) side yards, one on each side of the building, together having an aggregate width of not less than sixty (60) feet, but neither having a width of less than fifteen (15) feet. (c)  Rear yards: The required minimum depth of a rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet, subject to exception hereinafter set forth in section 1514. 
Section 1514. - Exceptions for side and rear yards.     In no case shall any building or structure be erected closer than two hundred (200) feet to a residential district nor any parking area closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential district. The first one hundred (100) feet from the property line shall be devoted to buffer areas to be maintained as green areas covered by well maintained laws, evergreen and suitable tree and shrub plantings. 
Section 1515. - Height restrictions.     The maximum height of any building or structure erected or enlarged in this district shall be thirty-five (35) feet except that the height of any such building or other structure may be increased to a maximum of sixty-five (65) feet or such increased height as may be warranted when approved by the board of appeals provided that for every foot of height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet there shall be added to each yard requirement one (1) foot. 
Section 1516. - Floor area ratio.     The total floor area of principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the lot area. 
Section 1517. - Site plan.     Must comply with site plan as described in section 1203. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
ARTICLE XVI. - I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
Section 1600. - Declaration of legislative intent.     To establish and preserve areas for necessary industrial and related uses. 
Section 1601. - Use regulations. (1)  A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied, for any industrial use, provided that such use shall not create any danger to health or safety in the surrounding area. (2)  Mini storage warehouses. ( Ord. of 7-8-13 ) 
Section 1602. - Minimum lot area, width and yard requirements. (a)  Front yard: The required minimum depth of the front yard shall be fifty (50) feet measured from the street line. (b)  Side yards: There shall be two (2) side yards each of which shall not be less than thirty (30) feet in width, subject to the exception detailed in paragraph (d), section 1602, hereinafter set forth. (c)  Rear yard: The required minimum depth of the rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet, subject to the exception detailed in paragraph (d), section 1602, hereinafter set forth. (d)  Exceptions to side and rear yards: In no case shall any building or structure erected or used in an I-2 District be located closer than two hundred (200) feet to any residential district. The remaining one hundred (100) feet shall be devoted entirely to grass, shrubs, evergreens and other suitable plantings. 
Section 1603. - Height regulations.     No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height unless authorized as a special exception by the board of appeals, in which case, for every foot of height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet there shall be added to each yard requirement one (1) corresponding foot of width or depth. 
Section 1604. - Site plan.     Must comply with site plan as described in section 1203. (Ord. of 2-10-97(2)) 
ARTICLE XVII. - P.U.D. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
Section 1700. - Declaration of legislative intent.     To encourage innovation and ingenuity in design and site planning as to permit a maximum choice the type of environmental and living units available to the public. The emphasis of this district is to facilitate a creative approach to the use of land and related physical development rather than individual minimum specifications. Developments in this district should promote an environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding development and should maximize the use of open space, recreation areas, and outstanding natural topography and geologic features. 
Section 1701. - Use regulations.     A building or group of buildings may be erected, altered, or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes. (1)  Residential, commercial, institutional, religious and public uses. (2)  Customary accessory uses. 
Section 1702. - Dimensional requirements.     Regulations as to area, yard, and height requirements are as follows: (1)  Minimum required tract size—ten (10) acres. (2)  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any tract boundary, fifty (50) feet to any existing public right-of-way or twenty-five (25) feet to any proposed street within the development. (3)  No building shall be closer to any other building than twenty (20) feet or a distance equal to the height of the lower building whichever is greater. (4)  Maximum building height—fifty (50) feet. (5)  Maximum density permitted—ten (10) dwelling units per acre. 
Section 1703. - Application procedures.     The owners shall submit to the planning commission a plan for the development and use of a tract meeting the requirements set forth in this section. At that time the owners shall request an amendment to the Vidalia zoning map and designation of the tract as Planned Unit Development District. The plan shall include the following: (1)  A site plan indicating: a.  North arrow and scale b.  Topography, not more than five-foot intervals c.  Uses of buildings and areas d.  Building locations and sizes e.  Off-street parking areas, drives, walks f.  Points of ingress and egress g.  Utility services supplied h.  Owner's name and address i.  Developer's name and address. (2)  A copy of any deed restrictions to be recorded. (3)  A drainage plan approved by the city engineer.     Additional requirements may be recommended by the planning commission for the protection of adjoining property or for the benefit and enhancement of the development. The planning commission shall report its recommendation for approval or disapproval with reasons and any additional requirements to the city council for action. If no report is submitted by the planning commission within thirty (30) days of referral, the city council may take action without such a report.     Amendments to the zoning map will follow procedures set forth in article XXIII of this ordinance. 
Section 1704. - District designation.     Planned Unit Development Districts will be designated PUD and numbered sequentially beginning with PUD-1. 
Section 1705. - Delay in construction.     In the event that construction is not begun within two (2) years from the date of approval by the city council, or is begun but is halted for a period of more than one (1) year, said approval shall be void. Reapproval must follow the procedures set forth in section 1703. 
Section 1706. - Amendment to the plan.     The plan may be amended in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 1703. Table 1 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT District Total Area in Sq. Ft. Area Per Dwelling Unit in Sq. Ft. Lot Width in Ft. Minimum Front Yard Setback— Ft. Minimum Side Yard Width— Ft. Minimum Rear Yard Depth— Ft. Maximum Height— Ft. 1/ Maximum Lot Coverage Percentage A-1 2 Acres* 2 Acres* 200 50 20 Each total 50 75  35* 25 R-1 20,000 20,000 100 40 10 Each total 30 30 35 15 R-1A 14,000 14,000 90 40 10 Each total 30 25 35 15 R-2 12,000 12,000  80 40 10 Each total 30 20 35 20 R-3 RM-3  8,000 One- family unit- 8,000  70 20 10 Each 20 35 25 10,000 Two- family twin- 5,000  80 25 10 Each 25 35 25 10,000 Two- family duplex- 5,000  80 25 15 Each 25 35 25 R-4 One- and two-family unit—same as R-3 Multi-family unit—See section 1003 OR (Minimum requirements—Same as adjoining resident district.) C-1  40*  35* C-2 20,000 square feet per individual store 15 None— 5 if provided 15 85 C-3 Minimum 1 acre See Article XIV for Dimensional Requirements 30 I-1  60* 15 Each* total 60  20*  35* 40 I-2 50 30 Each*  30*  35*  *See appropriate section for special sections. 1/ Accessory buildings See [sections] 201, 502(2), 503(f). NOTE: See appropriate section for regulations on corner lots and placement of accessory uses. (Ord. of 4-8-96(2)) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - MOBILE HOME PARKS[2]     There shall be no future development and no authorization for the location of mobile home parks within the city limits of Vidalia from the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord. of 12-14-98) Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 14, 1998, deleted Art. XVIII in its entirety and enacted new provisions in lieu thereof. Formerly, such provisions derived from the 1994 Code and an ordinance adopted Nov. 21, 1994. Cross reference— Mobile homes and mobile home parks, ch. 11. 
ARTICLE XIX. - SIGNS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 22, 2009, amended art. XIX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. XIX consisted of §§ 1900—1904, 1910—1918, 1930—1938, 1961—1963, 1970—1975, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted October 13, 2008. Cross reference— Buildings; construction and related activities, ch. 6. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Section 1900. - Findings, purpose and intent. (a)  The City of Vidalia finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever-increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. (b)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the city's citizens. (c)  The city further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The mayor and council finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a propriety purpose, such as identifying markings on utility poles, public utility signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. (d)  The city finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of providing addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Signs at the entrances to subdivisions or major developments favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. The city further finds that holiday decorations such as strings of light are not signs, but rather seasonal ornamentation not controlled by this Ordinance. (e)  The purposes of this article are to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication within the city; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this chapter. (f)  In considering the appropriate level of sign regulation for the City of Vidalia, the mayor and council have considered planning studies, reports, news articles and related information from a variety of sources. The mayor and council have determined that high intensity full color LED signs pose unique and substantial hazards to traffic caused by a higher level of distractibility than monochrome LED signs. In addition, the high intensity full color LED signs are inconsistent with the aesthetic standards established for major thoroughfares running through the city. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1901. - Interpretation generally.     Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meaning set forth in this zoning ordinance. Words and phrases not defined by this the zoning ordinance, but defined in other city ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinances. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Article, division, and section headings or captions are for reference only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1902. - Authority for provisions.     This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, the Charter of the City of Vidalia, the general police powers of Vidalia and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1903. - Applicability.     Signs shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created and maintained in accordance with the physical standards outlined in this article. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1904. - Noncommercial speech protected.     It is not the intent of this article to regulate the content of speech through signage controls. To the extent any court of competent jurisdiction interprets any provision of this article to restrict the content of speech; it is the intent of the city council that all allowable signs may display a noncommercial message in addition to, or in lieu of, any other message. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1905. - Variances.     No variances from the requirements of this article shall be granted. (Ord. of 9-29-09(2)) 
Sections 1906—1909. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 
Section 1910. - Computation of sign area. (a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c), the area of a sign face shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, color, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets other regulations of the city and is clearly incidental to the display itself. (b)  Area of multi-faced signs. The sign area of signs with more than one (1) sign face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one (1) point. When two (2) sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces are parallel, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty-two (42) inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of the larger of the two (2) faces. (c)  Area of monument signs. The computation of the sign area of a monument sign shall include the entire monument structure, as measured from the top to ground and side to side, upon which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements occur. (Ord of 4-22-09) 
Section 1911. - Signs allowed without permit.     The following signs are allowed on private property without obtaining a permit: (1)  Address numerals not exceeding four (4) inches in height in residential districts or eight (8) inches in height in commercial and industrial districts. (2)  Flags, provided that no flag shall exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area in any residential zone or sixty (60) square feet in area in any commercial, industrial or institutional zone and shall not be flown from a pole, the top of which is higher than twenty-five (25) feet in any residential zone or forty (40) feet in height in any commercial or industrial zone. The number of flags allowed without permit shall not exceed two (2) per parcel. Any flag not meeting any one (1) or more of these standards shall be considered a banner and shall be subject to regulation as such. (3)  Standard informational signs of less than four (4) square feet in sign area that otherwise meet the standards of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1912. - Planned unit developments.     Those areas of a planned unit development that are subject to single-family residential use shall follow the sign standards for single-family residential use. Those areas of a planned unit development that are used other than for single-family use shall follow the sign standards for other developed property. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1913. - Private signs erected on public property. (a)  No person shall erect a sign on public property other than the governmental entity responsible for such property or public utility companies or contractors occupying or working on public property pursuant to governmental contract or franchise. Such public utility companies and contractors occupying or working on public property shall be limited to temporary traffic control signage meeting state specifications for on-going work in street rights-of-way and necessary signage to identify fixtures for public safety response in the event of emergency. (b)  Any sign erected or installed on public property in violation of this section shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation and removal by the city without notice. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person posting such a sign the full cost of removal and disposal of the sign. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1914. - Setback requirements. (a)  Signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the curb, or pavement edge on streets with no curb, and at least fifty (50) feet from any adjacent parcel designed or intended for single-family residential use. (b)  No freestanding sign shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any other freestanding sign. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1915. - Owner's permission required for erection of signs.     No sign shall be placed on any private property without first obtaining the consent of the owner or owner's agent of the private property; however, no sign shall be erected in violation of any section of this ordinance. Any sign located on private property in compliance with the terms of this ordinance shall be included in the allowable aggregate computation for the activity to which it refers. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1916. - Prohibited signs.     The following signs are prohibited at all locations in the city: (1)  Obsolete or abandoned signs. (2)  Signs not structurally safe, clean, or in good repair. (3)  Signs attached to, drawn, or painted upon trees, rocks, or other natural features. (4)  Reserved. (5)  Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road or adjoining property by a person of normal hearing. (6)  If illuminated, signs containing, including, or illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving lights except those contained in allowable changeable copy signs. (7)  If illuminated, the illumination is not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with the operation of any motor vehicle. (8)  If illuminated, the illumination is such that it interferes with the effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, device, or signal. (9)  Signs containing more than one (1) face visible from the same direction on the main traveled way. Double-faced, back-to-back constructed signs shall, for the purpose of determining compliance with size and spacing limitation, be considered as one (1) sign. (10)  Signs located so as to obscure, or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign, signal or device. (11)  Signs located so as to obscure, or otherwise interfere with a motor vehicle operator's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic. (12)  Roof signs. (13)  Signs displaying any obscene message as obscenity is defined by U.S. Supreme Court decisions. (14)  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part thereto; signs attached in any manner to any fire escape. (15)  Signs placed on any utility pole, light pole, telephone pole or similar utility fixtures, other than identification labels attached by the owner of those poles and fixtures. (16)  Reserved. (17)  Billboards located less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet from another billboard. (Ord. of 4-22-09; Ord. of 7-8-13(1) ) 
Section 1917. - Electronic reader boards/message centers/changeable copy signs.     Electronic reader board/ message center/changeable copy signs are allowed to a maximum size area of thirty-two (32) square feet in the C-3 Commercial and Industrial zones, twenty-four (24) square feet in the C-2 Commercial zones, and twenty (20) square feet in the C-1 Commercial zones. The changeable copy signs will be included in the maximum square footage size allowed for signs. (Ord. of 4-22-09; Ord. of 7-8-13(1) ) 
Section 1918. - Compliance with technical codes and zoning. (a)  All permanent signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, altered, relocated or modified within the city shall conform with the requirements of the building and electric codes adopted by the city. Where the provisions of the building or electrical code and this chapter conflict or overlap, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. (b)  All permanent signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the city shall conform to all ordinances of the city. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this article and the other city ordinances, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Sections 1919—1929. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION OF SIGNS BY LAND USE: DEVELOPED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 
Section 1930. - Applicability.     The provisions of this article apply to all properties zoned single-family residential, properties used or intended for single-family residential occupancy, and town homes, as well as properties in planned unit development districts designed and intended for single-family residential occupancy. Institutional uses located in single-family residential zones are governed by division 4 rather than this division. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1931. - Aggregate sign allowance.     Parcels designed and intended for single-family residential occupancy are limited to an aggregate sign area of eight (8) square feet. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1932. - Height limitations.     No sign shall be erected on a single-family parcel to a height greater than four (4) feet. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1933. - Freestanding sign.     Each residential lot is allowed one (1) freestanding sign. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1934. - Standard informational signs.     In addition to any other signs authorized by this division, such property may contain standard information signs, subject to the aggregate sign area allowance, without a permit or fee, placed so that they are located entirely on private property. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1935. - Permanent subdivision signs.     In addition to any other signs authorized by this division, if such property is located at the entrance to any residential subdivision, then such property may contain no more than one (1) permanent sign per entrance. Such signs may be lighted by single-flood indirect lighting only, which may not be directed onto the street or vehicular traffic. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1936. - Sign supports.     All signs erected on single-family parcels shall be supported by independent means by use of a wooden stake or metal frame inserted directly into the ground. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1937. - Illumination.     No sign erected in a single-family residential district may be illuminated except as allowed under section 1935. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Sections 1938—1949. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO OTHER DEVELOPED PROPERTY 
Section 1950. - Applicability.     The provisions of this article apply to all properties zoned and intended for commercial, institutional, industrial and multifamily use, as well as properties in planned unit developments designed and intended for such uses. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1951. - Freestanding signs.     Freestanding signs may consist of either stanchion signs or monument signs. (a)  Stanchion signs. 1.  Number. Stanchion signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per parcel per street frontage. Where a parcel has frontage on more than one (1) street, one (1) stanchion sign shall be allowed on each frontage. 2.  Height. Stanchion signs shall be erected to a height of no more than eighteen (18) feet in the C-1 district, twenty-five (25) feet in the C-2 district, and thirty-five (35) feet in the C-3 and Industrial districts. 3.  Sign area. a.  Stanchion signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in sign area for signs fronting on Highways 130, 280, 292 and 297. b.  Stanchion signs shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet in sign area for those signs fronting surface streets. (b)  Monument signs. Monument signs may be erected in lieu of stanchion signs at the option of the sign owner. No monument sign shall exceed eighteen (18) feet in height. Monument signs fronting Highways 130, 280, 292 and 297, and shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in sign area. Monument signs fronting surface streets shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet in sign area. (Ord. of 4-22-09; Ord. of 11-12-12(2) ) 
Section 1952. - Building signs. (a)  Building signs may include a combination of wall, canopy, marquee, projecting, and awning signs. Building signs shall be limited to two (2) signs per street frontage per building. Window signs must be mounted inside of windows or made of a material suitable for outdoor use so as not to become litter. (b)  The aggregate sign area of all building signs shall be no more than ten (10) percent of the total store frontage, not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet. (c)  Wall signs shall not project more than six (6) inches from the surface upon which they are mounted. (d)  Awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall and shall not project beyond the building face by more than four (4) feet. (e)  Projecting signs shall be supported by overhead supports and shall leave a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance over any sidewalk or walkway. Supports for projecting signs shall be set at a perpendicular angle to the building and parallel to the plane of the ground. (f)  Marquee signs are allowed only in conjunction with indoor movie theaters and live performance theaters. Marquee signs shall be attached to the outside wall of the affected building. No more than two (2) signs as described in section 1917. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1953. - Drive-through windows.     In addition to any other freestanding signs authorized by this article, if such property contains a business premises where materials are delivered at a drive-through delivery point other than on the front side of the building, then one (1) additional freestanding sign per delivery point shall be allowed to be located on the property in the side or rear yard; no such sign shall exceed thirty (30) square feet in sign area nor eight (8) feet in height. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1954. - Incidental signs.     Incidental signs conforming to the definition and standards of this article may be erected on private property. No more than two (2) such signs shall be located at a driveway entrance and shall be placed in such a manner as to not constitute a traffic hazard. Each parcel is limited to a maximum of four (4) incidental signs. Such signs shall not exceed two (2) feet in height and two (2) square feet in total sign area. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1955. - Banners available for special events and promotions. (a)  Special uses, community, nonprofit events or other noncommercial promotions desiring the use of banners shall make application to the building official for a banner permit. (b)  Commercial users desiring the use of banners shall make application to the building official for a banner permit. (c)  Banner permits shall be made on forms provided by the building inspector and shall contain all information required to ensure compliance with the regulations of this section. Banner permits shall be issued by the building inspector within ten (10) business days where the building inspector determines the applicant meets the standards of this section. In the event a banner permit is denied, the applicant shall have the same rights of appeal as other sign applications denied under this article. (d)  Banners must be removed when determined by the city marshal to be in disrepair. (e)  Banners shall not exceed three (3) feet by twelve (12) feet in size. (f)  All banners must be placed on private property. Banners placed on public property may be confiscated and removed by the city without notice. (g)  Banners must be mounted on the building or permanent structure attached to the building. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1956. - Reserved. 
Section 1957. - Planned commercial centers. (a)  A uniform sign plan is required for any planned commercial shopping center, such as a shopping center with three (3) or more establishments. The uniform sign plan shall govern the placement and design of all signs within the planned commercial center as to their location, materials, size, letter style and color. (b)  The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. (c)  The uniform sign plan is to be submitted to the building inspector and shall be approved upon a finding by the building inspector that: (1)  The plan provides that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. (2)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the signs proposed in the uniform sign plan shall comply with the requirements of this division, such as number, size and location restrictions. (3)  In addition to any individual business signs that may be allowed under this division, each planned commercial center shall be limited to one (1) freestanding sign, located at the entrance of the commercial center. Such sign may contain one (1) individualized sign for each business located in the planned commercial center, provided that the aggregate sign area for such monument sign does not exceed the limitations set forth in section 1951(b). (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1958. - Billboards.     In lieu of other freestanding signs authorized by section 1951, any property located in a commercial or industrial district may contain one (1) billboard which complies with the following: (a)  Sign area. No billboard sign face shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet. Said area not to include as part of the measurement the structural components or trim of the sign. (b)  Billboards may be erected to a height of no more than thirty (30) feet above the grade of the highway. If additional height is needed, a conditional use permit may be issued. No billboard shall exceed thirty (30) feet in length and the bottom coping of the sign shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet above ground level. (c)  All portions of a sign face and support members of any billboard shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from all buildings, structures, property lines, and rights-of-way. (d)  Illumination. All illuminated billboards shall use base-mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. (e)  Only one (1) billboard shall be allowed per platted lot. No billboard shall be placed on any lot that contains any freestanding sign. (f)  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of any billboard, excluding aprons, are prohibited. (g)  Billboards shall not contain more than one (1) face visible from the same direction on the main traveled way. Double-faced, back-to-back constructed signs shall, for the purpose of determining compliance with size and space limitations, be considered as one (1) sign. (h)  No billboards shall be located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of another existing billboard. (i)  Billboards shall be erected no further than one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way line of any state or federal highway. (j)  Billboards shall be allowed to utilize tri-vision technology. Any existing billboard meeting the standards of this section that is eligible for conversion to tri-vision technology shall require a permit for such conversion from the city. However, no such multiple-message sign shall be placed within five thousand (5,000) feet of another mechanical multiple-message sign on the same side of the highway (as mandated by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75(c)(1)(C)). (k)  No billboards are allowed to be constructed on Highway 280. (l)  No billboard shall use LED technology. (m)  No billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of single-family residentially zoned parcels and/or parcels designated for single-family residential use. (n)  No billboard shall be located within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreational area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery. (o)  No billboard shall be stacked one (1) above the other and there shall be no V-type sign structures, only single-pole, back-to-back structures shall be allowed. The sign owner shall be responsible for maintaining the sign and ensuring that no litter accumulates from posting or deterioration of any sign. (p)  No billboard shall be located so as to obscure or otherwise interfere with a motor vehicle operator's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic. (q)  No person shall engage within the corporate limits of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, in the business of erecting or maintaining billboards under this ordinance until after such persons shall have filed with the city clerk evidence of liability insurance coverage of: fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) personal injury to any one (1) person and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for personal injury growing out of any one (1) occurrence. Such liability insurance will save and keep the city, and all of its officials, employees and agents, harmless from all damages, liabilities, losses or judgments resulting by reason of the erection or maintenance of any such sign, and of any injury to persons or damages to property resulting therefrom. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1959. - Historic district. (a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to those parcels located within the historic district of the City of Vidalia as designated by the National Register of Historic Places. The Historic District is bounded on the south by Fourth Street, on the east by Durden Street, on the west by Adams and College Streets, on the north by N. Main, Pine and Everett Streets. (b)  Signs authorized. In addition to any other signs allowed under this division, portable sidewalk signs are also allowed in the historic district only. One (1) nonilluminated portable sidewalk sign per business (either A-frame or easel structure) is allowed to be placed on the sidewalk during business hours. Two (2) such signs are allowed if such business has two (2) fronts on a corner. Said sign may not impede pedestrian traffic and shall be located adjacent to the entrance of the business, within one (1) foot from the entrance and at least three (3) feet away from the curb. Such sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height nor two (2) feet in width. Each such sign shall be removed at the end of each business day and no merchandise is allowed on the sidewalk. (c)  Sign material regulations. When regulated by section 1959, signage shall be of quality design, construction, color and materials consistent with the design of the building and/or development. This includes glass, masonry, wood, natural stone, ornamental metalwork, and ceramics. Paint and metal gilt work are also acceptable. "Faux" materials such as sign foam, vinyl and plastic are prohibited. Signs painted on cloth awnings are permissible. Mixed media are permitted, including reverse illuminated letters and etched or cutout solid materials, illuminated from behind. (d)  [Freestanding signs.] Freestanding signs in the historic district are limited to monument signs. (e)  [Billboards.] Billboards are prohibited in the historic district. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1960. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VACANT AND UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY 
Section 1961. - Freestanding signs.     One (1) freestanding sign will be allowed for every fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of street frontage. Such signs shall follow the height and sign area limitations outlined in division 4. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Sections 1962—1969. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Section 1970. - Permits; procedures. (a)  Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a permit under provisions of this article, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any sign within the city without first obtaining a sign permit from the city. No permit shall be required to repaint or change the lettering of an existing conforming sign with like-style elements, provided that no change of ownership of the entity displaying the message thereon has been made. (b)  Applications for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the city and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: (1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. (2)  Tax Parcel ID and address of building, structure, or parcel to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected. (3)  Two (2) accurate drawings showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). (4)  One (1) accurate drawing to scale of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment of the sign to the building or ground. The drawing shall specifically include the size of the sign area, overall height of the sign, location of the sign installation and its relation to existing rights-of-way and all driveways, a site distance diagram, and any protective devices or landscaping around the base of the sign. Applicant shall provide engineering data to support design and ensure safety including, but not limited to, structural integrity and wind load requirements. (5)  Name, address, telephone number and business license number of the person erecting the sign. (6)  Consent of the owner or lessor of the building or parcel to which or upon which the sign is to be erected. (7)  The location and size of all other signs on the parcel upon which the sign is to be erected. (8)  The distance in feet to the nearest existing freestanding sign. (9)  The distance in feet from the location of the proposed sign to the nearest residentially zoned parcel. (10)  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be erected and the length of the street frontage for the street to which the sign is oriented. (11)  If the sign is to be lighted, an application for electrical permit meeting all standards of the city's electrical code. (12)  The value of the sign. (13)  Such other information as the city shall require showing full compliance with this and other ordinances of the city. (c)  No review of the specific content of any proposed sign shall be made or required. (d)  For signs shared by more than one (1) person or entity, the property owner or sign contractor shall secure a permit for the sign structure and the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the structure as well as for removal of individual sign panels identifying uses which no longer exist within the building or buildings covered by the shared sign. In addition to the permit required for a shared sign structure, a separate permit shall be required for each entity shown on the sign which shall be obtained by the owner, his tenant, an authorized agent, or the sign contractor. (e)  Each application for permit shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fees. Fees for permits shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. (f)  Upon the filing of an application for a permit, the building inspector shall review all plans and specifications submitted and the premises upon which the sign is proposed to be erected. Such review shall be completed within thirty (30) business days of submission of a completed sign application. If, based on review of the permit application and inspection of the site, the proposed sign is in compliance with the requirements of this article and all other ordinances and laws of the city, the building inspector shall issue a permit upon payment of permit fees no later than thirty (30) business days from receipt of the completed application. If no decision is made within thirty (30) days, the permit will be deemed denied. (g)  The city shall deny permits to applicants who submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the building inspector shall revoke the permit. Should the building inspector deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before thirty (30) business days after the city received the completed application. Alternatively, the city may personally serve the sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. (h)  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision to the board of appeals, provided such appellant files a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten (10) business days of the building inspector's notice. Such appeal shall be considered by the board of appeals at the next meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that such notice of appeal is received a minimum of seven (7) business days before the next meeting. Appeal notices received within seven (7) days of a scheduled board of appeals meeting shall be heard at the next meeting more than seven (7) days following receipt of appeal. The board of appeals shall issue a written decision to the applicant no later than thirty (30) days following the close of the appeal hearing. If no decision is made within thirty (30) days, the appeal will be deemed denied. Decisions of the board of appeals to affirm the decision of the building inspector or to overrule the decision of the building inspector and grant or continue the permit for which appeal is taken shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant in the same manner as the original notice to deny or notice of revocation. (i)  In the event an applicant whose permit has been denied or a permit holder whose permit has been revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of appeals, such applicant or permit holder may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. (j)  Any person commencing work on a sign before securing the necessary permit from the building inspector shall be subject to double permit fees under the permit fee schedule. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1971. - Permit expiration.     A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made of permit fees for permits that expire due to failure to erect a permitted sign; provided that where an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one (1) six-month extension may be granted by the building inspector on the duration of the permit. Where a permit has expired for failure to erect the sign, if an individual later desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of resubmission. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1972. - Nonconforming signs. (a)  Signs that, on the effective date of this article, were approved and legally erected under previous sign restrictions, and that became or have become nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this article, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. (1)  No increase in size of the nonconforming sign shall be permitted. (2)  Existing signs which were legally erected and which have become nonconforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this ordinance due to road widening may be moved to meet the setback requirement of this ordinance but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. (3)  In all zoning districts, the following signs shall be prohibited and shall be removed by the owner: a.  Signs illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances. b.  Signs made of paper, cloth or non-durable materials (except standard informational signs). c.  Signs located in the public right-of-way (except as permitted by this article). (b)  Upon failure to comply with any requirement of this section, the building inspector or his authorized agent may cause the removal of such sign at the expense of the owner. (c)  Any attempt to add LED sign-face on a nonconforming sign shall negate its nonconforming status and require its removal. (d)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article; provided that signs damaged by fire or act of God may be restored to their original condition. (e)  Each nonconforming sign shall be identified by the city. (f)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the building inspector, with the aid of the police department and other city agencies. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1973. - Inspections.     The building inspector shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and nonconforming sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this article or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the sign owner. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1974. - Removal procedure. (a)  The building inspector shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or electrically or structurally defective sign or signs for which no permit has been issued or which are otherwise in violation of this article. The building inspector shall prepare a written notice that shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved. The notice shall state that if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within twenty (20) business days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. (b)  All notices by the building inspector shall be personally served or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date received if hand delivery or otherwise on the date delivered as shown upon the return receipt of the U.S. Postal Service. Notice is assumed made if certified mail is not picked up within ten (10) days. (c)  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign, and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the sign or on the premises. (d)  Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the building inspector ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice. Appeals will be handled as provided in subsections 1970(h) and (i). (e)  If the person to whom notice is directed fails to take corrective action within the time period prescribed, or if on appeal the city affirms the decision of the building inspector and the person fails to take corrective action or remove the offending sign within the time period prescribed, then the building inspector shall proceed to have the sign removed or corrected to bring such sign into compliance with this chapter or to remove any unsafe condition. (f)  When it is determined by the building inspector that the sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety and contact cannot be made with the sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served prior to removal. In such emergency situation, the building inspector shall document the unsafe condition and may correct the danger, with all costs being charged to the sign owner or the property owner. (g)  Any sign removed by the building inspector pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as city property taxes. The cost of removable shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign removal. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1975. - Permit procedures (a)  Applications. Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the city clerk or designee. Only applications completed on the appropriate form as prescribed by the city will be accepted. Applications shall be submitted to the city at least two (2) weeks prior to the requested date for installation of the temporary/disposable sign. (b)  Fees. The fee for application for a temporary/disposable sign shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Applicant is entitled to a refund of one hundred twenty five ($125.00) upon appropriate removal of permitted temporary/disposable signs. (c)  Action. Within seven (7) days of the submission of the completed application and payment of fees, the city shall either issue the temporary/disposable sign permit or reject the permit with explanation. (d)  Right-of-way. Temporary/disposable signs may not be permitted or erected on public right-of-way. (e)  Inspection. The zoning inspector shall inspect the installation of the temporary/disposable sign installation to insure proper installation and removal in accordance with this section. Signs installed in violation of this ordinance will be removed at the discretion of the zoning inspector. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1976. - Installation procedures. (a)  Signs may be installed on the first day of the permit period in the areas described on the application. (b)  Signs may not be installed in any manner which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, constitutes a hazard of any kind. (c)  Signs are not to be allowed to remain past the permitted period and must be removed by the applicant. (d)  Signs not removed within forty-eight (48) hours of the last permit day shall be removed by the city and the deposit will be forfeited. (e)  No temporary/disposable sign may be installed on the city right-of-way. (f)  No more than thirty-five (35) disposable signs are allowed per permit. Only one (1) permit per business, individual, event or activity is allowed per twelve (12) month period. (Ord. of 4-22-09) 
Section 1977. - Exemptions. (a)  Construction signs may be erected during the term of new construction and major commercial remodeling for the purpose of advertising contractors, sub-subcontractors, future tenants, and financing institutions. (b)  Political signs shall be exempt from the payment of fees and removal deposits and may remain from qualifying date to election date or run-off election if necessary. Political sign must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours of the election. (c)  Signs advertising sale and lease of property upon which they are located and directional signs no larger than ten (10) square feet for residential and thirty-two (32) square feet for commercial. (d)  Church directional signs provided that they are no larger than four (4) square feet, there cannot be more than two signs, and they cannot be located within 500 feet of each other. (e)  Non-profit/charitable organizations and community events are exempt from fees; however, all other procedures apply. Failure to abide by procedures outlined in this section could result in forfeiture of exemption status. (f)  Hospital and affiliated healthcare facilities, as defined below, shall be exempt from the application of this article in zone districts C-3, I-1, I-2 and A-1: (1)  A hospital is defined as a non-profit hospital corporation and/or its ancillary non-profit healthcare entities organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia and officially recognized as meeting the criteria as exempt from the Internal Revenue Code as defined by 501(c)(3) or other similar federal non-profit exemptions. The term nursing home(s) and senior assisted living facilities or medical office building(s) shall be given their common and ordinary meanings, and (2)  This exemption to healthcare signage is limited to directional, monument and marquee signs located on property owned by such parent hospital and/or hospital-sponsored ancillary 501(c)(3) institutions but only provided such ancillary and/or affiliated non-profit entities are sponsored or affiliated with such hospital providing acute-care patient beds and/or emergency room facilities and/or nursing home and/or senior healthcare or medical office as identified in (a) above within the city limits of Vidalia, Georgia. (Ord. of 4-22-09; Ord. of 9-20-10; Ord. of 11-12-12(1) ) 
ARTICLE XX. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 19-30 et seq. 
Section 2000. - Required off-street parking facilities.     Except with respect to lots in District C-1, there shall be provided off-street parking for motor vehicles, and the minimum number of parking spaces to be provided shall be shown in the following list: Use Spaces Required Single and two-family dwellings 2 per dwelling unit Rooming houses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, convalescent homes 1 parking space for each 2 residents and 1 space for each 2 employees Hotels 1 space for each guest room, suites, or units plus any spaces required for accessory uses Apartments and townhouses 2 spaces per dwelling unit Mobile home subdivisions and parks 2 per mobile home Churches, theaters, facilities for spectator sports, auditoriums, concert halls 1 space for each 4 seats Barber shops and beauty parlors 2 plus 1.5 per chair Bowling alleys 4 spaces per lane in addition to spaces required for restaurant facilities - excluding snack bar Fast food take-out establishments and drive-in restaurants 0.10 times floor area in square feet Restaurants (except drive-ins) 1 space for each 2 seats plus 1 space for each 2 employees on shift of greatest employment Furniture, appliance, household equipment, carpet and hardware stores, repair shops including shoe repair, contractor's showrooms, museums and galleries 1 per 800 square feet of floor area Funeral parlors 1 for each 2 seats in areas used for assembly purposes, plus sufficient space to park or store all company owned or leased motor vehicles Gas stations 1 space per 400 square feet but not less than 6 spaces Laundromats 0.5 per machine Doctors' and dentists' offices 1 space for each 300 square feet of the gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 2 employees Banks 1 space for each 200 square feet of total floor area plus 1 space for each 3 employees Warehouses 1 per 500 square feet of floor space  For uses not specifically listed above, the requirements listed below are applicable: Use Spaces Required Retail stores and service establishments 1 space per 200 square feet of floor space and outdoor sales space - if covered Offices 1 per 300 square feet of floor space Other commercial and industrial uses 0.75 times maximum number of employees on premises at any one time.  Where calculation in accordance with the foregoing list results in requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than ½ shall be disregarded and any fraction of ½ or more shall be required one space. (Ord. No. Ord. of 5-11-98) 
Section 2001. - Miscellaneous off-street parking rules.     The following rules shall be observed: (1)  In Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, RM-3, and R-4, required off-street parking shall be provided on the lot on which is located the use to which the parking pertains. In other districts, such parking may be provided either on the same lot or on another lot in a residential district but only where the lot on which the parking spaces are located and the lot on which the use requiring them is located are not separated by more than three hundred (300) feet at their closest points, measured along a street or streets. (2)  Where off-street parking is located on a lot other than the lot occupied by the use which required it, site plan approval for both lots is required. (3)  The use of any required parking space for the storage of any motor vehicle for sale, or for any other purpose other than the parking of motor vehicles, is prohibited. (4)  The following minimum design standards shall be observed in laying out off-street parking facilities: Parking Angle Stall Width Aisle Width Parking Stall Length Curb to Curb  0° to 15°  9 ft. 12 ft. 23 ft. 30 ft. 16° to 37° 10 ft. 11 ft. 19 ft. 47 ft. 38° to 57° 10 ft. 13 ft. 19 ft. 54 ft. 58° to 74° 10 ft. 18 ft. 19 ft. 61 ft. 75° to 90° 10 ft. 24 ft. 19 ft. 63 ft.  
Section 2002. - Design and requirements for commercial and industrial parking lots.     All parking lots in commercial and industrial districts shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all of the following conditions: (1)  They shall not be used for the sale, repair or dismantling of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. (2)  They shall be properly graded for drainage; surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, asphalt, oil or any dust-free surfacing and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash or debris. (3)  They shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion and the effect of headlight glare. (4)  They shall be provided with wheel or bumper guards so located and arranged that no part of any parked vehicles will extend beyond the boundaries of the parking lot. (5)  Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably nor unnecessarily disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties nor interfere with traffic by either location or glare. 
Section 2003. - Reduction of facilities.     Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of this ordinance shall not subsequently be reduced to an amount less than required hereunder for a similar new building or new use. Off-street parking facilities provided to comply with the provision of this ordinance shall not subsequently be reduced below the requirements of this ordinance. 
Section 2004. - Required off-street loading spaces.     Loading spaces required under this section shall be at least fifty (50) feet long and twelve (12) feet wide. The regulations of this section are not applicable in District C-4. Every lot used for commercial or industrial purposes and having a building or buildings with a total floor area of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet and every lot used for office or research purposes on which there is a building or buildings having a total floor area of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, shall be provided with an off-street loading space. An additional off-street loading space shall be required for lots used for commercial or industrial purposes where the floor area of all buildings exceeds one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. 
ARTICLE XXI. - ADMINISTRATION 
Section 2100. - [Enforcement officials.]     The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the building inspector, who shall also be the zoning officer, with the aid of the police department and other city agencies. 
Section 2101. - Duties and powers.     It shall be the duty of the building inspector and he shall have power to: (1)  Require that the application for a building permit and the accompanying plot plan shall contain all the information necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building complies with provisions of this ordinance. (2)  Keep a permanent record of all plans and application for permits, and all permits issued with notations as to special conditions attached thereto. All records should be open for public inspection and shall be the property of the city. (3)  Require that no building permit shall be issued until the building inspector has certified that the proposed building, alteration or use complies with all the provisions of this ordinance. (4)  Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this ordinance. In carrying out such surveys, the building inspector or his representative may enter upon any land or buildings. (5)  Make written orders requiring compliance with the provisions of this ordinance to be served personally or by registered mail. (6)  Maintain a map showing the current zoning classification of all land. (7)  Maintain a map and register showing the registration, identity, location and type of all nonconforming uses. (8)  Participate in all proceedings before the board of appeals, present facts and information to assist the board in reaching a decision, resist and oppose any deviations from standard provisions of this ordinance and have decisions of the board reviewed in a court of proper jurisdiction when, in the judgment of the building inspector, such review is desirable. (9)  The building inspector shall have authority to issue permits only for construction and uses which are in accordance with the ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work for the erection or alteration of any building until a building permit has been duly issued therefor. Permits for construction and uses which are a special exception to such general requirements shall be issued by the building inspector only upon order of the city council. The building inspector shall issue no permits for the construction or use of any land or buildings unless it also conforms to the requirements of all other zoning ordinances. Cross reference— Buildings; construction and related activities, ch. 6. 
Section 2102. - Permits.     No building shall be constructed or altered, or the use of any building and/or land changed, until a permit has been secured from the building inspector. Upon completion of the work authorized by any permit, the applicant for the permit shall notify the building inspector of such completion. No permits shall be considered as complete or as permanently effective until the building inspector has noted on the permit that the work has been inspected and approved as being in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 2103. - Application for permits.     All applications for permits shall be made in writing by the owner or tenants or authorized agent and shall be filed with the building inspector. The application: (1)  Shall include a statement as to the proposed use of the building and/or land. (2)  Shall be accompanied by working plans drawn to scale, showing the location of the building in relation to property and road lines. (3)  Shall give the name and address of the surveyor or other person competent to give such location and to stake the road lines. 
Section 2104. - Variance.     If the applicant desires the board of appeals to grant a variance, then in addition, the application shall be set forth the nature of the variance and shall state briefly the reasons why such variance should be granted. 
Section 2105. - Appeals.     An appeal from the decision of the building inspector shall be taken within thirty (30) days. 
Section 2106. - Fees.     The applicant for a permit shall, at the time of application, pay to the building inspector for the use of the city, a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by ordinance of the city council upon the enactment of this ordinance or as such schedule may be amended by ordinance of the city council. 
ARTICLE XXII. - DAY CARE CENTERS, GROUP DAY CARE HOMES AND FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES 
Section 2200. - Category and definitions. (a)  Day care centers: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, nineteen (19) or more children under the age of eighteen (18). (b)  Group day care homes: Any place operated by any person or group wherein are received for pay not less than seven (7) nor more than eighteen (18) children under eighteen (18) years of age for care and supervision for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. (c)  Family day care homes: A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three (3) but not more than six (6) children under the age of eighteen (18) and who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents of the private residence. 
Section 2201. - Zones allowed. (a)  Family day care homes (0—6 children) may be allowed in all zones, however, group day care (7—18 children) and day care centers (19 or more children) may be located only in commercial zones and industrial zones.     Exception: Churches—A church may operate a day care center or group day care from its premises regardless of the zone district in which it is located. (b)  Family day care homes (six (6) children or less) may be allowed in all zones provided applicant has complied with the rules and regulations under III(2) and (3). (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 1; Ord. of 10-12-92) 
Section 2202. - Rules and regulations. (a)  Any applicant for a group day care home or day care center shall submit an application to the planning and zoning commission for approval of that commission and the city council, setting forth a location and intended use of the site, names of all property owners and existing land uses within three hundred (300) feet and any other material or information pertinent to applicant's request, which the planning and zoning commission may require. (b)  All applicants, including family day care home applicants shall file a copy of their certificate of registration or state license with the city clerk prior to obtaining a business license, or otherwise beginning operation of their home or center. (c)  All group day care homes, day care centers, and family day care homes must meet and comply with all state rules and regulations, according to the Georgia Department of Human Resources, chapters 290-2-1, 290-2-2 and 290-2-3 and all state and local fire codes. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 2) 
Section 2203. - Registration fees.     Group day care homes and day care centers, fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover expenses incurred as per article [section] 2300, section 2301. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS AND ZONING CHANGES, POLICIES, PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS 
Section 2300. - [Authority.]     The city council of the City of Vidalia may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance, the boundaries of the use districts or zones established on the comprehensive zoning map or the regulations set forth in this ordinance. Any proposed amendment, supplement or change shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation. 
Section 2301. - Amendments.     This ordinance, including the comprehensive zoning map, may be amended by the city council on its own motion, on petition of an owner of property or on recommendation of the planning commission of the City of Vidalia, hereinafter referred to in this section as the "planning commission," but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, the city council shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this section. 
Section 2302. - Procedures for amendment.     Any person or persons, other than the city council or planning commission, desiring to submit a petition requesting a change in zoning shall file such petition with a plat of the subject property attached thereto, together with a payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover administrative and advertising costs, with the building inspector of the City of Vidalia. Such petition shall be signed by the petitioner who must be the owner of the property and shall state the name, address and telephone number of the petitioner, the present zoning classification of the property; the reasons for requesting the proposed change in zoning; the amount of any gift or campaign contribution made by the petitioner, or by any person who has a financial interest in the petitioner if the petitioner is a partnership, corporation or other business entity, to the mayor, any member of the city council or planning commission of the City of Vidalia during the three (3) years immediately preceding the filing of such petition, and said petition shall be accompanied by such disclosure as is required by volume 37 [27], title 26, chapter 67A [title 36, chapter 67] of Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.], if any. When a petition is filed, the building inspector shall forthwith deliver copies of such petition to the members of the planning commission and the city manager. 
Section 2303. - Public notification.     The building inspector shall then prepare and cause to be published at least once in the Vidalia Advance, a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the City of Vidalia and its official organ, a notice of the public hearings which will be held by the planning commission and city council, stating the time, place and purpose of such hearings, the location of the property and name of the owner thereof, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. The publication of said notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearings. Public hearings shall also be held by the planning commission on proposed amendments to this ordinance initiated by the city council or by the planning commission, and notice of such hearings shall be published as hereinbefore provided for notices of hearings on petitions of owners for rezoning. Such notices shall state the time, place and purpose of such hearings and, if rezoning of property is proposed, shall also state the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
Section 2304. - Sign requirements for public hearings.     Upon the filing of a petition for a change in zoning, and not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing thereon before the planning commission, the building inspector shall cause to be erected in a conspicuous location on the subject property a sign. The required sign shall be at least nine (9) square feet (3′ x 3′) in size and shall contain a message composed of black letters three (3) inches high upon a white background which shall read as follows: "PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE ZONE CHANGE A public hearing will be held at City Hall ____________ (Time (p.m. or a.m.)) on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (Date), ____________ (Year) by the Planning Commission then at ____________ (Time (p.m. or a.m.)) on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (Date) ____________ (Year) by the City Council to consider the rezoning of this property from ____________ (Present zone) to ____________ (Requested zone) as provided for in the City Revised Zoning Ordinance. _____City of Vidalia" "PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE ZONE VARIANCE A public hearing will be held at City Hall ____________ (Time (p.m. or a.m.)) on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (Date), ____________ (Year) by the Planning Commission then at ____________ (Time (p.m. or a.m.)) on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (Date), ____________ (Year) by the City Council to consider the zone variance of this property as provided for in the City Revised Zoning Ordinance. _____City of Vidalia"     All signs, whether erected by a petitioner or by the city, shall be so located as to provide adequate exposure to the public, and after the hearing before the planning commission, the sign shall be maintained on the subject property by the party responsible for its erection until the city council has taken final action on the proposed rezoning. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4) 
Section 2305. - Notification to property owners within 500 feet.     When any rezoning proceeding is initiated, the building inspector shall notify all persons owning property within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the subject property by first-class United States mail or personal delivery of the time, place and purpose of the hearing before the planning commission; provided, however, that the failure of the building inspector, through oversight, omission or lack of information, to give such notice to such a property owner shall not invalidate any action or recommendation of the planning commission, or any zoning decision of the city council in such proceeding, it being the intention of this provision to notify, insofar as reasonably possible, those persons substantially interested in the proposed change in zoning classification that a public hearing is pending. Depositing such notices in the United States mail in properly addressed envelopes with adequate postage affixed or personal delivery at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing of which notice is given shall be deemed full compliance with the requirements of this subparagraph. 
Section 2306. - Planning commission meeting procedures.     The hearings before the planning commission shall be public hearings as aforesaid, and be conducted as hereinafter provided.     At the commencement of the hearing, the presiding officer shall give a brief explanation of the matter under consideration and the issue or issues to be determined. Following such explanation, the petitioner and proponents of the petition seeking a change in zoning, or the proponents of any other proposed amendment to this ordinance, as the case may be, shall be afforded the first opportunity to present their case and evidence to the planning commission. After this presentment, all parties in opposition shall be afforded an opportunity to present their opposition and evidence, and, after all parties have been so heard by the planning commission, the planning commission may, but shall not be required to permit one (1) person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the proponents, and one (1) person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the parties in opposition, limiting the time for the presentation of such summaries to the extent the planning commission chairman deems appropriate. After all parties have been heard and such summaries, if any, have been completed, the planning commission chairman shall close the floor to open debate and further evidence, and once the floor is closed to open debate and further evidence, and deliberation has begun by the planning commission on the issue before it, no further evidence may be presented on arguments made either for or against the proposed rezoning or other amendments to this ordinance being considered without the expressed consent of the planning commission. Thereafter, the planning commission shall begin deliberations and shall take into consideration all evidence properly before it and all pertinent standards and factors set forth in this ordinance.     When a decision has been reached the planning commission shall make its written report on the proposed change in zoning or other amendment to this ordinance to the city council, reporting the vote of each member of the planning commission thereon. If such report is not made within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the petition for rezoning or other amendment to this ordinance shall be deemed to have been recommended for approval. Such reports of the planning commission shall be filed with the secretary of the city council who shall, upon the date said report is received, post a copy thereof as a regular notice at the place for posting such notices in city hall and forward a copy thereof to the petitioner for rezoning, if any, at the address shown in the petition for such rezoning. A copy of said report shall also be delivered to the building inspector. Should a petitioner fail to comply with any requirements of this ordinance pertaining to the petition prior to the time said public hearing is held, the petition shall for said reason be denied by the planning commission without inquiring into its merits. If the petitioner desires to further pursue the matter of rezoning the property in question, the petitioner must file a new petition requesting a change in the zoning of the property in question; pay an additional sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover administrative and advertising costs; and comply with all requirements of this ordinance pertaining to a petition for rezoning, whereupon the planning commission shall proceed to hear said petition on its merits. 
Section 2307. - City council meeting procedures.     The hearings before the city council shall be public hearings as aforesaid and all discussions and deliberations shall be conducted in open meeting provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prohibit the city council from going into executive session for the purpose of discussing legal questions arising due to the matter under consideration with the city attorney in an attorney-client relationship. At the commencement of the hearing, the presiding officer, whether the mayor or the mayor pro tem, or someone designated by the presiding officer, shall give a brief explanation of the matter under consideration and the issue or issues to be determined. Following such explanation, the petitioner and proponents of the petition seeking a change in zoning, or the proponents of any other proposed amendment to this ordinance, as the case may be, shall be afforded the first opportunity to present their case and evidence to the city council. After this presentment, all parties in opposition shall be afforded an opportunity to present their opposition and evidence, and, after all parties have been so heard by the city council, the city council may, but shall not be required to permit one person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the proponents, and one (1) person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the parties in opposition, limiting the time for the presentation of such summaries to the extent the presiding officer deems appropriate. After all parties have been heard and such summaries, if any, have been completed, the city council shall close the floor to open debate and further evidence, whereupon the city council shall consider the issue to be determined and the evidence and arguments presented to it during the hearing, and make its decision by open ballot. Once deliberation begins by the city council on the issue before it, no further evidence may be presented or arguments made either for or against the proposed rezoning or other amendments to this ordinance being considered without the expressed consent of the city council.     Since one (1) of the functions of the planning commission is to consider and plan for the long-range development of the City of Vidalia, the city council shall give great weight to the recommendations of the planning commission. However, such recommendations have advisory effect only and the city council shall not be bound by such recommendations. If the decision of the city council results in a rezoning of property or any other amendment to the comprehensive zoning ordinance, such amendment shall be adopted by ordinance. 
Section 2308. - Standards and factors to be considered in making zoning decisions.     The city council of the City of Vidalia recognized that the proper exchange of its zoning powers requires the consideration and balancing of the public interest in protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of property. To ensure a proper balancing of the aforesaid interest, the city planning commission in considering amendments to the zoning ordinance and application to rezone property for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council, and the planning commission in considering or making any zoning decision including, but not limited to, decisions concerning amendments to the zoning ordinance and applications to rezone property, shall consider the following standards and factors: (1)  The existing land use pattern, and existing uses and zoning of nearby property. (2)  Whether existing boundaries of use districts or zones are illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions affecting the property proposed for change. (3)  Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed zoning appropriate. (4)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the location of the subject property and the development of adjacent and nearby properties. (5)  The suitability of the subject property for the purpose of the zoning. (6)  Is this request a logical extension of use district or zone boundary which would improve the pattern of uses in the general area? (7)  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the vicinity of the property. (8)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. (9)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby properties. (10)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions, and the extent to which any such diminution in, or destruction of the property values of the owner of the subject property promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public. (11)  The population density pattern and the possible increase in the use of, or the overloading of public facilities, including but not limited to, water and sewer systems, and streets. (12)  The cost to the local government in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining water service, sewer service, streets and public safety measures. (13)  Whether this request requires a major change in existing levels of public service which cannot feasibly be financed by the local government. (14)  Accessibility of public transportation to the property. (15)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of any then-existing land use plan. (16)  Is the property likely to be used for the use requested? (17)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area. (18)  Impact on the environment, including but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity. (19)  Whether there exists a substantial need for the restrictions imposed or contemplated upon the use of the public health, morals, safety or welfare. (20)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner, and the relative loss to the public, as compared to the benefit gained by the individual property owner. (21)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. (22)  Any other factors relevant to the balancing of the public interest in protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of property. The board of appeals shall also consider such of the foregoing standards and factors as may be relevant to consideration of any issue before it on appeal. 
Section 2309. - Miscellaneous policies and procedures. (a)  Any attorney at law who intends to participate in any public hearing before the planning commission, the city council or the board of appeals as attorney for any person shall, prior to the hearing, provide the person who will preside at such hearing with a written statement setting forth the names of the clients who he will represent during the hearing and the reason each client is interested in the issue to be determined on the hearing. Thereafter, the clients of such attorney shall be bound by statements, stipulations and arguments made in their behalf by such attorney, and their oral participation in the hearing shall be limited to giving testimony when questioned by their attorney or any other attorney involved in the hearing, or by a member of the city council. (b)  During any public hearing held by the planning commission, the city council or the board of appeals under the provisions of this ordinance, the building inspector may appear in his capacity and provide such information, and make such comments and observations concerning the matter under consideration as may be appropriate and relevant. (c)  It is recognized that it is incumbent upon the members of the planning commission, the mayor and other members of the city council and the members of the board of appeals to remain impartial and consider every issue that comes before them impartially and without favor or affection to anyone. It is also recognized that it is imperative, in order that the planning commission, the city council and the board of appeals be free from suspicion of prejudice or partiality, that interested parties refrain from approaching any member thereof privately, and the only legitimate way for anyone to influence or persuade the planning commission, the city council or the board of appeals in making a decision on an issue under consideration is to present his opinions, arguments and evidence at the public hearings required to be held. Should any person interested, either directly or indirectly, in a decision to be made by one of the aforesaid boards or the city council on any zoning matter pending before it, or which may come before it at some later date, attempt to discuss the merits of the issue to be determined with any board member, or the mayor or members of the city council, or otherwise communicate or attempt to communicate with any board or member of the city council either directly or indirectly, in an effort to influence such member's vote on the issue when it comes before the body of which he is a member for determination, such board member or member of the city council shall immediately apprise such person of the impropriety of his conduct and decline to discuss such issue with such person in any way. It shall be unlawful for such person to persist in the effort to discuss the issue or otherwise communicate with the board member or member of the city council concerning same, and any person so persisting shall be punished as provided by the Code of the City of Vidalia. 
Section 2310. - Citizens protest against amendment.     In case of a protest against such amendment, change, modification or repeal, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent of more of either the area or the lots included in such proposed changes or of those within one hundred (100) feet of all external boundaries of such changes, such amendment, supplement, change or modification shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all members of city council authorized to vote thereon. 
Section 2311. - Limits on consideration of amendments.     Upon defeat of an application for a change in zoning, the city council may not consider the property in question for rezoning amendment until at least six (6) months has elapsed. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - NONCONFORMING USES 
Section 2400. - Land.     Any land, the existing lawful use of which at the time of passage of this ordinance does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located shall have such use considered as a nonconforming use, which may continue on such land but shall be subject to all other pertinent regulations covering nonconforming uses. 
Section 2401. - Buildings.     Any lawful building or the lawful use of any building existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance that does not conform in use, height, location, size or bulk, with the regulations of the district in which it is located shall be considered a nonconforming building or use and may contain such use in its present location, but shall be subject to all other pertinent regulations covering nonconforming uses. 
Section 2402. - Buildings under construction.     A building for which a valid building permit has been issued and/or is actually under construction to the extent of completion of footings may be completed as a nonconforming use. Buildings not under actual construction at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be built in conformity with its requirements. 
Section 2403. - Change of use.     A nonconforming building or use shall be considered as such unless and until it complies with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Such use shall not be changed to a use designated for a district having less restrictive regulations. 
Section 2404. - Discontinued use.     A nonconforming use, when discontinued, may be resumed at any time within one (1) year from such discontinuance, but not thereafter. The resumption may be of the same class of use but shall not be resumed as a nonconforming use of a lower class. 
Section 2405. - Extension.     Any lawful nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be extended throughout the building or any building of which a lawful nonconforming use is made may be extended upon the lot occupied by such building and held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of this ordinance, or such lawful nonconforming use may be continued in any new building erected upon the lot or tract held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of this ordinance and further, such lawful nonconforming use may be continued on adjoining lots only as a variance provided, in all such cases, that any structure, alteration, extension or addition shall conform with all the height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for the district in which it is located. 
Section 2406. - Change or resumption of nonconforming uses.     The board of appeals shall have discretion to determine in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance what resumption or change of nonconforming use is of the same class of use and permissible. 
Section 2407. - Building destroyed by fire, explosion, accident or calamity.     A nonconforming building which has been damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, accident or calamity (as contrasted to deterioration due to time or neglect) may be reconstructed and used for the same nonconforming use, provided that: (1) The reconstructed building shall not exceed in height, area and volume of the building destroyed, unless it meets the provision of section 2405; (2) building reconstruction shall be started one (1) year from the date the building was destroyed and shall be carried on without interruption. 
Section 2408. - Building condemned.     A nonconforming building which has been legally condemned shall not be rebuilt or used except in accordance with the provision of this ordinance. 
Section 2409. - Temporary nonconforming use.     A temporary nonconforming use, which will benefit the public health or welfare or promote proper development of a district in conformity with the intent of this ordinance, may be permitted for a period of not more than one (1) month, on the approval of the board of appeals, but any such use to be permitted for a longer period shall require a public hearing thereon, after which a board of appeals certificate may be issued for a period not exceeding one (1) year in any case. 
Section 2410. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 4 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 13, 2008 repealed § 2410 which pertained to nonconforming signs and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 14, 1998. 
ARTICLE XXV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Section 2500. - Effect of private covenants.     Nothing herein contained shall be construed to render inoperative any enforceable restrictions established by covenants running with the land, and which restrictions are not prohibited by or not contrary to the regulations herein established. 
Section 2501. - Lots of record.     A lot which is of record on the city plan or of record title upon a plan or separately described in a deed or recorded in the office for the recording of deeds of Toombs County and which is in single and separate ownership at the time of the enactment of this ordinance and where such owner does not own adjoining land or lots and where it is not financially feasible to acquire adjoining land or lots from other owners, such lot may be used for a use permitted in the district in which it is located upon a finding by the board of appeals that the lot size is reasonably close to the minimum and maximum regulations required under this article and that owners of lots within three hundred (300) feet thereof, after twenty (20) days notice and hearing, do not object or will not be adversely affected thereby. 
Section 2502. - Reduction of lot area.     No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of the required open spaces shall be less than herein prescribed by this ordinance. 
Section 2503. - Modification of front yard requirements.     Where an unimproved lot of record is situated on the same street frontage with two (2) improved lots or one (1) unimproved and one (1) improved lot, the front yard requirement for that district may be modified so that the front yard shall be an average of the existing and as required front yard. 
Section 2504. - Vision clearance at corners, curb cuts, and railroad crossings.     Notwithstanding any part of this ordinance or any permit granted or any variance granted by the board of appeals, no type of structure, vehicle, tree, plant, vegetation, sign or fence, or any type of obstacle or any portion thereof shall be placed or retained in such a manner which would create a traffic hazard or would obstruct the vision clearance of corners, curb cuts, or railroad crossings in any zone. 
Section 2505. - Unsightly or unsanitary storage.     No rubbish, salvage materials, junk, or miscellaneous refuse shall be openly stored or kept in the open and no weeds shall be allowed to go uncut within any zones when the same may be construed to be a menace to public health and safety by the appropriate health department, or to have a depressing influence upon property values in the area. 
Section 2506. - Accessory uses.     Accessory uses authorized in this ordinance shall include, but not by way of limitation, the following: (1)  Uses accessory to agriculture: Greenhouses, roadside stand for sale of products produced on the premises for use and the disposal thereof by marketing or otherwise. (2)  Uses accessory to dwellings: a.  Private garage, private parking space, private stables, barn, shelter for pets. b.  Private greenhouses. c.  Living quarters for household employees, caretakers or watchmen. d.  Professional office or studio of a doctor, dentist, healer, teacher, artist, architect, landscape architect, musician, lawyer, engineer, magistrate or practitioner of a similar character, or rooms for the home occupations listed below, provided that office, studio or rooms are located in a dwelling in which the practitioner resides, or in a building accessory thereto, and provided further that no goods are publicly displayed on the premises. The following home occupations shall be allowed: 1.  Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for custom apparel and custom home furnishing. 2.  Foster family care. 3.  Any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not commercially created, exchanged or sold. 4.  Tutoring. 5.  Fine arts studio in which are created only individual works of art. e.  Bed and breakfast. This activity shall be subject to the following specific requirements: i.  The applicant/owner for such activity reside where the bed and breakfast will be operated; ii.  All major construction or alterations must be approved by the planning and zoning commission to insure compatibility with the neighborhood and any alterations to the existing structure must remain essentially the same character as the existing structure; iii.  There shall be no more than five (5) bedrooms for rent per home; iv.  There must be off street parking with a minimum of one (1) space for each bedroom available for rent; v.  Each licensed bed and breakfast shall have only one (1) sign no larger than four (4) square feet and must be located on the same lot as the business. The sign design and location must be approved in advance by the planning and zoning commission to insure compatibility with the neighborhood; vi.  All bed and breakfast businesses operated within the city shall be subject to the city hotel/motel tax; vii.  All bed and breakfast businesses operated within the city must obtain the necessary food service permits from the county health department. (3)  Uses accessory to noncommercial recreational use: Customary recreational, refreshment and service uses and buildings in any noncommercial recreational area. Uses authorized in this ordinance as accessory to a dwelling shall not be deemed to include a business, hospital clinic, animal hospital, barber shop, beauty parlor, other personal service shop, tea room, hotel or similar use. (Ord. of 10-9-95) 
Section 2507. - Public utilities.     The provisions of this ordinance shall not be so constructed as to limit or interfere with the installation, operation and maintenance of public utility structures or facilities in existence at the time of passage of this ordinance, or which may hereafter be located within public easements or rights-of-way designated for such purposes. 
Section 2508. - Projections into required yards.     No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall project into any required yard in any district, except that: (1)  An unenclosed porch, not more than fourteen (14) feet in height, may be erected to extend into a required front or rear yard a distance of not more than ten (10) feet, provided that in no case shall it extend into such front or rear yard more than one-half (½) the required depth of the yard. (2)  A terrace, platform or landing place, not covered by a roof, canopy or trellis, which does not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may be erected to extend into a required yard a distance of not more than twelve (12) feet provided that it shall not extend into such yard more than forty (40) percent of the required depth or width of the yard. (3)  A porte-cochere, carport, may be erected over a driveway in a required side yard, provided that such structure is: a.  Not more than fourteen (14) feet in height and twenty (20) feet in length. b.  Entirely open on at least three (3) sides, exclusive of the necessary supporting columns and customary architectural features. c.  At least three (3) feet from the side lot line. (4)  A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may project not more than eighteen (18) inches into a required yard. (5)  Open, unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows and balconies may project not more than three (3) feet into a required yard. 
Section 2509. - [Reserved]     [Repealed by Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4] 
Section 2510. - Airport regulations.     No building, structure, or sign may be erected, altered or used which would create a hazard to the air navigation of the Vidalia airport. All structures, buildings or signs to be erected within the instrument approach zones, noninstrument approach zones, horizontal zone and conical zone of the Vidalia airport shall conform to the use and height requirements of the federal aviation regulations (FAR), Part 77, "Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace." 
Section 2511. - Annexation, deannexation.     In the event of changes in the city limits removing territory from the city, district boundaries shall be construed as moving with the city limits. In the event of annexation of new areas to the city, such areas shall be considered to be in the R-1 District until otherwise classified. 
Section 2512. - Administrative standards.     Whenever, in the course of administration and enforcement of this ordinance, it is necessary or desirable to make any administrative decision, then, unless other standards are in this ordinance provided, the decision shall be made so that the result will not be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - VIOLATIONS, FINES, REMEDIES AND CHARGES 
Section 2600. - Violations.     It shall be the duty of the building inspector to take cognizance of violation of this ordinance. He shall investigate each violation which comes to his attention whether by observation or by communication. He shall order in writing the correction of such conditions as are found to be in violation of this ordinance. Failure to secure a zoning or use permit or board of appeals certificate when required, previous to erection, construction or alteration to a building, or change in use of land or building as in this ordinance provided, shall be a violation of this ordinance. 
Section 2601. - Fines and charges.     For any and every violation of the provisions of this ordinance, the owner, general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which part such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the owner, general agent, contractor or any other person, who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation, or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violations shall exist, shall be liable on conviction thereof to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every offense and, whenever such person shall have been notified by the building inspector, or by service or warrant in a prosecution, or in any other way, that he is committing such violation of this ordinance, each day that he shall continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine. Such fines shall be collected by the institution of summary proceedings before a magistrate or justice of the peace, a resident of the city, in the manner that such fines are now by law collected. Editor's note— There are no longer justices of the peace. 
Section 2602. - Remedies.     In case any building, sign or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained; or any building, sign, structure or land is used; or any hedge, tree, shrubs or other growth is maintained, in violation of this ordinance or of any regulations made pursuant hereto, in addition to other remedies provided by law, any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, may be instituted or taken to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - BOARD OF APPEALS[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Variances and appeals from flood plain regulations, appeal board, § 6-64. 
Section 2700. - Appointment.     The city planning commission shall function as the board of appeals. 
Section 2701. - Powers and duties.     When functioning as the board of appeals, the city planning commission shall have the following powers: (1)  To hear and decide appeals, where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance. (2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which such board is required to pass under such ordinance. (3)  To recommend the city council upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance, as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship on a finding by the board of appeals that: a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography, and b.  The application of the ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship, and c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved, and d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the ordinance provided however, the [that] no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by the ordinance.     In exercising the above powers, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
Section 2702. - Standard for board of appeals action.     In any instance where the board of appeals is required to consider a variance in the zoning ordinance or map in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, the board shall, among other things: (1)  Assure itself that the proposed change is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance and consider the effect upon the public interest of granting or denying the application. (2)  Determine that the proposed change will not substantially injure or detract from the use of neighboring property or from the general character of the neighborhood, and that the use of the property adjacent to the area included in the proposed change or plan is adequately safeguarded. (3)  Determine that the proposed change will serve the best interests of the city, the convenience of the community, where applicable, and the public welfare. (4)  Consider the unnecessary hardship which will or may be inflicted upon the applicant by denial of his application. (5)  Consider the presence or absence in the neighborhood of conditions or uses which are the same or similar in character to the condition or use for which the applicant seeks approval. (6)  Consider the effect of the proposed change upon the logical, efficient and economical extension of public services and facilities such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection and public schools, and assure adequate arrangements for sanitation in specific instances. (7)  Safeguard the development of highway frontage insofar as possible so as to limit the total number of access points and encourage the frontage of buildings on parallel marginal roads or on roads perpendicular to the highway. (8)  Consider the suitability of the proposed location of an industrial or commercial use with respect to probable effects upon highway traffic, and assure adequate access arrangements in order to protect major highways from undue congestion and hazard. (9)  Ascertain the adequacy of sanitation and public safety provisions, where applicable, and require a certificate of adequacy of sewage and water facilities from the department of health of the county in any case required herein or deemed advisable. (10)  Impose such conditions, in addition to those required, as are necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance is complied with, which conditions may include, but are not limited to, harmonious design of buildings, planting and its maintenance as a sight or sound screen, and the minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4) 
Section 2703. - Rules and procedures.     The board of appeals shall make rules as to the manner of filing appeals or applications for special exceptions or for variance from the terms of this ordinance. (1)  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall be filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. (2)  Whenever a person shall take an appeal to the board of appeals, he shall obtain the appropriate form therefor from the building inspector. It shall be the duty of the said person to complete the appeal form in its entirety; which form is then to be submitted to the city together with the appropriate fees. (3)  In addition, a list of names and addresses of the owner, if he or his residence is known, or the occupier of every lot in the same street within five hundred (500) feet of the lot or building in question and of every lot not on the same street within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of said lot or building, shall be submitted with the appeal form; provided, however that failure to provide such list of names provided by this paragraph shall not invalidate any action taken by the board of appeals. 
Section 2704. - Meetings.     Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be public record. 
Section 2705. - Advisory opinion.     In the exercise of the powers vested in it by this ordinance, the board of appeals may, in its discretion, refer to any other agency of the city, county or state for an advisory opinion on any matter properly before it with respect to which it believes that such advisory opinion would be helpful to it in reaching its own determination. 
Section 2706. - Notice of hearings.     The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appeal in person or by agent or by attorney. The board of appeals shall give at least fifteen (15) days notice of any required public hearing in the following manner: (1)  By publishing a notice thereof in one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the city. (2)  By mailing a notice to those persons identified as owners or occupiers under section 2703(3) by the person seeking relief from the board of appeals. 
Section 2707. - Expiration of variances.     Unless otherwise specified by the city council, a variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit thereunder within six (6) months from the date of authorization thereof. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4) 
Section 2708. - Fees.     A charge or fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid by each applicant upon the filing of an application with the board of appeals for a variance from the terms of this ordinance. The charge or fee shall be paid in advance to the secretary of the city council and shall be used to defray the necessary expenses of the board of appeals. If the applicant desires a stenographic record of the proceedings before the board of appeals, such stenographic services shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4; Ord. of 11-12-12(3) ) 
Section 2709. - Board of appeals actions required.     All appeals, requests for variances shall first be referred to the board of appeals for action. If the board of appeals fails to take action within thirty (30) days of the public hearing required under section 2706, the matter shall be referred to the city council for final determination as if the board of appeals had recommended approval. (Ord. of 3-11-91, § 4) 
Section 2710. - Board of appeals actions advisory.     Any decision, recommendation, or other action of the board of appeals shall be considered advisory in nature, and shall be referred to the city council for final determination within a reasonable time period. Actions of the board of appeals shall not be binding upon the city council, except that a favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all members of the city council authorized to vote thereon shall be required to override any action proposed by the board of appeals. However the city council may by simple majority vote to impose any additional or more stringent safeguards or special conditions before granting any appeal, special exemption, or variance, so long as such safeguards or special conditions are reasonable and designed to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— The subdivision regulations, enacted on March 10, 1986, are set out herein as they appear in pamphlet form, which pamphlet contains some amendments, except that words and numbers appearing in brackets have been inserted by the editor for clarification. Amendments to this appendix will be cited in parentheses following amended provisions. Cross reference— Land clearing and tree protection, § 6-81 et seq.; municipal utilities and services, ch. 12; planning and development, ch. 16; planning commission, § 16-20 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT 
Section 101. - Short title.     This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Vidalia." 
Section 102. - Purpose and intent.     This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, for the following purposes: (1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; (2)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments; (3)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; (4)  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments, through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and (5)  To assure that land is developed in conformity with the comprehensive plan of the City of Vidalia. 
Section 103. - [Stricter standard applies.]     Whenever the provisions of this ordinance and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
Section 201. - Definitions.     When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. (1)  Lot: A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description, as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map, or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. (2)  Planning commission: The Vidalia Planning Commission. (3)  Street: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way, and for the purposes of this ordinance. "Streets" are divided into the following categories: (See Illustration 1). a.  Major streets: Those streets designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan of the City of Vidalia. b.  Collector street: A street within a subdivision used to carry traffic from the "minor streets" to the "major streets" and including the principal entrance and circulation streets of a subdivision. c.  Minor street: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. d.  Alley: A minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. e.  Cul-de-sac: A "minor street" with only one (1) outlet, sometimes called a "dead-end" street. f.  Marginal access street: A "minor street", parallel and adjacent to "major streets", which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through traffic. Illustration 1. Subdivision Street Types. (4)  Subdivider: The person, firm, or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person, firm, or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this ordinance. (5)  Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development, and including all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and including resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: a.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the zoning ordinance. b.  The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new street is involved. (6)  House trailer (mobile home): A structure or vehicle with or without its own motive power, equipped for or used for living purposes and having a permanent metal chassis or frame mounted on wheels or designed to be so mounted and transported, whether or not such wheels are attached or whether the structure or vehicle has been placed on a stationary foundation. (7)  Trailer park or court: Any portion or parcel of land designed to accommodate one or more house trailers to be used for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure, or facility used by the occupants of house trailers on such property. (8)  Buffer strip: A planted evergreen strip five (5) feet wide to effectively screen from view the enclosed development. (9)  Reserve strip: Any portion or parcel of land proposed for retention in private ownership without plans and approved plats for development or use. 
ARTICLE III. - PLATTING JURISDICTION, ENFORCEMENT 
Section 301. - Platting authority.     From and after the passage of this ordinance, the Vidalia Planning Commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a land subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Toombs or Montgomery county unless it shall have the approval of the planning commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the planning commission as required by this ordinance is declared to be a misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 302. - Use of plat.     The transfer, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county in which the property is located is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
Section 303. - Opening and improving public streets.     The governing body of the city shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street, or lay any utility lines in any street, which had not attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this ordinance, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat or on an official street map adopted by the planning commission, provided that the governing body may accept, lay out, open, and improve any street not so platted if it first submits such proposed action to the planning commission for its review and comment. 
Section 304. - Erection of buildings.     No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the city unless the street giving access thereto has been accepted as a public street in accordance with this ordinance, or unless such street had attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or the lot is on a street accepted by the governing body. Cross reference— Buildings; construction and related activities, ch. 6. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE 
Section 401. - Preapplication review.     Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the City of Vidalia is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the building inspector. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review and no formal application shall be required. 
ARTICLE V. - PROCEDURE FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT 
Section 501. - Application for preliminary plat approval.     Following the preapplication review of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the secretary of the planning commission, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, the following: (1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat, and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. (2)  Ten copies of the preliminary plat and other documents, as specified in article VI. (3)  A statement from the city engineer approving the proposed water supply and sewage disposal systems which will be delivered to the developer within fifteen (15) working days from the date the water supply and sewage disposal systems layout is delivered to the city. If the county sanitation officer's approval is needed, a statement will be submitted within a reasonable time period. (4)  A preliminary plat filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or three dollars ($3.00) per lot, whichever is greater. Said fee is nonreturnable. 
Section 502. - Review of preliminary plat.     The building inspector shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this ordinance, and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning commission, by registered or certified mail, to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review and approval, not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.     Thereafter, the planning commission shall give approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat. A notation of the action shall be made on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat, including a statement of the reasons for disapproval, if the preliminary plat is disapproved. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one (1) copy added to the records of the planning commission. In the case of a disapproval, a statement of the reasons shall accompany these copies.     Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one (1) year unless an extension of time is approved by the planning commission.     If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the planning commission within thirty (30) days of the date of its next regular meeting following the submittal date, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. For the purposes of this ordinance, the submittal date is defined as that date the subdivider provides all required submissions to the secretary of the planning commission and meets the fifteen (15) day prior requirement under section 501. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRELIMINARY PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 
Section 601. - Scale.     The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
Section 602. - Sheet size.     Sheet size shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches where possible. If the complete plan cannot be shown on one (1) sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
Section 603. - Ground elevations.     The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations based on the datum plane of the U.S. Geodetic Survey. A tie to one (1) or more bench marks shall be shown. Topographic requirements: Ground elevation lines shall be shown only at every five (5) foot elevation change. 
Section 604. - Information to be provided on preliminary plat.     The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: (1)  Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider. (2)  Proposed name of subdivision. (3)  North point and graphic scale and date. (4)  Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision. (5)  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances. (6)  Names of owners of record of adjoining land. (7)  Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract. (8)  Proposed layout including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. (9)  Block numbers and lot numbers. (10)  Provisions for water supply, sewerage, and surface drainage. (11)  Minimum building front yard setback lines. (12)  Such street cross-sections and centerline profiles as may be required by the city. 
Section 605. - Certificate of preliminary approval.     A certificate of tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: "Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, all requirements of Preliminary Approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was given Approval by the Vidalia Planning Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . This Approval of the Preliminary Plat does not constitute approval of a Final Plat. This Certificate of Approval shall expire and be null and void on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . _____Date    _____Secretary Vidalia Planning Commission"  
ARTICLE VII. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE 
Section 701. - Application for final plat approval.     After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given tentative approval by the planning commission, the subdivider may, within one year from said approval, submit to the planning commission: (1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat, and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the final plat shall be sent. (2)  Ten (10) copies of the final plat and other documents, as specified in article VIII, the original and at least one (1) copy of which shall be drawn in permanent ink or plastic vellum or linen. (3)  A statement from the county sanitation officer and/or city engineer approving the water supply and sewage disposal system. (4)  A statement from the city or its engineer that all improvements have been made as required by this ordinance, or that an adequate bond has been posted to cover the cost of the unfinished improvements as required in article XIII. (5)  The required recording fee for each sheet to be recorded. 
Section 702. - Review of final plat.     The building inspector shall check the final plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat and with the rules and regulations of this ordinance, and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the final plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval, not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.     Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action shall be made on the original tracing and two (2) prints of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefor if the final plat is disapproved. If action on a final plat is not taken by the planning commission within thirty (30) days of the date of its next regular meeting following the submittal date, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. For the purposes of this ordinance, the submittal date is defined as that date the subdivider provides all required submissions to the planning commission. However the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
Section 703. - Recording of final plat.     Upon approval of a final plat, the building inspector shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county in which the property is located. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of the recording fee at the time of submitting the final plat as provided in the preceding section.     Upon recording of the approved final plat, the original tracing or a reproducible plastic vellum print of the final plat, with all certificates endorsed thereon, shall be provided by the subdivider for the records of the planning commission. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 
Section 801. - The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat and certain additional specifications.     The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat, (article VI, section 604), with the following additions: The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink on plastic vellum. Sheet sizes shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches, and where more than one (1) sheet is required an index map shall be required on the same size sheet. The final plat shall show: (1)  Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines, bench marks, or other permanent monuments (not less than three) shall be accurately described on the plat. (2)  Municipal, county, and land-lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. (3)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth ( 1/100 ) foot and angles to the nearest second, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one (1) to ten thousand (10,000). (4)  Name of subdivision, and exact locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat. (5)  Street center lines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. (6)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth ( 1/100 ) foot, and bearings. (7)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. (8)  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. (9)  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. (10)  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. (11)  The final plat shall also conform to the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act of 1978, as amended. (12)  The following certifications: a.  An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: "It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "Future," and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, have been fully complied with. By: _____ Registered C.E. No. _____or                  By: _____ Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. _____ "  b.  A certificate of approval of the final plat by the planning commission, directly on the plat, as follows: "Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this Final Plat was given Final Approval by the Vidalia Planning Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . _____Date    _____Secretary Vidalia Planning Commission"  
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
Section 901. - Suitability of land.     Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion, or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
Section 902. - Name of subdivision.     The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in Toombs or Montgomery county. 
Section 903. - Access.     Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street which shall be dedicated by the developer and accepted by the city. (Ord. of 7-12-04) 
Section 904. - Conformance to adopted major-street and other plans.     All streets and other features of the major street plan of the City of Vidalia, Georgia, shall be platted by the subdivider in the locations and to the dimensions indicated on the major thoroughfare plan adopted by the planning commission, or in city records, if the location or dimension is unclear in the plan.     When features of other plans adopted by the planning commission (such as schools or other public building sites, parks, or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency.     Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning commission finds not required or suitable for such public use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the governing body of the reasons for such action. 
Section 905. - Large-scale developments.     The requirements of this ordinance may be modified in the case of a large-scale community or neighborhood unit, such as a housing project or shopping center, which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks, and streets, if the development is approved by the planning commission and if it is in conformity with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
Section 1001. - Continuation of existing streets.     Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. (See Illustration 2.) 
Section 1002. - Street names.     Street names shall require the approval of the planning commission. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
Section 1003. - Street jogs.     Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. (See Illustration 3.) 
Section 1004. - Cul-de-sacs.     Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets, will not be greater in length than six hundred (600) feet if possible. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet, with an outside pavement diameter of at least eighty (80) feet. (See Illustration 4.) 
Section 1005. - Development along major street, limited-access highway, or railroad right-of-way.     Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major street, a limited-access highway, or a railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street or, at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a non-access reservation suitably planted. Due regard should be given to requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to the major street (or limited access highway), but only to the access street. 
Section 1006. - Reserve strips.     Reserve strips shall not be permitted unless their control is placed in the hands of the governing body, under conditions approved by the governing body. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such a street. 
Section 1007. - Easements.     Easements having a minimum width of ten (10) feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as required for utility lines and underground mains and cables. These easements shall also have a twenty-foot construction easement.     Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water or drainage right-of-way of adequate width as approved by the city. INSERT DIAGRAMS FROM MSP 2645 HERE Illustration 2. Continuation of existing streets. Unacceptable Acceptable Better Illustration 3. "Street Jogs" Illustration 4. Long and Short "Cul-de-Sac" with Turn-Arounds. 
ARTICLE XI. - STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
[Section 1101. - Schedule.]     Except as otherwise specified by the planning commission, all streets shall meet the following design requirements: Type of Street Major Collector Minor Alley Right-of-way width (Minimum) As shown on major street plan  60′  50′  40′ Pavement width (Minimum) As shown on major street plan  37′  22′  20′ Maximum street grade 7%  10%  14%  14% Minimum street grade 5%   5%   5%   5% Minimum radius of center line curvature, horizontal curves 800′ 200′ 100′ 100′ Minimum length of tangent between reverse curves 200′ 100′ None None On vertical curves a minimum sight distance at six (6) feet above ground level 500′ 200′ None None Street intersections All street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersections shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees, unless required by unusual circumstances. Radius at street intersections (Minimum) 15′ 15′ 15′ 15′ (Where angle of intersection is less than 90 degrees more may be required.)  INSERT DIAGRAMS FROM MSP 2648 here Illustration 5. Tangents between reverse curves. Left - designate angle "less than 60° not acceptable". Illustration 6. Streets should intersect at nearly right angles. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks should be appropriate for the topography and type of development Illustration 7. 
ARTICLE XII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 
Section 1201. - Block lengths and widths.     Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: (1)  Blocks shall be not greater than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet nor less than six hundred (600) feet in length, except in unusual circumstances. (2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major streets, limited-access highways, or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
Section 1202. - Lot sizes.     Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning ordinance.     Residential lots shall have a depth of not less than one hundred (100) feet and not greater than twice the width of the lot at the building line, unless unusual circumstances make these limitations not practicable.     Where individual septic tanks are used, the county sanitation officer shall prescribe minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards.     Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to the use intended. (See Illustration 8.)     Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. (See Illustration 9.) 
Section 1203. - Lot lines.     All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. (See Illustration 10.) 
Section 1204. - Building lines.     A building line meeting the front yard setback requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be established on all lots. 
Section 1205. - Lots abutting public streets.     Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street. 
Section 1206. - Double and reverse frontage lots.     Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots, shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least five (5) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. (See Illustration 11.) DIAGRAMS FROM MSP 2654 here Illustration 8. Typical Shopping Center.     Residential corner lots should have an adequate width for building setback. Illustration 9.     Lot lines should be perpendicular to the street line—radial on curved streets. Illustration 10. DIAGRAM FROM MSP 2655 here Illustration 11. Reverse Frontage with Protective Screen Easement. 
ARTICLE XIII. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
Section 1301. - Required improvements. (a)  Every subdivider shall be required to have installed by the appropriate city agency at subdividers expense, or with approval of the agency concerned to install the following street improvements and utilities: (1)  Street grading, street basing, and street paving, in accordance with city specifications. (2)  Sanitary sewer lines and manholes, surface drainage facilities, permanent reference monuments, street name signs, and road regulatory signs as recommended by the city engineer. (3)  If a required sewer line cannot be connected to a trunkline sewer at the time of the development of the subdivision, septic tanks or a lift station shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or lot purchaser for interim use, in conformity with the requirements of the city and/or county health department. (4)  Water mains within the subdivision which shall comply with city specifications. (5)  All subdivisions with underground electrical lines shall have placed appropriate utility poles for street lighting. All required street improvements, utilities, and monuments shall be built to standards specified by the agency responsible for each. All utilities to be installed in the streets shall be placed and compacted prior to paving. (b)  In order to encourage residential subdivision development inside the corporate limits, the city will provide incentives to developers for property meeting the following criteria: (1)  The property must either be within the city limits, or pre-annexed into the city prior to any sketch plan or preliminary platting so that the property is developed totally under the city's subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance, and other land use regulatory ordinances. Property outside the city must meet the requirements for annexation under Georgia statutes, so that the property is clearly within the city limits before any incentives can be contract for or received. (2)  The property must be zoned R-1, R-1A, R-2 or R-3 by the city. The city may consider extending these incentives to property zoned PUD. The intent of this provision is to allow developers flexibility in developing cluster housing on smaller lots, with a corresponding increase in open space in common ownership maintained by a homeowners' association or similar entity. (3)  The property must be reasonably close to existing water and sewer lines such that the city can economically extend the main lines to the subdivision. Such determination shall be made at the discretion of the city. Should more than one property owner make application for this incentive program in any fiscal year, the city reserves the right to decide which of the subdivisions is most economical for it to help develop, and to only develop those for which it has adequate funding in any given fiscal year. More than one subdivision per year may be developed if determined by the mayor and city council to be economically and financially feasible. If financial constraints dictate, no subdivision developments, with city participation, may be approved. (4)  The subdivider must enter into a written agreement with the city, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, delineating the subdivider's and city's respective responsibilities for the various components of development. (5)  The subdivider must develop the subdivision using underground electric, telephone, and CATV lines, curb and gutter, sidewalk on at least one side of each street, decorative street lights and poles, and covenants and restrictions requiring brick veneer or comparable construction and a minimum of a two-car enclosed garage. The intent is to develop subdivisions with high-end amenities compared to the existing market in the county. (6)  The subdivision must be developed in reasonably-sized phases to as not to place a financial strain on either the developer of the city. (c)  The city will provide the following incentives for the proposed subdivisions meeting the criteria in section (b) above: (1)  The city will pay fifty (50) percent of the entire cost to install the water and sewer system in an approved subdivision following review and comment on the proposed plans by the city's engineers. (2)  The city will pay fifty (50) percent of street development costs including curb, gutter and sidewalk if required. (3)  The city will install all street signs and traffic signs within the subdivision. (Ord. of 7-12-04) 
Section 1302. - Bond in lieu of completion of improvements.     The planning commission may allow the subdivider to post a bond as defined below in lieu of completion of all the improvements as required by this article. The bond shall be made payable to the City of Vidalia and shall be of an amount sufficient to assure completion of all required improvements. The bond shall be approved and held until a specified reasonable length of time for completion has passed, after which the bond may be forfeited and the improvements installed by the city.     The bond identified above may be made in any of the following manners: (1)  Cash bond; or (2)  Insurance bond in the nature of a performance bond by an insurance carrier approved by the Vidalia Planning Commission; or (3)  Bond in the form of a personal guaranty of the developer, properly secured by a first deed to secure debt on real estate located in Georgia, which is of a value at least double the amount of the estimated cost of the mandatory improvements as identified by these regulations, and said cost estimated shall be made in the sole discretion of the Vidalia Planning Commission. Said deed to secure debt being given to assure the city of full compliance with these regulations, including holding the city harmless as to any court cost and/or attorney fees incurred to enforce these regulations and/or enforcement of this performance bond. (4)  In the event the subdivider posts bond under the provisions of section 1302, the bonding period shall be a five (5) year period. If, after five (5) years, the city has not provided trunkline sewerage to the subdivision or has not contracted to provide trunkline sewerage, or has not committed itself to provide trunkline sewerage within twelve (12) months of the expiration of the five (5) year period, then all obligation of the subdivider to continue the bond shall be terminated.     The subdivision developer and his performance bond shall continue to be accountable for the above regulations until said regulations are completed on said subdivision to the reasonable satisfaction of the Vidalia Planning Commission. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PREVIOUS SUBDIVISIONS EXEMPT 
Section 1401. - "Grandfather" clause. (a)  Any subdivision or parcels of lands that have previously been platted and so recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Toombs County or Montgomery County, Georgia, as of the effective date of this ordinance, shall not be subject to provisions of these currently enacted subdivision regulations, but shall only be subject to any previous ordinances, regulations, and zoning requirements that were in existence at the time of said previous development; that is to say that these subdivision restrictions and requirements are to be prospective in nature and not retrospective. (b)  Any owner of parcels of lands as of the effective date of this ordinance who had previously platted said land but not recorded the same in the office of the clerk of superior court of Toombs or Montgomery county shall also be exempt from the provisions of these regulations, subject to the terms of paragraph (c) below. (c)  Subdivisions currently existing under the old subdivision regulation and which shall be governed by the old subdivision regulation are as follows: Heath Estates, Villa Maria, Southgate, Sharpstead and Donnie Morris Subdivision. All other subdivisions must be filed and approved by the city council, based upon recorded plat or other clear documentation in order to be exempt from the provisions of the subdivision requirements. (1)  Owners of the specified five (5) subdivisions shall have six (6) months from January 9, 1995, within which to file with the council necessary documentation to establish their exception from the provisions of the subdivision ordinance. Once their status is approved, the developer shall have twenty-four (24) months from date of approval to complete the development of the subdivision according to the following specifications. Any subdivision not specifically listed as exempt above and which has not filed for exemption under the provisions of this Code section on or before August 1, 1997, shall hereafter comply with all requirements of the subdivision ordinance currently in existence for development. (2)  The city will participate under the following formula on all subdivisions exempt from the application of the subdivision ordinance: a.  The city will participate with one-half (½) of the cost of basing; b.  The city will participate with one-third ( 1/3 ) of the cost of paving; c.  The city will share cost of water and/or sewer installation on a fifty/fifty split for all administrative requirements for documentation, permitting, design and development for the project will apply and will be coordinated through the offices of public works director and building inspector. (Ord. of 10-13-86; Ord. of 1-9-95) 
ARTICLE XV. - SEVERABILITY 
[Section 1501. - Intent.]     It is intended that the provisions of this ordinance be severable and should any portion be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other portion of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XVI. - REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES 
[Section 1601. - Repeal; exception.]     All ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed subject to the "grandfather" clause in article XIV, which maintains the effectiveness of any previous laws or ordinances on previous subdivision development that were in existence at the time of that particular development. 
ARTICLE XVII. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
[Section 1701. - Taking effect.]     This ordinance shall take effect and be in force after the date of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1968 CODE This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1968 Code, as updated through February 20, 1980, which are included herein. Sections of the 1968 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 1968 Code Section Section  this Code 1-2 1-2 1-4 1-2 1-5 2-32 1-6 1-6 1-11 1-8 1-13—1-16 1-10—1-13 2-3—2-6 2-1—2-4 2-21, 2-22 2-20, 2-21 2-23—2-32 2-21—2-30 2-33—2-37 2-31 2-38 2-33 2-39 2-6 2-49—2-53 2-40—2-44 2-64—2-68 2-50—2-54 2-79—2-84 15-100—15-105 2-95—2-101 16-20—16-26 2-103, 2-104 16-27, 16-28 2-115—2-120 14-20—14-25 3-12—3-25 3-20—3-33 3-27—3-32 3-35—3-40 4-1 4-4 4-2 4-6 4-17.1 4-22, 4-23 4-22, 4-23 4-14 4-23.1 4-14 4-30 5-20 4-34 5-30 4-35 4-23 5-31 4-36 4-23 4-40 4-7 4-50 4-1 4-51 4-9 4-53 4-5 4-54 4-3 4-55 4-2 4-61 4-1 4-64 4-7 4-65 4-10 4-70 4-14 4-72 4-31 4-75 4-24, 4-25 4-83 4-32 4-52 4-102(c) 4-14 4-102(d)— 4-102(g) 4-54—4-57 5-1 5-2 5-2—5-4 5-4—5-6 5-6 5-10 5-17 5-3 5-18 5-7 5-20 5-9 5-21 5-7 5-22 5-9, 5-10 5-24 5-8 5-25, 5-26 5-1 5-37—5-44 5-22 5-45, 5-46 5-21 5-47, 5-48 5-23 5-55 5-24 6-16 6-2 6-51 6-4 7-1—7-5 7-1—7-5 8-1—8-4 8-1—8-4 8-16—8-19 8-21—8-24 9-1, 9-2 9-20, 9-21 9-13—9-19 12-70—12-76 9-30—9-36 9-22—9-28 10-1—10-10 10-1—10-10 10-12—10-14 10-11—10-13 10-16—10-18 10-14—10-16 10-27, 10-28 10-32, 10-33 10-30, 10-31 10-30, 10-31 10-41, 10-42 10-40, 10-41 10-43 10-41, 10-42 10-45 10-43 10-46 10-45 10-47 10-44 10-48(a) 10-46 11-1—11-3 11-4—11-6 11-4 11-3 11-5 11-1 11-7 11-6—11-8 11-8—11-10 11-9 11-13 11-10 11-11 11-11 11-2 11-12 11-1 11-13 11-14 11-14 11-12 12-2 19-2 12-6, 12-7 19-3, 19-4 12-13 19-5 12-14 19-7 12-16 19-6 12-17 19-8 12-36 19-11 12-49 19-12 12-71 19-13 12-80 19-10 12-88 19-1 12-91 19-14 12-93 19-15 12-114 19-17 12-138 19-9 12-154 19-30 12-154.1 19-31 12-155 19-32 12-156(c) 19-43 12-157—12-159 19-33—19-35 12-161—12-167 19-36—19-42 12-178—12-188 19-50—19-60 13-1 9-4 13-6, 13-7 13-3, 13-4 13-7.1 13-5 13-8 13-1 13-9, 13-10 13-11, 13-12 13-12 13-2 13-14 13-6 13-15.1 13-7 13-16 13-8 13-18 13-9 13-19 12-77 15-1 17-10 15-2 17-13 15-3 17-12 15-4 17-11 15-5, 15-6 17-14, 17-15 15-8 17-16 15-10—15-17 17-17—17-24 17-1 18-11 17-4—17-8 18-12—18-16 17-9A 18-18 17-9B 18-17 18-1 20-1 18-12—18-18 20-20—20-26 18-19—18-22 20-28—20-31 18-24 20-33 18-25 20-32 18-26 20-27 18-27—18-34 20-34—20-41 19-1 12-1 19-5 12-26 19-6 12-32 19-9 12-32 19-11, 19-12 12-33 19-13, 19-14 12-28 19-14.1 12-27 19-15 12-54 19-52 12-50 19-53(a)— 19-53(d) 12-51—12-54 19-54—19-58 12-55—12-59 19-59 12-60, 12-61 19-60 12-62  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES, MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances, motions and resolutions adopted since the 1968 Code, as updated through February 20, 1980, which are included herein. Ordinances, motions and resolutions adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1968 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances, motions and resolutions which precede February 20, 1980, but which were never included in the 1968 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances, motions and resolutions not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.  Date Section  Section this Code  6-10-69(Ord.) Arts. I—XXVII App. A, Arts. I—XXVII 12-13-82(Ord.) 19-1 12-29-82(Ord.) 2—4 10-16 5(b) 10-80 5(c) 10-81, 10-82 5(d) 10-82 5(e), (f) 10-87 5(g) 10-84 5(h) 10-83 5(i)—(k) 10-85 5(l) 10-86 5(m) 10-88 7 10-30 9 10-31  8- 8-83(Ord.) 10-11 18-17, 18-18  9-23-83(Ord.) 1—5 10-50—10-54 6 10-56 10-10-83(Ord.) 6-2 11-15-83(Ord.) 1 10-55  9- 9-85(Ord.) 1—5 17-1—17-5 10-21-85(Ord.) 19-50—19-56 19-58—19-60 12-185 19-57  3-10-86(Ord.) Arts. I—XVII App. B, Arts. I—XVII  8- 6-86(Ord.) 17-20 10-13-86(Ord.) App. B, § 1401  2-11-87(Ord.) 2 4-6 10-10-87(Ord.) 17-24 10-12-87(1)(Ord.) 19-15 10-12-87(2)(Ord.) 19-16 10-12-87(3)(Ord.) 19-43  1-11-88(Ord.) 5-4  2- 8-88(Mo.) 8-5  6-13-88(Ord.) 1.1—1.4 6-51—6-54 2.0 6-50 3.1—3.6 6-55—6-60 4.1 6-63 4.2, 4.3 6-61, 6-62 4.4-1, 4.4-2 6-64, 6-65 5.1, 5.2 6-66, 6-67  8- 8-88(Ord.) 1 13-5  9-12-88(Ord.) A—E 6-5—6-9  9-12-88(Res.) 2-5  1- 9-89(Ord.) 1 5-20—5-23 5-30, 5-31  8-14-89(Ord.) 20-72 10-101 20-73 10-100 20-74—20-85 10-102—10-113 10- 9-89(Ord.) App. A, § 106  8-13-90(Ord.) 5 13-10  3-11-91(2)(Mo.) 10-60  3-11-91(Ord.) 1, 2 App. A, § 2201, App. A, § 2202 3 App. A, § 1901 4 App. A, § 201 App. A, § 401 App. A, § 501 App. A, § 601 App. A, § 801 App. A, § 901 App. A, § 1001 App. A, § 1101 App. A, § 1201 App. A, § 1401 App. A, § 1501 App. A, § 2304 App. A, § 2702 App. A, § 2707— App. A, § 2709 11-11-91(Ord.) App. A, § 201 12- 9-91(Ord.) 1, 2 18-31, 18-32 3 18-34 4 18-33 5—9 18-35—18-39 11 18-41 12 18-40  4-13-92(1)(Ord.) 12-71 12-75  4-13-92(2)(Ord.) 19-70—19-74 9-91—9-95 19-75—19-79 9-76—9-80 19-80 12-43  4-13-92(3)(Ord.) 9-20 12-78  4-13-92(4)(Ord.) 17-12  5-11-92(Ord.) 12-79 10-12-92(Ord.) App. A, § 201 App. A, § 2201 11- 9-92(Mo.) 12-32  4-20-93(Mo.) 12-44  5-24-93(Ord.) I 6-80 II 6-89 III—V 6-81—6-83 VI(1), VI(2) 6-84, 6-85 VII(1) 6-100 VII(2) 6-101, 6-102 VII(3)(A)(1—6)) 6-110 VII(3)(A)(7))—VII(3)(A)(9) 6-111—6-113 VII(3)(B), VII(3)(C) 6-114, 6-115 VII(4) 6-116 VIII(1) 6-130 VIII(1)(A)—VIII(1)(D) 6-131—6-134 IX(1) 6-150 IX(3) 6-151 X(1)—X(3) 6-160—6-162 X(4)(I) 6-163 X(4)(II)(A), X(4)(II)(B) 6-164, 6-165 X(4)(III), X(4)(IV) 6-166, 6-167 X(4)(V) 6-169 X(4)(A)(I—III) 6-168 XI 6-170 XII 6-86 XIII 6-90 XIV, XV 6-87, 6-88  8- 2-93(1)(Ord.) 6-1  8- 2-93(2)(Ord.) 8-20  6-13-94(1)(Ord.) Adopting Ordinance, p. vii  6-13-94(2)(Ord.)       Added 9-111—9-116 11-14-94(Ord.) 4-5       Added 4-14 (4) 4-16 (a)       Rpld 4-16 (e), (f) 4-32, 4-35 (a)       Rpld 4-35 (b) 4-50       Rpld 4-52 (2)—(10) 4-57       Added 4-59 4-72       Rpld 4-82 (2)—(9) 11-21-94(1)(Ord.) I—IX       Added 7.5-21—7.5-29 11-21-94(2)(Ord.) App. A, § 1804 (d) 12-20-94(Ord.)       Rpld 10-1—10-15 10-16 (a), (c), (d)       Added 10-161—10-192  5- 8-95(1)(Ord.)       Added 6-10  5- 8-95(2)(Ord.) 12-26(a), (b)  5- 8-95(3)(Ord.) 1, 2       Added 10-221, 10-222  5- 8-95(4)(Ord.) 1—3, 5       Added 10-241—10-244  6-12-95(Ord.) 12-70 12-73 12-76 12-78 12-79  1- 9-95(Ord.) App. B, § 1401(c)  8-14-95(Ord.) 10-16(d) 10- 9-95(Ord.)       Added App. A, § 2506(2)e. 11-13-95(Ord.) 6-101(b) 6-102(a), (b)       Rpld 6-131—6-134       Added 6-131 6-151 12-11-95(Ord.) 10-162(b) 10-163(a) 10-164(a)(1), (b), (c) 10-179 10-184  2-12-96(Res.)       Added 2-70—2-74  4- 8-96(1)(Ord.)       Added 6-180  4- 8-96(2)(Ord.) App. A, § 503(a)       Added App. A, § 503(d) App. A, § 603(a)  5-28-96(Ord.) 1       Added 12-2  6-10-96(Ord.) 7.5-22, 7.5-23(a)(1), (4), (6), (9) 7.5-24, 7.5-25       Added 7.5-26(d), (e)       Dltd 7.5-27(e) 11-11-96(Ord.)       Added 20-2 20-22(b) 20-29 11-26-96(Ord.) 4-14(4)—(6) 4-72  2-10-97(1)(Ord.)       Dltd 4-31       Added 4-31  2-10-97(2)(Ord.) App. A, Art. IV, § 400 App. A, Art. V, § 502(2) App. A, Art. VIII, §§ 801, 802, 804, 805 App. A, Art. IX, §§ 904, 905 App. A, Art. XI, § 1101 App. A, Art. XII, § 1203 App. A, Art. XIII, §§ 1303, 1304 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1400       Added App. A, Art. XIV, § 1401       Rnbd App. A, Art. XIV, §§ 1401—1404       as App. A, Art. XIV, §§ 1402—1405       Added Art. XV, § 1517       Added Art. XVI, § 1604  4-14-97(Ord.) 2-20 10-13-97(Ord.)       Added 6-181  2-24-98(Ord.) 2-34  3- 9-98(Ord.) 10-169 10-175  5-11-98(Ord.) App. A, Art. XX, § 2000  7-13-98(Ord.)       Dltd 4-34  8-25-98(1)(Ord.)       Added 4-60  8-25-98(2)(Ord.) 5-20, 5-21(4)  9-29-98(Ord.) 4-59 12-14-98(Ord.)       Rpld App. A, Art. X, § 1001(3)       Rnbd App. A, Art. X, § 1001(4)       as App. A, Art. X, § 1001(3) App. A, Art. XVIII  4-12-99(Ord.)       Added 2-91  5-10-99(Ord.) 20-2(a) 20-36  7-12-99(Ord.)       Added 2-92  8- 9-99(Ord.) 1—6       Added 7.5-41—7.5-46 11- 8-99(Ord.)       Added 4-61, 4-62       Added 4-74 4-72  2-14-00(Ord.) 20-36 11-13-00(Ord.) 12-56(k) 12-27-00(1)(Ord.)       Added 6-182 12-27-00(2)(Ord.)       Added 6-183  3-12-01(Ord.) 20-28(a), (b)       Added 20-28(c), (d) 20-35(a)       Added 20-35(b)  4- 9-01 7.5-22 7.5-23(a)(1), (5)       Added 7.5-23(a)(6)       Rnbd 7.5-23(a)(6)—(9)       as 7.5-23(a)(7)—(10) 7.5-23(a)(8), (9) 7.5-23(b) 7.5-24(b)(1)—(3) 7.5-24(c)(8)—(10) 7.5-24(c)(14)       Rpld 7.5-24(c)(15)—(17)       Added 7.5-24(c)(15), (16) 7.5-25(a) 7.5-25(b)(3)—(5) 7.5-25(c)(1) 7.5-25(c)(2)h. 7.5-25(c)(3)e. 7.5-25(c)(3)h., i. 7.5-25(d)(2) 7.5-26(a), (c), (e) 7.5-27(b)—(d)       Added 7.5-29(c)(3)  7- 9-01       Added 12-91  8-28-01       Added 19-18  2-26-02       Rpld 4-2       Rpld 4-19(c)(1)c. 4-19(d)       Rpld 4-19(e) 4-21       Added 4-30(d) 4-50 4-54(a) 4-58       Rpld 4-71 4-90(2)       Added 4-111  3-27-02(1) 10-121 10-130 10-138(a)  3-27-02(2) 19-35 19-50       Rpld 19-52 19-54       Rpld 19-55 19-56(1) 19-57(a), (b)  8-27-02(1) 10-16(a), (d)       Added 10-16(f)       Rpld 10-80—10-88       Added 10-80  8-27-02(2) Ch. 20, art. II(tit.), 20-20 20-36  9- 9-02 App. A, § 201 App. A, § 1901 App. A, § 1901(3)       Added App. A, § 1901(8) App. A, § 1902(2)       Added App. A, §§ 1904—1906 10-14-02 1       Added 2-92(2)  2-10-03       Added ch. 12, art. VI(tit.), 12-101—12-105 12-121—12-128 12-141—12-144 12-161—12-167 12-181—12-188 12-201—12-213 12-231, 12-232 12-241, 12-251 12-261—12-268 12-281—12-284 12-301—12-306 12-321—12-323 12-331—12-334  3-25-03(1) 10-16(a)       Added App. A, § 1901(9)  3-25-03(2) Ch. 10, art. VI(tit.), 10-80(a)       Added 10-81, 10-82  3-25-03(3) App. A, § 1903(8)  4-29-03(3)       Added 2-7  6- 2-03(1) 10-162  6- 2-03(2) 19-53       Added 19-55 19-57(a), (b) 19-60(a), (b)  6- 9-03       Added 9-75  2- 9-04       Added App. A, § 1901(8)       Rnbd App. A, § 1901(8), (9)       as App. A, § 1901(9), (10) App. A, § 1903(8)  6-14-04 I—IX 7.5-21—7.5-29  6-22-04       Added 1-16  7-12-04 App. B, § 903 App. B, § 1301(a)       Added App. B, § 1301(b), (c) 11-23-04       Added Ch. 17, art. I(tit.)       Rpld 17-20, 17-21       Added Ch. 17, art. II(tit.), 17-30—17-33       Added Ch. 17, art. III(tit.), 17-39—17-41  5- 9-05       Added 18-42 11-29-05       Added 13-13, 13-14  2-13-06 App. A, § 1903(11), (12)       Rpld App. A, § 1903(16)       Rnbd App. A, § 1903(17)—(19)       as App. A, § 1903(16)—(18) App. A, § 1903(16)  5- 8-06       Added 2-126—2-137  6-12-06       Rpld 10-80—10-82       Added 10-80—10-94  8-29-06       Added 4-40  2-12-07(1) 2-43       Rpld 2-44 Ch. 2, art. IV(tit.) 2-50—2-54  2-12-07(2) 10-32  4- 9-07       Rpld 20-1, 20-2, 20-20—20-41       Added 20-1, 20-2, 20-20—20-74  8-13-07       Rpld 4-25, 4-26  1- 7-08 1, 2       Added 10-114, 10-115  4-14-08       Added 2-92(3) 10-13-08 1 App. A, Art. II, § 201 2, 3 App. A, Art. XIX 4       Rpld App. A, Art. XXIV, § 2410 10-28-08 1, 2       Added 13-15, 13-16  2-24-09 12-26(a)  4-22-09       Rpld App. A, §§ 1900—1904, 1910—1918, 1930—1938, 1950—1959, 1961—1963, 1970—1975       Added App. A, §§ 1900—1904, 1910—1918, 1930—1937, 1950—1959, 1961, 1970—1977  5-11-09 10-81  6- 8-09 1, 2       Added 10-17, 10-18  8-25-09(1)       Added Ch. 17, Art. IV, Divs. 1—9  8-25-09(2)       Added 10-34  8-25-09(3)       Added 13-17  8-25-09(4) Ch. 18, Art. III, 18-31—18-42  9-10-09 19-18  9-29-09(1) Ch. 7, Art. II, §§ 7.5-21—7.5-30  9-29-09(2)       Added App. A, § 1905  1- 4-10       Added 4-60(c)—(e)  3-23-10       Rpld Ch. 6, Art. III, 6-50—6-67       Added Ch. 6, Art. III, 6-50—6-55  7-12-10       Added 10-81(f)  9-20-10       Added App. A, § 1977(f) 11- 8-10 5-20       Added 5-21(d)—(f)  2-15-11       Added 12-92  6-13-11 4-19(c)(1)b.1 11-14-11       Added 12-80  1- 9-12       Added 4-38(j)  1-12-12(1) 1       Added 2-92(4)  1-12-12(2) 1       Added 2-92(5)  5-14-12 1       Added 10-250—10-262  6-11-12       Rpld 13-13(d)  7- 9-12 1       Added 2-151—2-159 11-12-12(1) App. A, § 1977(d) 11-12-12(2) App. A, § 1951(b) 11-12-12(3) App. A, § 2708 12-10-12 App. A, § 1201(10) 12-10-12(1)       Added App. A, § 1301(2)—(5)  7- 8-13 1       Added App. A, § 1301(6) 2       Added App. A, § 1402(9) 3       Added App. A, § 1501(5) 4 App. A, § 1601  7- 8-13(1)       Rpld App. A, § 1916(4), (16) App. A, § 1917  8-12-13 1-2(a)  8-12-13(1) 10-16(a)—(c) 11- 5-13 1 4-14 11- 5-13(1) 1 4-61 12- 9-13 4-50 12- 9-13(1) 4-60(d)(1) 12-19-13 1, 2 12-43(b), (c) 12-19-13(1)       Added 11.5-21—11.5-28  2-10-14 12-32(a)(1) 12-35  2-20-14 4-19(c)(1)   3-20-14(1) 2-34   3-20-14(2)       Added 2-35   5-12-14       Added 13-18   6- 9-14 2-21   7-14-14(1) 12-36   7-14-14(2) 12-54  6- 8-15(1) 1       Rpld 10-250—10-262       Added 10-250—10-267  6- 8-15(2) 18-32  6- 8-15(3) 18-33 12-17-15       Added 10-280—10-284   6- 8-15       Rpld 10-32, 10-33   4-11-16       Added App. A, § 1201(13)   6-13-16       Rpld 10-80—10-94       Added 10-80—10-94       Rpld 17-18  6-11-18(1) 1—14       Added 12-63  6-11-18(2) 8-5  7- 9-18(1)       Rpld 7.5-21—7.5-30       Added 7.5-21—7.5-30  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. O.C.G.A. Section Section  this Code 1-3-1 et seq. 1-2 1-3-1(d)(3) 1-2 1-3-3 7.5-23 12-92 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-105 10-177(4) 3-1-2 4-1 3-3-2 Ch. 4 4-11 3-3-3 4-13 3-3-7 4-1 4-14 4-30 3-3-20 4-1 4-14 4-30 3-3-21 4-7 10-257 3-3-21(b)(3) 4-60 3-3-22 4-30 3-3-23 4-30 3-3-23 4-31 3-3-24 4-32 3-3-24.2 4-31 3-4-1 4-1 3-4-49 4-9 3-4-80 4-24 3-5-1 4-1 3-5-80 4-22 3-6-1 4-1 3-6-60 4-23 3-7-1 4-1 4-3-1 et seq. 5-2 4-3-4 5-9 4-8-5 Ch. 5, Art. II 4-8-6 5-21 4-8-20 et seq. Ch. 5, Art. II Ch. 5, Art. II, Div. 2 4-8-28 5-32 6-1-1 Ch. 3 6-3-20 et seq. Ch. 3 8-2-20(9)(B) 6-1 8-2-25 6-1 8-2-25 et seq. 6-1 8-2-26(d) 12-2 8-2-110 et seq. App. A, § 201 10-1-370 et seq. 4-38 12.7-7.1 7.5-23 12-2-B 7.5-24 12-2-8 7.5-24(b)(15) 12-63 12-4-72 7.5-23 12-5-20 7.5-22 12-5-20 et seq. 7.5-22 Ch. 12, Art. III 12-5-23(5)(a) 7.5-25 12-5-30(f) 7.5-22 7.5-24 12-5-282 7.5-22 12-5-286 7.5-24 12-5-440 et seq. 7.5-22 12-7 7.5-22 12-7-1 7.5-24 12-7-6 7.5-23 12-7-6(b) 7.5-23 7.5-24 12-7-6(c) 7.5-24 12-7-1.1 7.5-23 12-7-7(d) 7.5-26(e) 12-7-7(e) 7.5-26 12-7-7(f)(1) 7.5-25 12-7-8(a) 7.5-22 7.5-23 7.5-25 7.5-26 12-7-17(9) 7.5-25 12-7-17(10) 7.5-25 12-7-19 7.5-22 12-7-19(b)(1) 7.5-28 12-7-19(b)(4) 7.5-28 12-7-20 7.5-25 7.5-28 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. II Ch. 12, Art. IV 12-8-22(1.1) 9-112(b) tit. 15, ch. 11, art. 1 13-10 15-11-1 et seq. 13-10 15-18-22 2-158 15-18-96 2-157 16-6-8 4-6 16-7-40 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. II Ch. 12, Art. IV 16-7-43 9-114 16-7-51(6) 9-111 16-8-5 12-42 13-5 16-10-6 2-131 16-10-24 13-2 17-33 16-10-27 8-4 16-11-36 13-4 16-11-39 17-33 16-11-41 4-3 16-11-100 9-4 16-11-103, 16-11-104 13-7 16-11-120—16-11-134       17-33 16-11-127 17-41 16-12-20 et seq. 13-6 16-12-20(2) 10-251 16-12-20(3) 10-252 16-12-35 10-260 16-12-35(a)—(k) 10-251 16-12-35(b)—(d) 10-235 16-12-35(c) 10-258 16-12-35(d)(1) 10-235 16-12-35(e)—(g) 10-262 tit. 21, ch. 3 Char., §§ 5.10 5.19 5.20 21-2-45(c) 2-7(b) tit. 22 Char., § 1.13(6), (26) 25-2-4 Ch. 8, Art. II 25-9-6 17-69 31-3-5.2 12-92 31-19-1 et seq. 5-22 32-4-92(10) 17-50 32-6-75(c)(1)(C) App. A, § 1958 33-3-5 10-55 33-3-5(1) 10-50 10-54 33-8-4 10-53 33-8-8 et seq. 10-177(5) 33-8-8.1 10-53 33-8-8.2 10-54 tit. 36, ch. 81 Char., § 6.23 36-18-1 7.5-23 36-30-10 17-10 36-34-1 Ch. 2 36-34-2 Ch. 2 36-34-2(4) Ch. 15 36-34-3 Ch. 3 36-35-3 Char., § 2.23(b) 17-50 36-35-4 Ch. 15 36-35-4(a) Ch. 15 36-39-1 et seq. Ch. 17 36-60-4 Ch. 9, Art. III 36-66-2 et seq. Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. II 36-67-1 et seq. App. A, § 2302 36-71-2(8) 10-162(b) 38-3-3(1) 7-1 40-1-1 19-1 40-1-1(32) 11.5-21 40-6-1—40-6-395       19-1 40-6-121 19-17 40-6-181 19-14 40-6-183 19-15 40-6-206 19-32 40-6-249 Ch. 9, Art. II Ch. 12, Art. IV 40-6-331(b) 11.5-21 40-6-371(a)(10) 19-16 40-6-372 19-1 40-8-1 et seq. 19-13 40-8-4 11.5-23 11.5-24 40-11-3 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. III 41-2-1—41-2-17 6-181 41-2-5 Ch. 9 tit. 43 10-171(a) tit. 43, ch. 37 10-60 43-8-1(3) 10-253 43-8-2 10-32 43-8-3 10-32 43-8-9 10-32 43-37-1 et seq. 10-60 43-46-5 10-84 tit. 44, ch. 12, pt. 5 10-60 44-12-130 et seq. 10-60 tit. 46, ch. 3 10-177(2) 46-5-1 et seq. 10-17 46-7-15 10-177(6) 47-5-1 et seq. Ch. 15 47-18-1 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II 48-2-41 18-36 48-2-42 18-36 48-2-43 18-36 tit. 48, ch. 5, art. 2, pt. 1       18-18 48-5-40 et seq. 18-18 48-5-355 10-177(7) 48-5-356 10-177(8) 48-5-359 18-12 18-14 48-5-380 18-37 48-6-93 10-177(9) 10-221 48-6-93(d) 10-222 48-13-5—48-13-26       10-168 48-13-7 10-161(a) 48-13-9 10-163(b) 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18)       10-166 48-13-22 10-188(b) 48-13-50 et seq. 18-31 48-13-51 18-32 48-13-55 10-177(10) 50-27-70 10-253 50-27-70(b)(2) 10-253 50-27-71 10-261 50-27-71(a.1) 10-261 50-27-78 10-261 50-27-84(b)(1) 10-259 51-2-7 Ch. 5, Art. II, Div. 2 88-401 Ch. 8, Art. II  