CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF TUCKER, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Frank Auman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Patricia Soltys, District 1 
William (Bill) Rosenfeld, District 1 
Matthew J. Robbins, District 2 
Noelle Monferdini, District 2 
Michelle Penkava, District 3 
Anne Lerner, District 3 
City Council 
____________ 
Tamara Hanlin 
City Manager 
____________ 
Brian Anderson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Bonnie Warne 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Tucker, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances of the city adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Jean B. Lindsay, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Bonnie Warne, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tucker, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tucker, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tucker, Georgia. 2019. 
ORDINANCE NO. O2019-05-21 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
CITY OF TUCKER 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF TUCKER, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE: CITY COUNCIL OF TUCKER, GEORGIA 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Tucker, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 46, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before O2019-03-04, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum required or permitted by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after O2019-03-04, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council of Tucker, Georgia this 10 th day of June, 2019. 
  

ATTEST: 
  

(SEAL) 
  
1 st Reading: May 28, 2019 
2 nd Reading: June 10, 2019 
Council Action: Adopted June 10, 2019 
  
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the 10 th day of June, 2019. 
  


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Act 237, HB 515 as issued by the Governor on May 12, 2015; all as same appear of file and record in this office. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city, Ga. Laws, Act No. 237 (HB 515), May 12, 2015. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering, capitalization and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, AND POWERS 

SECTION 1.01. - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the Charter of the City of Tucker, Georgia. The City of Tucker, Georgia, in the County of DeKalb, and the inhabitants thereof, are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the "City of Tucker" and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal for all other purposes as authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia and the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 1.01, 5-12-2015) 
Editor's note— Appendix A has been omitted from publication and is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
SECTION 1.02. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Tucker shall be those set forth and described in Appendix A of this Charter, and such Appendix A is incorporated into and made a part of this Charter. The city clerk shall maintain a current map and written legal description of the corporate boundaries of the city, and such map and description shall incorporate any changes which may hereafter be made in such corporate boundaries. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 1.02, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 1.03. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades to the extent permitted by general law; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by O.C.G.A. title 48 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. 
(A)  To condemn property inside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use and for any public purpose deemed necessary by the city council, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; and 
(B)  To condemn and cause to be remediated or removed any building, structure, or existing condition within its corporate limits that is dangerous to life, limb, or property, by reasons of decay, dilapidation, or unsanitary condition. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to relieve the city of any duty to give owners or interested persons reasonable notice and opportunity to remedy the situation. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed as relieving the city of liability to any owner or interested person for damages to person or property taken or destroyed in furtherance of this subparagraph. This subparagraph shall not be construed as authorizing the doing of any act or thing contrary to the Constitution of this state and the policy of the general laws of this state. The city shall have authority to adopt reasonable ordinances and resolutions for the purpose of carrying out this subparagraph; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the enactment of ordinances that preserve and improve air quality, restore and maintain water resources, control erosion and sedimentation, manage stormwater and establish a stormwater utility, manage solid and hazardous waste, and provide other necessary or beneficial actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Ethics. To adopt ethics ordinances and regulations governing such things as, but not limited to, the conduct of municipal elected officials, appointed officials, contractors, vendors, and employees; establishing procedures for ethics complaints; and setting forth penalties for violations of such rules and procedures; 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges, taxes, or fees; 
(12)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Homestead exemption. To establish and maintain procedures for offering homestead exemptions to residents of the city and maintaining current homestead exemptions of residents of the city as authorized by Act of the General Assembly; 
(16)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by Georgia law; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(17)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(18)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices not specified in this Charter, commissions, authorities, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(19)  Municipal courts. To create a municipal court with a judge or judge and associate judges as may be necessary and to authorize the creation of a municipal court clerk's office or make said clerk's duties a part of the duties of the city clerk as designated by the city council; 
(20)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(21)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(22)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(23)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, stormwater management, gas works, electricity generating plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(24)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(25)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(26)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for city land use, signage, and outside advertising, and development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(27)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(28)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(29)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, maintenance, or abolition of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, public housing, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside the corporate limits of the city and to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(30)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(31)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(32)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on, public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(33)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(34)  Retirement and employee benefits. To provide and maintain a retirement plan, insurance, and such other employee benefits for appointed officers and employees of the city, as are determined by the city council; 
(35)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(36)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(37)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements, subject to referendum; 
(38)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation to a maximum of one mill without a referendum; 
(39)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes and fees as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(40)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; to inspect such vehicles and mandate standards of safety and cleanliness; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(41)  Tourism, conventions, and trade shows. To provide for the structure, operation, and management of the Tucker Convention and Visitors Bureau created pursuant to Section 1.05 of this Charter and to authorize the City of Tucker to contract with private sector nonprofit organizations or other governmental agencies to promote tourism, conventions, and trade shows; 
(42)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(43)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and any listing of particular powers in this Charter shall not be held to be exclusive of others or restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the city shall exercise the powers enumerated in subsection (a) of this section only for the purposes of planning and zoning, code adoption and enforcement, and parks and recreation services and those items directly related to the provision of such services and for the general administration of the city in providing such services. 
(c)  In the event that the city desires to provide services in addition to those services enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, the city council shall pass a resolution specifically stating the services sought to be offered by the city and shall submit such resolution for ratification by the electors of the city in a referendum. If the electors of the city vote in favor of ratifying such resolution, then the city shall be authorized to exercise the powers enumerated in subsection (a) of this section for the purpose of providing such services stated in such resolution and those items directly related to the provision of such services and for the general administration of the city in providing such services. If the electors of the city disapprove such resolution, such resolution shall immediately be null and void and of no force and effect. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 1.03, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 1.04. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 1.04, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 1.05. - Tourism, conventions, and trade shows. 
The Tucker Convention and Visitors Bureau is hereby authorized to be created by an ordinance of the city council. When created, the bureau shall consist of a board of seven members appointed by the city council. The bureau shall report to the city manager on a regular basis and shall send an annual report to the city council in January of each year. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 1.05, 5-12-2015) 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

SECTION 2.01. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of the City of Tucker, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council of which the mayor shall be a voting member. 
(b)  The city council of the City of Tucker shall consist of six members, plus the mayor. 
(1)  There shall be three council districts, designated as Council Districts 1 through 3, as described in Appendix B of this Charter, which is attached to and made a part of this Charter of the City of Tucker. 
(2)  Two councilmembers shall be elected from each of the three council districts and shall hold Council District 1, Post 1; Council District 1, Post 2; Council District 2, Post 1; Council District 2, Post 2; Council District 3, Post 1; and Council District 3, Post 2, respectively. Each person desiring to offer as a candidate for councilmember for such posts shall designate the council post for which he or she is offering. Councilmembers shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the respective council districts voting at the elections of the city. In the event that no candidate for a council post obtains a majority vote of the qualified electors of the council district voting in the election, then a run-off election shall be held. The candidates receiving the two highest numbers of votes in the election for such council post shall be included in the run-off election. The person receiving the highest number of votes of the qualified electors of the council district voting at such run-off election shall be elected. Each candidate for election to the city council shall reside in the district which he or she seeks to represent. 
(c)  With the exception of the initial terms set forth in subsection (d) of this section, councilmembers shall be elected to terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified on a staggered basis in alternate election cycles such that every two years three councilmembers are up for election. 
(d)  In order to assure staggered elections of the councilmembers, in the first election of the city council, the terms for the candidates elected for Council District 1, Post 1; Council District 2, Post 1; and Council District 3, Post 1 shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to their successors elected in the regular elections held in November, 2017, as provided in of subsection (b) of Section 2.02 of this Charter. The terms for the candidates elected for Council District 1, Post 2; Council District 2, Post 2; and Council District 3, Post 2 shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to their successors elected in the regular elections held in November, 2019, as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2.02 of this Charter. Thereafter, a successor to each councilmember shall be elected at the November election immediately preceding the end of such councilmember's term of office, and the term of each councilmember shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to his or her successor. 
(e)  With the exception of the initial term of office, the mayor of the City of Tucker, with the powers and duties specified in this Charter, shall be elected to a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city. In the event that no candidate for mayor obtains a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city, then a run-off election shall be held. The candidates receiving the two highest numbers of votes in the election shall be included in the run-off election, and the candidate receiving the highest number of votes in the runoff of the qualified electors of the city at large voting in such runoff shall be elected. The term of the first elected mayor shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to his or her successor elected in the regular election held in November, 2017, as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2.02 of this Charter. Thereafter, a successor to each mayor shall be elected at the November election immediately preceding the end of such mayor's term of office and the term of each mayor shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to his or her successor. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.01, 5-12-2015) 
Editor's note— Appendix B has been omitted from publication and is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
SECTION 2.02. - Mayor and councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  For all elections subsequent to the first election, the mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their terms shall expire upon the administration of the oath of office to their respective successors. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the City of Tucker for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of election for mayor or councilmember, shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service, and shall continue to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Tucker. In addition to the above requirements, no person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember representing a council district unless that person continues to reside in such district during that person's period of service. 
(b)  An election shall be held on the date of and in conjunction with the 2016 presidential preference primary to elect the first mayor and city council. At such election, the first mayor and council shall be elected to serve for the initial terms of office specified in subsection (d) and (e) of Section 2.01. Thereafter, the time for holding regular municipal elections shall be on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year beginning in 2017. 
(c)  The number of successive terms an individual may hold a position as a councilmember shall be limited to two terms. 
(d)  The number of successive terms an individual may hold the position of mayor shall be limited to three terms. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.02, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.03. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Elected officials of the city shall not hold other elective or public offices. The elective offices of the city's government shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, removal, or forfeiture of office. The following shall result in an elected city official forfeiting his or her office: 
(1)  Failing to reside in the city or the district from which such person was elected; 
(2)  Being convicted of, or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to, a felony or any misdemeanor involving theft or deception; or 
(3)  Failing to attend one-third of the regular meetings of the council in a three-month period without being excused by the council. 
(b)  The office of mayor shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election if such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office. If such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor. 
(c)  The office of a councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of a councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election if such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office. If such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the mayor shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term, subject to the approval of the city council or those members remaining. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of a councilmember. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.03, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.04. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.04, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.05. - Election votes. 
The candidate for mayor who receives the majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting in the elections of the city and the candidates for the city council who receive the majority vote of the qualified electors of their respective districts voting in the elections of the city shall be elected to a term of office. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.05, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.06. - Applicability of general laws; qualifying; other provisions. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 21, ch. 2, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended or otherwise provided by law. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, the establishment of qualifying fees, to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended or otherwise provided by law. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.06, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.07. - Compensation and expenses. 
The annual salary of the mayor shall be $20,000.00, and the annual salary for each councilmember shall be $14,000.00. Such salaries shall be paid from municipal funds in monthly installments. The mayor shall be provided an annual expense allowance of $5,000.00 and each councilmember shall be provided an annual expense allowance of $3,000.00 for the reimbursement of expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor and councilmembers in carrying out their duties as elected officials of the city. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.07, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.08. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.08, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.09. - Meetings, oath of office, and mayor pro tempore. 
(a)  The city council shall meet on the seventh working day in January immediately following each regular municipal election. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor-elect, and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected mayor and councilmembers collectively by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths. The oath shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of [councilmember or mayor, as the case may be] of the City of Tucker, and will, to the best of my ability, support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and the Charter, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Tucker. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident of my district and the City of Tucker for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal Charter. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interests of the City of Tucker to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
(b)  Following the induction of the mayor and councilmembers, the city council, by a majority vote of the councilmembers, shall elect a councilmember to be mayor pro tempore, who shall serve for a term of two years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The number of successive terms an individual may hold a position as mayor pro tempore shall be unlimited. 
(c)  The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's temporary disability, suspension, or absence. If the mayor pro tempore is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one of the remaining councilmembers, chosen by the councilmembers present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor as described in this Charter and shall perform the mayor's duties in the same manner as the mayor pro tempore. 
(d)  The city council shall, at least once a month, hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. The city council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any day or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(e)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of either the mayor and one councilmember or three councilmembers. Notice of such special meetings shall be delivered to all councilmembers, the mayor, and the city manager personally, by registered mail, or by electronic means at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor, all councilmembers, and the city manager are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by the mayor, a councilmember, or the city manager in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice. The notice of such special meeting shall state what business is to be transacted at the special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.09, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.10. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business for the city council. The mayor shall be counted toward the making of a quorum. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote, and the yeas and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but on the request of any member, there shall be a roll call vote. In order for any ordinance, resolution, motion, or other action of the city council to be adopted, the measure shall receive at least three affirmative votes and shall receive the affirmative votes of a majority of those voting. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, no ordinance that effects the land use of parcels in only one district shall be adopted if the ordinance receives a no vote from both councilmembers that have met the residence requirement in that district. In order to effectuate such two-member denial of an adoption of a land use ordinance, a roll call vote must be requested. 
(b)  Any voting member of the council may abstain from voting on an issue or may recuse himself or herself from voting only when a conflict of interest exists. Such conflict shall be disclosed to the city council and entered on the record. A vote to abstain may be entered by any voting member as a protest under the councilmember's First Amendment rights and shall be reflected as such in the record of the vote. If any councilmember or the mayor is present and eligible to vote on a matter and refuses to do so for a reason he or she will not disclose, he or she shall be deemed to have voted with the majority of the votes of the other councilmembers on the issue involved, provided that if there is a tie in the vote of the voting councilmembers, then the mayor and each councilmember shall be required to vote unless he or she discloses a reason for not voting. The mayor shall have one vote on all matters brought before the council. 
(c)  The following types of actions require an ordinance in order to have the force of law: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter, or abolish a department, office not specified in this Charter, or agency; 
(2)  Provide for a fine or other penalty; 
(3)  Levy taxes; 
(4)  Grant, renew, or extend a franchise; 
(5)  Regulate a rate for a public utility; 
(6)  Authorize the borrowing of money; 
(7)  Convey, lease, or encumber city land; 
(8)  Regulate land use and development; 
(9)  Amend or repeal an ordinance already adopted; and 
(10)  Propose and vote on a budget for the fiscal year and to authorize a budget plan for a term beyond the current fiscal year. 
(d)  The city council shall establish by ordinance procedures for convening emergency meetings. In an emergency, an ordinance may be passed without notice or hearings if the city council passes the ordinance by a three-fourths' vote; provided, however, that the city council shall not in an emergency meeting: 
(1)  Levy taxes; 
(2)  Grant, renew, or extend a franchise; 
(3)  Regulate a rate for a public utility; or 
(4)  Borrow money. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.10, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 02018-05-16, 5-29-2018) 
SECTION 2.11. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Tucker as provided in Article I of this Charter. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Tucker and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.11, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.12. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except for the office of city manager and the positions provided for in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices not specified in this Charter, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The city council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies created or established under this Charter; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the city council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Charter or by ordinance and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and city council. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.12, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.13. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is in conflict with or which is within the scope of the proper discharge of official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others, except as required by law; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged. As used in this paragraph, the term "valuable" means an amount determined by the city council; provided, however, that the amount shall not exceed $150.00; or 
(5)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she or any member of his or her immediate family has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. As used in this subsection, the term "private financial interest" includes the interest of a spouse, child, or significant other or domestic partner. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose in writing such private interest, such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the city council shall hold any other elective city office or be employed by any city or county government during the term for which elected. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.13, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.14. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be nominated by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by applicable state law. If the city council does not approve of two consecutive nominations by the mayor for the same position, any councilmember may nominate such member subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(b)  No member of any board, commission, or authority of the city shall hold any elective office in the city. Councilmembers and the mayor, however, may serve as ex officio members of such boards, commissions, or authorities, without a vote. 
(c)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or any applicable law of the State of Georgia. 
(d)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she shall have executed and filed with the designated officer of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the city council and administered by the mayor or a judicial officer authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(e)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office by a vote of a majority of the councilmembers in accordance with state laws. 
(f)  Members of boards, commissions, and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the designated officer of the city. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.14, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.15. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance and resolution shall be introduced in writing, and the city council shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or amend such ordinance or resolution. A resolution may be passed at the time it is offered, but an ordinance shall not be adopted until the title of such ordinance shall have been read at two city council meetings, provided that the beginning of such meetings be not less than 24 hours nor more than 60 days apart. This requirement of two readings shall not apply to emergency ordinances, to ordinances passed during the first 90 days from the date on which the city begins operation, or to ordinances adopted at the first meeting of the initial city council as elected under subsection (b) of Section 2.02 of this Charter. The catchlines of sections of this Charter or any ordinance printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and: 
(1)  Shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or as any part of the section; and 
(2)  Shall not be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted unless expressly provided to the contrary. 
Furthermore, the chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Charter shall not be deemed to govern, limit, or modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any chapter, article, or section of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business, including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent councilmembers. Such rules may include punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the city council. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.15, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 2.16. - Submission of ordinances to the city clerk. 
(a)  Every ordinance, resolution, and other action adopted by the city council shall be presented to the city clerk within 15 days of its adoption or approval. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery from the city council. 
(b)  An ordinance or resolution that has been passed by the city council shall become effective on the date the ordinance is passed by the city council or on such other date as may be specified in the ordinance. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 2.16, 5-12-2015) 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

SECTION 3.01. - Powers and duties of the mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside over all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Set the agenda for meetings of the city council after receiving input from members of the city council, the city manager, and the public; provided, however, that an additional item shall be added to the agenda upon the written request of any member of the city council, and name of the mayor or councilmember placing an item on the agenda shall be noted on the agenda; 
(3)  Serve as the ceremonial head of the city and as its official representative to federal, state, and local government bodies and officials; 
(4)  Sign all orders, checks, and warrants for payment of money within a level of authorization as established by the city council; 
(5)  Execute all contracts, deeds, and other obligations of the city within a level of authorization as established by the city council; 
(6)  Vote in all matters before the city council as provided in subsection (a) of Section 2.10 of this Charter; 
(7)  Make all appointments of city officers as provided by this Charter, subject to confirmation by the city council; 
(8)  Serve in a part-time capacity and be compensated accordingly; 
(9)  Approve all raises or increases in compensation of city staff with the consent of the city council; and 
(10)  Perform any other duties and exercise any other powers required by state or federal law or authorized by a duly adopted ordinance that is not in conflict with this Charter. 
(b)  The mayor shall have the authority to certify that a supplemental appropriation is possible due to unexpected revenue increases but only with approval of the city council. 
(c)  The mayor shall have all of the powers specifically granted to the mayor elsewhere in this Charter regardless of whether such powers are enumerated in this section. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.01, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.02. - City manager; appointment and qualification. 
The mayor shall nominate a person for the office of city manager, and the approval of the city council shall be required to make the appointment official. If the first proposed city manager is rejected by the city council, the mayor shall make a second appointment selection. If the city council rejects that second appointment selection, the city council shall offer a candidate for city manager and, by a majority vote, send the appointee to the mayor for approval. If the mayor vetoes or does not approve, a second vote of a two-thirds majority of the council shall be needed to approve the appointee for the position. The city council may offer as many candidates as needed until the required approval is achieved. The city manager shall be appointed without regard to political beliefs and solely on the basis of his or her education and experience in the accepted competencies and practices of local government management. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.02, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.03. - City manager; chief administrative officer. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the government of the city. The city manager shall devote all of his or her working time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the city over which such officer has jurisdiction. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.03, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.04. - City manager; powers and duties enumerated. 
The city manager shall have the power, and it shall be his or her duty, to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  Propose a budget for city operations from a zero base with input from the actual expenditures of the city from the prior year; 
(3)  Appoint and employ all necessary employees of the city, provided that the power of this appointment shall not include officers and employees who, by this Charter, are appointed or elected by the mayor and the city council or departments not under the jurisdiction of the city manager; 
(4)  Remove employees appointed and employed under subsection (3) of this section, without the consent of the city council and without assigning any reason therefor; 
(5)  Exercise supervision and control of all departments and all divisions created in this Charter or that may hereafter be created by the city council except as otherwise provided in this Charter or specified by the city council; 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the city council, without a right to vote, but with a right to take part in the discussions as seen fit by the chairperson; provided, however, that regardless of the decision of the meeting chairperson, the city manager may take part in any discussion and report on any matter requested and approved by the city council at such meeting. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(7)  Recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient; 
(8)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and, upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be forthwith to take such steps as are necessary to protect and enforce the same; 
(9)  Make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the city as to matters within the city manager's level of authorization as established by the city council to the extent that such contracts are funded in the city's budget, except such as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no contract purchase or obligation requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the city council; 
(10)  Sign all orders, checks, and warrants for payment of money within the city manager's level of authorization as established by the city council to the extent that such contracts are funded in the city's budget, except such as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no such order, check, or warrant requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the city council; 
(11)  Act as budget officer to prepare and submit to the city council, after review and comment by the mayor, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; 
(12)  Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(13)  Make a full written report to the city council on the 15th of each month showing the operations and expenditures of each department of the city government for the preceding month, and a synopsis of such reports shall be published by the city clerk; 
(14)  Fix all salaries and compensation of city employees in accordance with the city budget and the city pay and classification plan; 
(15)  Shall have the authority to transfer appropriations within a department, fund, service, strategy, or organizational unit, but only with the approval of the city council; and 
(16)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.04, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.05. - City council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.08 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction or supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager or a designated agent, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.05, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.06. - City manager; removal. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may remove the city manager from office for any reason in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution removing the city manager and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a city council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  The city council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of four of its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of preliminary resolution was delivered to the city manager, if he or she has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he or she has requested one. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of his or her removal. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency. 
(c)  If the city manager is suspended in accordance with subsection (a) of this section or becomes disabled and is unable to carry out the duties of the office or if the city manager dies, the acting city manager shall perform the duties of the city manager until the city manager's disability is removed or until the city manager is replaced. Removal of the city manager because of disability shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.06, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.07. - Acting city manager. 
(a)  The mayor with the approval of the city council may appoint any person to exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager during the city manager's suspension under subsection (a) of Section 3.06 of this Charter, temporary absence from the city, or during the city manager's disability. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the mayor may designate with the approval of the city council a person as acting city manager, who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until a city manager is appointed. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.07, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.08. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint the city attorney or attorneys, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be deemed appropriate, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The rates or salary paid to any city attorney or assistant city attorney shall be approved in advance by the city council. The city attorney or attorneys shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court if the city elects to create a municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, other officers, and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. Except as provided in this Charter, the city attorney or attorneys shall review and sign all contracts and documents that bind the city but shall not have the power to bind the city. In a conflict between the mayor and the city council, the city attorney shall engage a separate outside firm to represent the interests of the city council and mayor, respectively. Notwithstanding any law or ordinance to the contrary, the city attorney shall not represent the interest of the city council or the mayor against the other. Unless the litigation allegations specify individual wrongdoing by an individual member of the city council or the mayor, the outside firm shall be able to represent the entity rather than the individual and separate attorneys for the individuals of the city council shall not be necessary. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.08, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.09. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council; to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city; and to perform such duties as may be required by law or ordinance or as the mayor or city manager may direct. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.09, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.10. - Tax collector. 
The mayor may appoint a tax collector, subject to confirmation by the city council, to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city; and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.10, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.11. - City accountant. 
The city council shall appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.11, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.12. - City internal auditor. 
The city council shall appoint an internal auditor to audit the financial records and expenditures of city funds and to report the results of such audits in writing to the city council at times and intervals set by the city council but no less than quarterly. Such audit reports shall, at a minimum, identify all city expenditures and other financial matters that the internal auditor either determines are not in compliance with or cannot conclusively be determined to be in compliance with: 
(1)  The provisions of this Charter; 
(2)  The applicable city budget; and 
(3)  Applicable ordinances, resolutions, or other actions duly adopted or approved under the provisions of this Charter. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.12, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.13. - Consolidation of functions. 
The city manager, with the approval of the city council, may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector, and city accountant, or any other positions, or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The city manager may also, with the approval of the city council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of the appointment of other persons to perform the same. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 3.13, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans; employment at will. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and a pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the City of Tucker and any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted by the city council, neither the city council nor the city manager shall increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except in conformity with such pay plan or pursuant to an amendment of such pay plan duly adopted by the city council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all employees of the city shall be subject to removal or discharge, with or without cause, at any time. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

SECTION 4.01. - Creation. 
The city council may establish by ordinance a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Tucker which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of such city and to punish for a violation of such laws or ordinances. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law, including ordinances of the city; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before such court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of, and in accordance with, the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Such court shall be presided over by a judge of such court pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 36, chs. 32-45 and 60-76. The provisions of this article shall apply only upon the creation of the municipal court. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 4.01, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 4.02. - Judges. 
(a)  There shall be at least one judge of the municipal court and that judge shall be designated as the chief judge with the authority to direct the court calendar, recommend associate judges to the city council, sit in presiding matters, discipline the city solicitors, and enforce all the powers of a judicial officer pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 15, ch. 1. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge unless he or she shall have attained the age of 28 years and shall have been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for a minimum of seven years. The judge or judges shall be nominated by the mayor subject to approval by the city council. The compensation and number of the judges shall be fixed by the city council. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of his or her office, a judge shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state declaring that he or she will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(d)  A judge shall serve for a term of four years but may be removed from the position by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council or shall be removed upon action by the State Judicial Qualifications Commission for: 
(1)  Willful misconduct in office; 
(2)  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties; 
(3)  Habitual intemperance; 
(4)  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute; or 
(5)  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 4.02, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 4.03. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary by the judge to keep current the dockets thereof. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 4.03, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 4.04. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Tucker and for violations of its ordinances. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction to the fullest extent allowed by state law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to recommend to the city council for approval a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as security for appearances of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited to the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Tucker, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears, by probable cause, that a state law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of such court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by state law. 
(g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the judicial jurisdiction and judicial powers throughout the entire area of the City of Tucker granted by state laws generally to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 4.04, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 4.05. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of DeKalb County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 4.05, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 4.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge or judges shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 4.06, 5-12-2015) 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

SECTION 5.01. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Such fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.01, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.02. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide, by ordinance, the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.02, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.03. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
(a)  On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than the first day of the ninth month of the fiscal year currently ending, the city manager shall, after input, review, and comment by the mayor, submit to the city council a proposed operating budget and capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor and city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as they may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. 
(b)  Prior to passage of the budget, the city council shall hold a special public hearing at which the budget shall be presented and public comment on the budget shall be solicited. The date, time, and place of the special public hearing shall be announced no less than 30 days prior to the scheduled date for such hearing. 
(c)  All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the unappropriated surplus or reserves of the fund or funds from which such appropriations were made. When a supplemental appropriation is certified by the city manager to exist, these appropriations may be spent during the current fiscal year following passage of a supplemental appropriation ordinance. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.03, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.04. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget or capital budget proposed by the city manager in accordance with subsection (a) of Section 5.03 of this Charter, except that the budget, as finally amended and adopted, shall provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year; and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt a budget on or before the first day of the eleventh month of the fiscal year currently ending. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by the prescribed deadline, the operating budget and capital budget proposed by the mayor and city manager shall be adopted without further action by the city council. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.04, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.05. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is in writing. The city council may adopt procedures for the authorization of certain contracts without the city attorney's signature or city council approval. Absent the foregoing, no contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(2)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.05, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.06. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.06, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.07. - External audits. 
(a)  There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
(b)  As a minimum, all audits and budgets of the city shall satisfy the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 81, relating to local government audits and budgets. 
(c)  The city council shall appoint the external auditor. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.07, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.08. - Homestead exemption; freeze. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Tucker, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Base year" means the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which the exemption under this section is first granted to the most recent owner of such homestead. 
(3)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in of the O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, as amended, with the additional qualification that it shall include not more than five contiguous acres of homestead property. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Tucker is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Tucker ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the current year assessed value of that homestead exceeds the base year assessed value of that homestead. This exemption shall not apply to taxes assessed on improvements to the homestead or additional land that is added to the homestead after January 1 of the base year. If any real property is added to or removed from the homestead, the base year assessed value shall be adjusted to reflect such addition or removal, and the exemption shall be recalculated accordingly. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1, as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year so long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2017. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.08, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.09. - Homestead exemption; senior citizens; disabled. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Tucker, including, but not limited to, any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, as amended. 
(3)  "Income" means Georgia taxable net income determined pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 7, as amended, for state income tax purposes, except income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and such individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. Income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as income for the purposes of this Charter. 
(4)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under subsection (b) of this section is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Tucker who is disabled or is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Tucker ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $14,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The exemption granted by this subsection shall only be granted if that person's income, together with the income of the spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead, does not exceed $15,000.00 for the immediately preceding year. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(1)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (b) of this section due to being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34, as amended, certifying that, in the opinion of such physician or physicians, such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. Such certificate or certificates shall constitute part of and be submitted with the application provided for in subsection (b)(2) of this subsection. 
(2)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, giving the person's age, income, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(c)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1, as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year so long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in this subsection (c), it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(d)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2017. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.09, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.10. - Homestead exemption; general. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Tucker, including, but not limited to, any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, as amended. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Tucker is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Tucker ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $10,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1, as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year so long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2017. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.10, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 5.11. - Homestead exemption; surviving spouses. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Tucker, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, as amended. 
(3)  "Unremarried surviving spouse" of a member of the armed forces includes the unmarried widow or widower of a member of the armed forces who is receiving spousal benefits from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. 
(b)  Any person who is a resident of the City of Tucker and who is an unremarried surviving spouse of a member of the armed forces of the United States, which member has been killed in or has died as a result of any war or armed conflict in which the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, shall be granted a homestead exemption from all City of Tucker ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes in the amount of the greater of $32,500.00 or the maximum amount which may be granted to a disabled veteran under 38 USC 2102, as amended. As of January 1, 2013, the maximum amount which may be granted to a disabled veteran under 38 USC 2102, as amended, is $50,000.00. The exemption shall be on the homestead which the unremarried surviving spouse owns and actually occupies as a residence and homestead. In the event such surviving spouse remarries, such person shall cease to be qualified to continue the exemption under this Act effective December 31 of the taxable year in which such person remarries. The value of all property in excess of such exemption granted to such unremarried surviving spouse shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in this Act, the unremarried surviving spouse shall furnish to the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, documents from the Secretary of Defense evidencing that such unremarried surviving spouse receives spousal benefits as a result of the death of such person's spouse who as a member of the armed forces of the United States was killed or died as a result of a war or armed conflict while on active duty or while performing authorized travel to or from active duty during such war or armed conflict in which the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, pursuant to the Survivor Benefit Plan under 10 USC ch. 73, subch. II, or pursuant to any preceding or subsequent federal law which provides survivor benefits for spouses of members of the armed forces who were killed or who died as a result of any war or armed conflict. 
(d)  An unremarried surviving spouse filing for the exemption under this section shall be required to file with the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, information relative to marital status and such other information which the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, deems necessary to determine eligibility for the exemption. Each unremarried surviving spouse shall file for the exemption only once with the governing authority of the City of Tucker or the designee thereof. Once filed, the exemption shall automatically be renewed from year to year, except that the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, may require annually that the holder of an exemption substantiate his or her continuing eligibility for the exemption. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Tucker, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for such exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by this section shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other exemption from ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes which is equal to or lower in amount than such exemption granted by this section. If the amount of any other exemption from ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes applicable to any resident qualifying under this section is greater than or is increased to an amount greater than the amount of the applicable exemption granted by this section, such other exemption shall apply and shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the exemption granted by this section. 
(f)  The exemptions granted by this section shall apply to all tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2017. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 5.11, 5-12-2015) 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

SECTION 6.01. - DeKalb County special services tax district. 
For the taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, the adjusted ad valorem tax millage rate and amount for service charges or fees for district services for the Tucker special services tax district shall be zero percent. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the General Assembly under Section 1 of that local constitutional amendment providing that certain municipalities in DeKalb County shall constitute special services tax districts, Resolution Act No. 168; House Resolution No. 715-1916; Ga. L. 1978, p. 2468, to control the subject matter of such local constitutional amendment. Municipal services provided by DeKalb County for the City of Tucker shall be established through intergovernmental agreements or established as otherwise authorized by statute. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 6.01, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 6.02. - Referendum and initial election. 
(a)  The election superintendent of DeKalb County shall call a special election for the purpose of submitting this Act to the qualified voters of the proposed City of Tucker for approval or rejection. The superintendent shall set the date of such election for the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2015. The superintendent shall issue the call for such election at least 60 days prior to the date thereof. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of DeKalb County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES Shall the Act incorporating the City of Tucker in DeKalb County according 
( ) NO to the Charter contained in the Act and the homestead exemptions described in the Act be approved?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, it shall become of full force and effect as provided in this Charter, otherwise it shall be void and of no force and effect. The initial expense of such election shall be borne by DeKalb County. Within two years after the elections if the incorporation is approved, the City of Tucker shall reimburse DeKalb County for the actual cost of printing and personnel services for such election and for the initial election of the mayor and councilmembers pursuant to Section 2.02 of this Charter. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to hold and conduct such election. It shall be his or her further duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
(b)  For the purposes of the referendum election provided for in subsection (a) of this section and for the purposes of the special election of the City of Tucker to be held on the date of and in conjunction with the 2016 presidential preference primary, the qualified electors of the City of Tucker shall be those qualified electors of DeKalb County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Tucker as described by Appendix A of this Charter. At subsequent municipal elections, the qualified electors of the City of Tucker shall be determined pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. title 21, ch. 2, the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  Only for the purposes of holding and conducting the referendum election provided for by subsection (a) of this section and holding and conducting the special election of the City of Tucker to be held on the date of and in conjunction with the 2016 presidential preference primary, the election superintendent of DeKalb County is vested with the powers and duties of the election superintendent of the City of Tucker and the powers and duties of the governing authority of the City of Tucker. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 6.02, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 6.03. - Effective dates and transition. 
(a)  The initial mayor and councilmembers shall take the oath of office the next business day after certification of the election of such officers and by action of any four members of the governing authority may, prior to the first day of the second month immediately following the 2016 presidential preference primary, meet and take actions binding on the city. 
(b)  A period of time will be needed for an orderly transition of various government functions from DeKalb County to the City of Tucker. Accordingly, there shall be a two-year transition period as allowed by law beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day of the second month immediately following the 2016 presidential preference primary. 
(c)  During such transition period, DeKalb County shall continue to provide within the territorial limits of the city all government services and functions which DeKalb County provided in 2015 and at the same actual direct cost and level of service, except to the extent otherwise provided in this section; provided, however, that upon at least 30 days' prior written notice to the governing authority of DeKalb County by the governing authority of the City of Tucker, responsibility for any such service or function shall be transferred to the City of Tucker. The governing authority of the City of Tucker shall determine the date of commencement of collection of taxes, fees, assessments, fines and forfeitures, and other moneys within the territorial limits of the city and the date upon which the City of Tucker is considered removed from the special services tax district. 
(d)  During the transition period, the governing authority of the City of Tucker may generally exercise any power granted by this Charter or general law, except to the extent that a power is specifically and integrally related to the provision of a governmental service, function, or responsibility not yet provided or carried out by the city. 
(e)  During the transition period, all ordinances of DeKalb County shall remain applicable within the territorial limits of the city unless otherwise amended, repealed, or replaced by the City of Tucker. Any transfer of jurisdiction to the City of Tucker during or at the end of the transition period shall not in and of itself abate any judicial proceeding pending in DeKalb County or the pending prosecution of any violation of any ordinance of DeKalb County. 
(f)  During the transition period, the governing authority of the City of Tucker may at any time, without the necessity of any agreement by DeKalb County, commence to exercise its planning and zoning powers; provided, however, that the city shall give the county notice of the date on which the city will assume the exercise of such powers. Upon the governing authority of the City of Tucker commencing to exercise its planning and zoning powers, the Municipal Court of the City of Tucker shall immediately have jurisdiction to enforce the planning and zoning ordinances of the city. The provisions of this subsection shall control over any conflicting provisions of any other subsection of this section. 
(g)  Effective upon the termination of the transition period, subsections (b) through (f) of this section shall cease to apply except for the last sentence of subsection (e) which shall remain effective. Effective upon the termination of the transition period, the City of Tucker shall be a full functioning municipal corporation and subject to all general laws of this state. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 6.03, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 6.04. - Directory nature of dates. 
It is the intention of the General Assembly that this Act be construed as directory rather than mandatory with respect to any date prescribed in this Act. If it is necessary to delay any action called for in this Act for providential cause or any other reason, it is the intention of the General Assembly that the action be delayed rather than abandoned. Any delay in performing any action under this Act, whether for cause or otherwise, shall not operate to frustrate the overall intent of this Act. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it is specifically provided that, if it is not possible to hold the referendum election provided for in Section 6.02 of this Act on the date specified in that section, then such referendum shall be held as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable. If the referendum election provided for in Section 6.02 of this Act is conducted on or before the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2015, the special election for the initial members of the governing authority shall be conducted on the date specified in Section 2.02 of this Act. If the referendum election provided for under Section 6.02 of this Act is conducted after the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2015, then the special election for the initial members of the governing authority shall be held as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, and the commencement of the initial terms of office shall be delayed accordingly. If the first election provided for in Section 2.02 of this Act occurs after the date of the 2016 presidential preference primary, the city council shall be authorized to delay the dates otherwise specified in Section 6.03 of this Act. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 6.04, 5-12-2015) 
SECTION 6.05. - Charter commission. 
No later than three years after the inception of the City of Tucker, the mayor and the city council shall call for a Charter commission to review the city's experience and recommend to the General Assembly any changes to the Charter. Members of the Charter commission shall be appointed as follows: one member by the mayor, one member by the city council, and one member by each member of the Georgia House of Representatives and Georgia Senate whose district lies wholly or partially within the corporate boundaries of the City of Tucker. All members of the Charter commission shall reside in the City of Tucker. The commission shall complete the recommendations within the time frame required by the city council. 
(Ga. Laws, Act No. 237, § 6.05, 5-12-2015) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from Ga. Laws, Act No. 237 (HB 515), May 12, 2015. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table shows the location within this Code of the sections of the Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code is designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Tucker, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Tucker City Code" or the "City Code." 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-1, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Construction. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
(b)  Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(c)  Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling; the specific controls over the general. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearing indicates a different meaning: 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
City. The term "city" means the incorporated areas within the municipal boundaries of the City of Tucker, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the city's Code as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, then the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
Council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Tucker, Georgia. The full city council consists of six councilmembers and the mayor. 
Councilmember. The term "councilmember" means the individual members of the city council, including the mayor. 
County. The term "county" means DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Fee schedule. The term "fee schedule" means the official consolidated list of city fees, rates and other charges as determined from time to time by the city council. A copy of the city fee schedule is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Fire department. The term "fire department" shall refer to the county fire department, which provides services to the city. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the mayor and city council. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the municipal judge. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular and plural number includes the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. A reference to a state act, whether by year and act number, year, act number and page, year and page or short title, is a reference to such act as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city, or other political subdivision when acting under an intergovernmental agreement represents the city. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the city council of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Police. The term "police department" means the police department of the county which is serving as the police force for the city. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city council of a special or temporary character. 
Shall and may. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" shall be construed to include printing. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-2, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-3, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance before it expired or was repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-4, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of The Code of Ordinances of the City of Tucker, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Tucker, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered _____, that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-5, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-6, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" or "violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared a violation or a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" or "violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(e)  Community service may be substituted for the fine with the rate of hourly work set to that of the federal minimum wage. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-7, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-8, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-9, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-10, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-11. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
Unless otherwise provided, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city may be changed from time to time by the city council and such changes shall be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-11, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances not in this Code, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness; 
(3)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement; 
(4)  Granting any right or franchise; 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget; 
(6)  Providing for salaries, employee benefits, and personnel policies and procedures not codified in this Code; 
(7)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan; 
(8)  Levying or imposing any special assessment; 
(9)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley; 
(10)  Providing for or dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision; 
(11)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code; 
(12)  Rezoning property or otherwise pertaining to zoning; 
(13)  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, bus stops, taxi stands, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones, consistent with this Code; 
(14)  Describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city; 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)  Any agreement with another political subdivision; 
(17)  That is temporary, although general in effect; 
(18)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(19)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances, resolutions and actions are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-12, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions hereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any other document or record of the municipal government. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § 1-13, 3-18-2016) 
Sec. 1-14. - Document retention. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., the city adopts the records management plan and record retention schedules recommended by the secretary of state as amended from time to time. The city clerk shall coordinate all records management for the city including storage, archiving, and destruction of records. Records shall be maintained according to approved retention schedules. All requests made under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., excepting standardized routine requests of the city police department, the city fire department, and the city municipal court shall be made to the city clerk. No record shall be destroyed except as provided in the approved retention schedule, provided, however, a written record may be destroyed if it is otherwise preserved by means of microfiche, scanning, or other reliable photographic or digital means as permitted by law. Changes to the retention schedules shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-22, § 1-14, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 1-15. - Mayor administer oath of office. 
The mayor shall have the authority to administer the oath of office for all non-elected personnel, employees, or agents of the city. The chief of police may administer the oath of office to all police officers and police personnel. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-22, § 1-15, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 1-16. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  The council, when sitting as a judicial or quasi-judicial body pursuant to public law, its charter, or its ordinances, shall compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena under the same rules as prevail in the superior courts, and any witness who shall fail to respond to the subpoena, or who shall refuse to testify under oath, shall be guilty of contempt. 
(b)  The subpoenas as authorized in the preceding section shall bear witness in the name of the mayor; shall be issued by the city clerk; and shall be served by the police chief, any police officer, or by such other person as the mayor may designate. 
(c)  Should any person fail to respond to a subpoena of the council, after having been lawfully served, without good cause, or should the person refuse to testify under oath, then the council shall hold the person in contempt, and, in their discretion, punish the person by the imposition of a fine according to the maximum allowed by state law. Each of the failures or refusals herein described shall constitute a separate contempt. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-22, § 1-16, 5-29-2018) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Administering oaths of office. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the authority to administer the oath of office to all non-elected personnel, employees, or agents of the city. 
(b)  The chief of police may administer the oath of office to all police officers and police personnel. In addition, sworn police officers of the City of Tucker that are precinct commanders or assistant division commanders may administer the oath of office to all police officers and police personnel. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-24, 6-27-2018) 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Compliance with state law. 
All elections and challenges thereto shall be in compliance with the Georgia Election Code codified at O.C.G.A. title 21, ch. 2. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-1), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-22. - General elections. 
In accordance with section 2.02 of the Charter, general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-2), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-23. - Special elections. 
Special elections to fill a vacancy shall be held as needed according to section 2.03 of the Charter and all special elections shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 21, ch. 2. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-3), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-24. - Superintendents. 
In the absence of an appointed municipal election superintendent, the city clerk shall serve as the municipal superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70.1. The council shall provide for the superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-71. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-4), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-25. - Conducting elections. 
The city shall coordinate all elections with the county board of elections and registration. The city may contract or otherwise decide by agreement with the county board of elections and registration for that board to coordinate and conduct all elections in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-5), 6-28-2017) 
Secs. 2-26—2-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS 

Sec. 2-54. - Candidate requirements, residency. 
In accordance with section 2.02 of the Charter, candidates for mayor and city council must have been a resident of the city for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of election; and each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city. In addition to the above requirements, no person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember representing a council district unless that person continues to reside in such district during that person's period of service. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-29), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-55. - Notice of candidacy. 
Filing of notice of candidacy for municipal office shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132, as amended. The qualifying period shall commence no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election and shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday. In special elections, the qualifying period shall commence no earlier than the date of the call and shall end no later than 25 days prior to the election. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-30), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-56. - Fees. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, each candidate shall pay a fee in the amount established by action of the city council. Such fee shall be deposited into the city treasury in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
(b)  A pauper's affidavit may be filed in lieu of the qualifying fee in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-31), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-57. - Withdrawal. 
Any candidate may withdraw his name as a candidate prior to the date established by state law of the election year. No refund will be made to any candidate for the fee remitted to qualify for office. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-32), 6-28-2017) 
Secs. 2-58—2-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VOTING 

Sec. 2-88. - Electors to be registered by county. 
The city council shall provide for the use of the county voter registration list. Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the county shall be eligible to vote in any municipal primary or election. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-53), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-89. - Absentee ballots. 
Voting by absentee ballots in a method consistent with state law shall be permitted in municipal elections. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-54), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-90. - Voting records. 
To the extent required by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-72, voting records and documents shall be made available in accordance with that statute. The maintenance of said records shall be kept in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-73. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-72, exh. (10-55), 6-28-2017) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means any one or more of the following: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, printed material, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below. For purposes of this definition, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It may be presumed that a business has a significant portion of its stock in trade in adult material if any one of the following criteria is satisfied: 
(1)  20 percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; 
(2)  20 percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; 
(3)  20 percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; 
(4)  20 percent or more of the retail floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); 
(5)  20 percent or more of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or 
(6)  20 percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. 
Adult business means an establishment, other than those expressly specified in this section, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building, or enclosed or semi-enclosed room or booth within an enclosed building, with a capacity of less than 50 persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, digital video devices (DVDs), movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this subsection, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It may be presumed that a business has a "significant portion of its stock in trade" in adult material if any one of the following criteria is satisfied: 
(1)  20 percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; 
(2)  20 percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; 
(3)  20 percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; 
(4)  20 percent or more of the floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); 
(5)  20 percent of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or 
(6)  20 percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. 
Erotic entertainment/dance establishment means a nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by dancers, entertainers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. These establishments are also regulated pursuant to section 4-139. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "beer or malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises. As used herein, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines and that derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. Neither barrels of beer sold to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers, as authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36(2)(D), or retail sales by the package or growler, shall be used when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales. 
Bring your own bottle establishment means any restaurant, music hall, theater or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
Day means a period of time from 12:00 midnight through 11:59 p.m. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Family means and includes any person related to the person indicated within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, as determined according to civil law. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery located on-premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of honey, grapes, berries or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery, or a domestic winery which: 
(1)  Makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in the state where the winery is located; 
(2)  Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the state agricultural produce used in its annual production, and for this purpose such production of a substantial portion of such state agricultural produce shall be determined by the state commissioner of revenue; 
(3)  Produces less than 100,000 gallons per year; and 
(4)  Has been certified and licensed as a farm winery by the state commissioner of revenue. 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of the term "fixed salary," tips or gratuities that are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Full-service kitchen means a kitchen consisting of a commercial sink and refrigerator and either a commercial stove, grill or microwave oven approved by the health director and the police department. 
Growler means glass, plastic or other type of container, not less than 12 ounces or more than 64 ounces, used to hold specialty malt beverages such as beer and hard cider, which are dispensed from a tap and sealed airtight before being sold to the customer for off-premises consumption. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership, corporation or limited liability company (LLC), all partners, officers, directors, members, or managers of the partnership, corporation, or LLC. 
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Mainstream performance establishment means a theater, movie theatre, concert hall, museum, or educational institution which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description, or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description, or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. An adult entertainment establishment within the meaning of section 10-468 is not a traditional or mainstream performance establishment within the meaning of this section. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits. 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members. 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with all of the following: 
a.  Full-service kitchen and dining room space and equipment. 
b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests. 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Retailer, retail dealer, retail licensee or retail outlet means any person or other legal entity selling alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.1, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-2—4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-21. - Inspection of premises. 
The police department, the development department, or the finance department may inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city during the establishment's hours of operation. Such inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.26, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-22. - Agent for service of process. 
All establishments licensed under this article must have and continuously maintain in the city a registered agent, who must be a resident of the county, upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city in such form as the city prescribes. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.27, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-23. - Collection of delinquent sums. 
If any person fails to pay the sum due under this article, the finance department shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent and such person's property for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.28, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-24. - Audits. 
If the finance department deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of a licensee under the provisions of this article, it shall so notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.29, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-25. - Temporary permits. 
Any nonprofit civic organization may be issued a temporary alcoholic beverage permit for an event up to a maximum of four events annually. Such a permit shall have the effect of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article and shall authorize sale by the drink of such alcoholic beverages as are specified in the permit. The nonprofit civic organization must make application and pay a fee equaling to ten percent of the corresponding annual fee, a copy of which is on file with the city clerk. Such civic organizations shall comply with all the general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption-on-the-premises establishment, with the exception of having a full-service kitchen requirement. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.30, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-26—4-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-54. - License required to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued by the city clerk at an annual license fee to be established by city council resolution for the following: 
(1)  Retail consumption dealer (distilled spirits); 
(2)  Retail package dealer (distilled spirits); 
(3)  Retail consumption dealer (beer and wine); 
(4)  Retail package dealer (beer and wine); 
(5)  Wholesale dealer (distilled spirits); 
(6)  Wholesale dealer (beer); 
(7)  Wholesale dealer (wine); 
(8)  Manufacturer (distilled spirits); 
(9)  Manufacturer (beer); 
(10)  Manufacturer (wine) 
(11)  Manufacturer (farm winery); 
(12)  Private club; 
(13)  Bottle club; 
(14)  Special event permit; and 
(15)  Wine tasting permit. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.45, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-55. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage without a license from the city to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(b)  The city license shall not be valid without current state licenses. 
(c)  A retail establishment shall not have alcoholic beverages on the sales floor or in a cooler unless the establishment has a current city alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.46, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-56. - Sale in city; scope of license. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the incorporated area of the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions provided. 
(b)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and state law. 
(c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted." 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.47, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-57. - Separate license for each location. 
A separate application for an alcoholic beverage license must be made for each location and a separate license must be issued. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.48, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-58. - Consumption sales only. 
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell liquor by the package or bottle, except as provided in section 4-298. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.59, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-59. - Application. 
(a)  All persons or entities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the finance department. 
(b)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The proposed business to be carried on; 
(3)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; 
(4)  If a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers; 
(5)  The name and address of the agent for service of process; 
(6)  The name and address of the manager; 
(7)  The names and addresses of all stockholders holding more than ten or more percent or of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be required by the finance department or the police department. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the finance department and the police department with the name and address of the new manager and other information as is requested within ten days of such change. 
(c)  All applications for a package liquor license, both original and renewals, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include names and addresses of all persons possessing a legal ownership in the subject establishment, together with any interest that each person or that any family member of each person has in any other retail liquor store located in the city or any other place; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for the land and building, the manner in which such rental is determined, and to whom and at what intervals the rental is paid; the names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of the land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other legal interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the finance department to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. Any change in relationship herein declared must be filed when made with the finance department and failure to so file within a period of ten days after this change is made shall be grounds for the city to cancel the license. 
(d)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the finance department or the police department and failure to furnish this data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application. By filing an application, applicants agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the finance department or the police department and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the license. The failure to produce the person within 30 days after being requested shall result in the automatic dismissal, with prejudice, of the application. An application shall not be considered complete until the applicant has furnished all data, information and records requested of them by the finance department or the police department. 
(e)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(f)  In all instances in which an application is denied or dismissed with prejudice under the provisions of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(g)  The finance department shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this division within 30 days of filing a properly completed application. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal to a public hearing officer under the provisions of this division within 15 days from date of notice. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.49, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-60. - Persons eligible. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person or entity, where the majority of stock or partnership interests are controlled by individuals who are not citizens of the United States or aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence. If an entity is owned by other entities, then this requirement shall apply to the majority stockholders of the other entities to ensure that a license is not granted to an ineligible person or entity. 
(b)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person that has not attained the age of 18. 
(c)  No retailer or consumption on-premises license for the sale of distilled spirits shall be granted where the applicant is not a resident of the county or municipality within the state where the sales of distilled spirits is authorized. 
(d)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the provisions of this section shall apply to all stockholders with ownership of ten or more percent, corporate officers and all partners. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued to jointly to the corporation and local manager of the business or to the registered agent designated pursuant to section 4-22. In the case of a partnership, the license shall be issued to the partners with the highest ownership percentage. In the case of a sole proprietorship, the sole proprietor shall be the applicant and the licensee. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person, or the spouse of any person, who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony within the last ten years, has been on felony probation or parole within the last five years, or released from prison on felony charges within the last five years prior to filing an application. The term "conviction" includes any adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person, or the spouse of any person, who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within ten years prior to filing an application. The term "conviction" includes any adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. The term "moral turpitude" shall include any violation that involves gambling, drugs, or a driving while intoxicated conviction in less than five years from a prior driving while intoxicated conviction, and sale of alcohol with the exception of any violations of section 4-141 or 4-143. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee of a department regulating alcoholic beverages, or the employee's spouse or minor children, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(h)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(i)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person or entity that has violated this section within one year prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(j)  The finance department may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this article for the licensee. 
(k)  The inability of the finance department or the police department to verify any statement or information required to be disclosed or to be able to adequately conduct a full investigation of an applicant or a place of business due to foreign background, ties or interest or for any reason beyond the finance department or the police department's control shall be, in addition to all other grounds, cause for dismissal of any license, with prejudice and if any license has been granted shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.50, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-61. - Issuance of license and employee permits; adult entertainment employee permits; employee permit fees. 
(a)  Before a license shall be granted under this division, the applicant shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and each applicant for a license to sell alcohol shall pay a license fee in the amount to be established by action of the city council. No adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to acquire a license. 
(b)  A license will be issued or the issuance of a license will be denied within 30 days after submission of a properly completed application. If a license is not issued or denied within the time frame specified herein, the license shall be automatically approved. 
(c)  All employees of any licensed establishment must hold a permit. A permit fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permit the amount of which shall be established by action of the city council. The conditions and procedures governing the issuance of alcohol permits for employees are set forth herein and in sections 4-175, 4-210 and 4-235. 
(d)  Any employee permit identified in this division will be issued or the issuance of a permit will be denied within 30 days after submission of a properly completed application. A permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date of issuance. If a permit is not issued or denied within the time frame specified herein, the permit shall be automatically approved. 
(e)  No employees employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to acquire a permit. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.51, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-62. - Expiration; renewal. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew the license shall file application, with the requisite fee heretofore provided, with the finance department on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. All applications for renewal will be reviewed by the finance department. Licensees do not have a right to automatic renewal and must be in compliance with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year; otherwise penalties and interest will be assessed. No renewal license shall be granted after December 31, but such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(b)  All licenses granted under this division shall be for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. License fees shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. License fees are not refundable. 
(c)  Any person renewing any license issued under this division who pays the required fee or any portion thereof after the date set by law for such payment shall pay, in addition to the annual fee, a late-payment penalty in addition to an assessment of interest at the rate specified of three percent per annum unless a higher rate is set by resolution by the city council as authorized by law. 
(d)  Failure to fully complete the renewal application, as required by the finance department will delay the renewal. The failure to furnish complete information within 30 days after being requested shall result in automatic denial of the renewal. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.52, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2019-05-18, § 4-52, 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 4-63. - Transferability. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of the licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 30 days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new license, whichever occurs first; provided, however that the finance department must be notified of the licensee's death within ten days of the death or the license shall automatically terminate on the 11th day following the death of the licensee. 
(c)  If a license in surrendered, or a licensee severs the association with the licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 30 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined to be the date of severance; provided, however that the finance department must be notified of the change within ten days of the severance or the license shall automatically terminate on the 11th day following the date of the severance. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more of the partners in the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license; nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing stock holdings to a total of ten or more percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in the entity. 
(e)  Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license issued under this division automatically, without the necessity of a hearing. 
(g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine of $1,000.00 each on the new ownership and the old ownership. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.53, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-64. - Display. 
The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view at the place of business of the licensee. The finance director or designee shall ensure that all licenses for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages show: 
(1)  Any special land use permit conditions imposed by the city council for the establishment; 
(2)  The allowed hours of operation for the location; and 
(3)  Written notice to the licensee that the license with the hours of operation must be posted in a public and conspicuous place within the licensee's establishment. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.54, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-65. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be suspended or revoked by the finance department if the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the original, renewal or transfer application for a license or omits information required in the original, renewal or transfer application for a license and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the state revokes any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The police department, upon notice of such revocation from the finance department, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of section 4-139 shall be subject to immediate license revocation in addition to all other penalties. 
(d)  The finance department shall revoke the Sunday sales license of any licensee where the establishment has been found in violation of the Sunday sales ordinance. 
(e)  The finance department shall revoke the license of any licensee where the licensee has sold alcoholic beverages at a time other than the time permitted by the license. 
(f)  The finance department shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 24-month period. 
(g)  The finance department shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(h)  The finance department may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this division at any time such knowledge becomes known to it. 
(i)  An act or omission of a licensee, majority stockholder, general or managing partner, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of the license in accordance with the provisions of this division when evidence is submitted to the finance department that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. In the case of a violation by an employee, the licensee may submit evidence to the finance department that the acts of the employee were not known to or under reasonable circumstances should not have been known to the licensee, were not condoned by the licensee, and that the licensee has established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring, and that the licensee has not failed to properly train or supervise employees to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(j)  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a violation of sections 4-141 or 4-143 by a licensee, majority stockholder, general or managing partner or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment shall result in the following action by the finance department: 
(1)  The first violation shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than two days, which shall be scheduled to include a Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  The second violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than ten days which shall be scheduled to begin on a Friday. 
(3)  The third violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall result in license revocation. 
(k)  The finance department shall revoke the license of any licensee where the establishment has been declared a public nuisance or has created a danger to public safety as determined by the police department. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.55, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-66. - Fee deposit and investigative and administrative costs. 
(a)  Each application for a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(b)  Each application for a license to sell beer and wine for on-premises consumption shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(c)  Each application for a license as a private club shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the sum paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained. 
(d)  Each application for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(e)  Each application for a license to sell beer and wine by the package shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or the city council, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to issuance of the license, the license fee shall be refunded but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(f)  Each application for a manufacturer's license shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to issuance of the license, the license fee shall be refunded but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.60, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-67. - Appeals. 
(a)  Public hearing officer appointment and duties. A public hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of city council to hear appeals in accordance with this division. The public hearing officer shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To hear appeals from decisions of the finance department denying the issuance or renewal of any license pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city; 
(2)  To hear appeals from the decisions of the finance department revoking or suspending any license pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city; 
(3)  To hear appeals from the decisions of the police department denying the issuance of permits pertaining to employment in a licensed establishment; 
(4)  To hear appeals from the decisions of the police department revoking or suspending an employee permit to an employee of a licensed establishment. 
(b)  Right to appeal. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the issuing department may have a review thereof by appeal to the hearing officer. Such appeal shall be by written petition filed with the city within 15 days after the final decision or action by the city. 
(c)  Right to hearing. No license or permit under articles II and III of this chapter shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing; provided, however, that upon conviction or plea of nolo contendere by a court of competent jurisdiction that results in the suspension or revocation of a license or permit, the license or permit shall be deemed immediately revoked or suspended by the public hearing officer appealable. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. The issuing department shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license or permit. Such written notification shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right of appeal. For the purpose of this section, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(e)  Hearing procedure. A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the issuing department, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the issuing department. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(f)  Findings of public hearing officer. The findings of the public hearing officer shall be forwarded to the relevant issuing department at the conclusion of the hearing. The issuing department shall have the duty to notify the appellant of the action of the public hearing officer. The findings of the public hearing officer shall not be set aside unless found to be contrary to law or ordinances, unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole or unreasonable. The findings of the public hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, §§ 4.56—4.58, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-68. - Alcohol beverage caterer license. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained an alcohol beverage catering license. 
(a)  Applicants for an alcohol beverage caterer's license to sell wine and/or beer and malt beverage and/or distilled spirits for consumption off-premises in conjunction with an authorized catered function at facilities authorized for special event activities must also possess a valid license issued by the City of Tucker and the State of Georgia for the retail sale for consumption on premises of the same alcohol beverage(s). 
(b)  A licensed alcohol beverage caterer may only sell that which is authorized by his/her alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcohol beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he/she may only sell malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(c)  Those employed by a licensed alcohol beverage caterer to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcohol beverages must adhere to employee regulations as stated in sections 4-175 and 4-210, employee regulations. 
(d)  Each applicant shall pay a license fee set by city council. The license will be valid for the period of no longer than one year. The alcohol beverage caterer shall apply for a new license annually in the same manner as the original period. 
(e)  Copy of license; sale without licenses; separate application and separate license required for each place of business. 
(f)  A copy of the license shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function and shall be available for inspection at the catered event or function during the duration of such event or function. 
(g)  No alcohol beverage caterer may distribute or sell alcohol beverages during any hours prohibited in the city. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-18, § 4-31, 5-28-2019) 
Secs. 4-69—4-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX ON SALES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 4-93. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means that person designated by a licensee in the application for a permit to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city. 
Alcoholic beverage by the drink, for purposes of this section, means any beverage containing alcohol obtained by distillation including rum, whiskey, gin and other spirituous liquors by whatever name called; but not including malt beverages, fermented wines or fortified wines. 
Drink means any alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Licensee means any person who holds a license or permit from the city to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Monthly period means the calendar month of the year. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any alcoholic beverage by the drink. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this division. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.71, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-94. - Imposed; rate. 
There is imposed and levied upon every sale of an alcoholic beverage purchased by the drink in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of such beverage. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.72, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-95. - Purchaser's receipt; credit or deferred payment. 
Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink operating a place of business in the city shall maintain detailed sales records indicating each transaction by beverage and food served, its price and total. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.73, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-96. - Liability for tax; authority to collect. 
Every licensee or the licensee's agent shall collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within the licensee's licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the finance department to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.74, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-97. - Determinations, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this division shall be due and payable to the finance department monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Return; limit of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance department in such form as the finance department may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the finance department. 
(d)  Delivery of return and readmittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the finance department. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.75, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-98. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the finance department is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax to be paid to the finance department by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency law. Interest shall be assessed for each month or fraction thereof from the close of the monthly period in which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayments, for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 4-99(c). 
(d)  Penalty for negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, the penalty amount at the rate of ten percent of the amount due shall be added to the amount of the deficiency. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this division or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of determination. The finance department shall give to the licensee written notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4 and shall be addressed to the licensee at the licensee's address as it appears in the records of the city. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this division, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this division or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of every month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires last. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.76, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-99. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the finance department shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in or may come into the possession of the finance department. Upon the basis of this estimate, the finance department shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to ten percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayments for a period or penalties against penalties or interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three percent per annum unless a higher rate is set by resolution by the city council as authorized by law. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof from the close of the monthly period in which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this division or rules and regulations, penalties shall be assessed at the rate of an additional penalty of 25 percent of the amount due shall be assessed. 
(e)  Notice; manner of service. Promptly after making a determination, the finance department shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.77, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2019-05-18, § 4-77, 5-58-2019) 
Sec. 4-100. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any licensee who fails to pay the tax to the city, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax, or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 4-99(c). 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.78, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-101. - Collection of tax; security deposit; refunds. 
(a)  The finance department, whenever deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this division, may require any person subject hereto to deposit such security as the department may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the department, shall be the greater of twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which the return was filed, determined in such a manner as the department deems proper, or $10,000.00. The amount of the security may be increased by the department subject to the limitations herein provided. The department may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the city council, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice of a deficiency determination and shall be addressed to the person at the person's address as it appears in the records of the department. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid, or if a determination has been made against the person which remains unpaid, the finance department may, not later than three years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the city having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owing any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the finance department consents to a transfer or disposition or until 20 days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall, within five days after receipt of the notice, advise the finance department of all the credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance department may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  If any operator liable for any amount under this division sells out the business or quits the business, the successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover the tax liability until the former owner produces a receipt from the finance department showing that same has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the finance department shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the finance department of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(f)  Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this division, it may be offset as provided in section 4-98(c), or it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the finance department within three years from the date of payment. The claim may be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the finance department. If the claim is approved by the finance department and the city council, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to this person, or such person's administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.79, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-102. - Administration. 
(a)  The finance department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The finance department may make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this division or other laws and regulations of the city and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division and the collection of taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance department may require. 
(d)  The finance department may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  In administration of the provisions of this division, the finance department may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having possession or custody of information relating to sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance department when required by the department and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date of each sale and such other information as the department may require. 
(f)  The finance department shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this division, except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, and assignees, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.80, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-103. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
The failure to timely pay the tax imposed by this division for three consecutive months or four times in a 12-month period shall render the dealer or person liable therefor subject to suspension of the alcoholic beverage license for ten consecutive days beginning on a Friday. The failure to timely pay the tax imposed by this section six times within a 12-month period shall render the dealer or person liable therefor subject to revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.81, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-104—4-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONAL RULES FOR RETAILERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-135. - Posting of regulations. 
(a)  All licensees under this article shall post in a prominent location on licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of the city and the state in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage or intoxicated persons. 
(b)  Each such sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the police department and shall include either the language of the applicable sections, or summaries approved by the city. 
(c)  The finance department may design and have printed approved signs, which shall be made available to licensees at a price to be established by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.101, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-136. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell at retail, except as allowed under subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, college campus or adult entertainment establishment. This requirement does not apply to any establishment if the sale of beer and wine was lawful at any time during the previous 12 months. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a grocery store licensed for the retail sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises. 
(2)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any residence or church or within 200 yards of any school building, school grounds, educational building, educational facility, college campus or adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 200 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(4)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 200 yards of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell for consumption on the premises, except as allowed under subsection (f) of this section: 
(1)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school, school grounds, or college campus. This requirement does not apply to any establishment if the sale of beer and wine was lawful at any time during the previous 12 months. 
(2)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church or within 200 yards of any school building, school grounds, educational facility or college campus. 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 200 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(4)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 200 yards of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  The school building, school grounds, college campus, educational facility or educational building referred to in this section applies only to state, county, city, church school, day care, kindergarten or buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Every license application shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises, showing the distance of the uses described in this section and a certificate of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer that the location complies with these distance requirements. 
(e)  Where an existing licensed location is interfered with by government action under the power of eminent domain, and not by a voluntary act of the licensee, the licensed use may relocate elsewhere on the property, and the new building site will be treated as an existing nonconforming use eligible for license renewal for purposes of the distance requirements of this section. 
(f)  The distance restrictions contained in subsection (b) of this section do not apply to an eating establishment if the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  Eating establishments that desire to offer alcoholic beverages for consumption on-premises shall be situated at least 50 feet from any pre-existing single-family detached dwelling. This 50-foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of the single-family detached dwelling to the side wall of the restaurant closest to that property line; and 
(2)  The distance restrictions contained in subsection (b) of this section shall continue to apply to nightclubs and late-night establishments. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.101.1, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-137. - Age restriction for employees in licensed establishments. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in or about the premises of any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail, nor shall any person under the age of 18 years sell, take orders for, or deliver alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed to apply to establishments licensed for retail sale of beer or wine by the package, where such sales constitute less than 50 percent of the gross revenue of the establishment; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years who is employed by such an establishment to sell or take orders for alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to discriminate against or impede the employment of any person under 18 years of age. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.102, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-138. - Advertising. 
(a)  Each licensee for the retail sale of liquors hereunder, except consumption-on-the-premises establishments, shall have printed on a front window or entrance of the licensed premises the name of the licensed establishment together with the inscription "Tucker Retail License No._____" in uniform letters not less than four nor more than eight inches in height. 
(b)  Each retail licensee, except consumption-on-the-premises establishments, shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the liquors offered for sale or the licensee may have the price placed on the bottles or on the front of the shelf where liquors are exhibited for sale. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.103, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-139. - Prohibited types of entertainment, attire and conduct. 
(a)  The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverage while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (a)(1) of this section or where such persons performs any of the following acts or simulates any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; 
b.  Clearly depicts human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
d.  Fondling or touching or nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts; 
e.  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring, or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a traditional or mainstream performance establishment which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages for the purposes of this section shall be based on the gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages for the 12-month period immediately preceding the licensed year for which an alcohol license is to be issued. In the event the establishment has not been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for a 12-month period immediately preceding the year for which an alcohol license is sought, gross annual income shall be based on the average monthly gross income for the preceding months during which the establishment had an alcoholic beverage license. In the event that an applicant is a new establishment, it shall complete a form and an affidavit furnished by the finance department showing projected anticipated gross income and anticipated gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. A temporary license for no more than three months shall be issued by the finance department for such establishments if such establishments otherwise qualify for a license under the provisions of this article. At the expiration of the temporary license period, said establishment must demonstrate gross income of less than 20 percent in the preceding three months from the sale of alcoholic beverages. In the event that such business establishes the gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages as required under this section, and otherwise meets all qualifications for a license a new temporary license will be issued for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(c)  The finance department may, at any time, require that a licensed mainstream performance establishment obtain an audit prepared by a certified public accountant at the licensee's expense, to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals incorrect, incomplete, or misleading information was submitted, then the permit issued pursuant to this section shall be automatically revoked by the finance department. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.104, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-140. - Sales on days of national or state elections. 
Licensees may open their establishments for the sale of alcoholic beverages on any election day, except within 200 yards of any polling place. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.105, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-141. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
(a)  It is unlawful not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served or possesses alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. In this section, the term "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state department of public safety identification card. 
(b)  Licensee must have written policies and procedures and train, instruct and supervise employees to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.106, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-142. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.107, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-143. - Happy hour promotions. 
(a)  No licensee under this article or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(3)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink or drinks by up to one-half the price customarily charged. 
(4)  Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed, by any one person. 
(5)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. 
(6)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person, any alcoholic beverage made with more than three ounces of distilled spirits. 
(7)  Selling offering to sell, or delivering to any person, any beer or wine in a container of more than 12 ounces or its metric equivalent. 
(b)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." 
(c)  In this section, the term "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.108, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-144. - Locations where sales by the drink permitted; entrance to establishment. 
No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen prepared to serve food every hour they are open. When located in hotels, motels and high-rise office and apartment buildings, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.109, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-145. - Certain organizations exempt from food establishment requirements. 
Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax-exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or O.C.G.A. § 48-71-1 et seq. shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption-on-the-premises establishments. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.110, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-146—4-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 4-174. - Hours of sale and operation. 
(a)  Distilled spirits shall be sold and delivered to the customer for consumption on the premises during the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Friday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. of the following day. 
(2)  Saturday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. on Sunday. 
(3)  Sunday hours are from 11:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. on Monday as permitted by section 4-176. 
(b)  Sales and deliveries during all other hours are prohibited. There shall be no consumption on the premises after prohibited hours have been in effect for one-half hour. All licensed establishments must close their premises to the public and clear their premises of patrons within one hour after the time set by this division for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises and shall not reopen their premises to the public until 9:00 a.m. or thereafter. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.126, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2018-10-34, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-175. - Employees. 
The following provisions apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of beer, wine, or distilled spirits on the premises: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be either of the following: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be 18 years of age or older and who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Nonalcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes, but is not limited to, host, hostess, doorperson and bouncer. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include the applicant's name, all of the applicant's aliases or any other name by which the applicant has ever been known, address, telephone number, the applicant's Social Security number, the date of birth with written proof thereof, and prior arrest record of applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this division, the police department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person fingerprinted or cleared is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted is not eligible for employment, the police department shall not issue a permit to the employee. 
(5)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the police department or the finance department. 
(6)  This section does not apply to employees whose duties are limited solely to those of a bus person, cook or dishwasher. 
(7)  No licensee under this chapter shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(8)  If any permitholder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(9)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(10)  It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to provide all new employees at the time of their employment, and all employees annually, with an orientation and training on the alcoholic beverage ordinance. Failure of the employee to participate shall not be a defense for an employer whose worker or agent violates any provisions of this article; and, provided that a licensee shall keep a record of such orientation and training, which shall be subject to inspection by city personnel. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.127, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-176. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least 50 percent of their total annual income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine by the drink from 11:00 a.m. on Sunday until 1:55 a.m. of the following Monday. Failure to adhere to these standards shall result in the automatic revocation or denial of a Sunday sales permit by the finance department. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the finance department. The finance department may, at any time, require that the licensee obtain an audit prepared by a certified public accountant, at the licensee's expense, to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals that incorrect, incomplete or misleading information was submitted on or with the Sunday sales form or affidavit, then, the permit shall be automatically revoked by the finance department. No later than March 31 of the license year, licensee shall submit a report on monthly sales by category for the prior calendar year. 
(c)  All annual permit renewals shall be filed with the finance department not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All renewals are subject to audit prior to being renewed to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Sunday sales permits may be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Establishments which qualify for a Sunday sales license are authorized to apply for a temporary Sunday sales permit if they desire to open for special events or holidays. The temporary permit shall be valid for one calendar month and partial months shall be counted as a full month. Licensees must apply 30 days in advance of the issuance date. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.128, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2018-10-34, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-177. - Open area and patio sales. 
No consumption or sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed in open areas and patios unless first permitted and approved by the finance department. The department shall prepare such appropriate regulations as to ensure the safe and orderly operation of these establishments, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.129, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-178—4-207. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF BEER AND WINE 

Sec. 4-208. - Types of retail establishments. 
(a)  No beer or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold except in eating establishments having a full-service kitchen prepared to serve food every hour they are open. These establishments must be located in zoning districts which permit restaurants and drive-in restaurants as conforming uses or where these eating establishments are incidental to a hotel or motel. 
(b)  A golf course within a planned development, a stadium facility during the playing of professional athletic competitions, and a licensed or leased athletic complex within a park owned by city, may be issued a beer and wine consumption-on-the-premises license without meeting the full-service kitchen requirement. No license may be issued for use at a park or stadium at which the consumption of alcohol is not permitted under section or 4-136. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.146, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-209. - Hours of sale and operation. 
(a)  Beer or wine shall be sold and delivered to the customer for consumption on the premises only during the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Friday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. of the following day. 
(2)  Saturday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. on Sunday. 
(3)  Sunday hours are from 11:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. on Monday as permitted by section 4-211. 
(b)  Sales and deliveries during all other hours are prohibited. There shall be no consumption on the premises after prohibited hours have been in effect for one-half hour. All licensed establishments must close their premises to the public and clear their premises of patrons within one hour after the time set by this division for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises and shall not reopen their premises to the public until 9:00 a.m. or thereafter. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.147, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2018-10-34, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-210. - Employees. 
The following provisions apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of beer or wine on the premises: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be either of the following: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be 18 years of age or older and who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Nonalcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes, but is not limited to, host, hostess, doorperson and bouncer. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this division, the department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the department shall not issue a permit to the employee. 
(5)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the finance department or the police department. 
(6)  This section does not apply to employees whose duties are limited solely to those of a bus person, cook or dishwasher. 
(7)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(8)  If any permitholder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(9)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.148, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-211. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least 50 percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages by the drink from 11:00 a.m. on Sunday until 1:55 a.m. of the following Monday. Failure to adhere to these standards shall result in the automatic revocation or denial of a Sunday sales permit by the finance department. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the finance department. The finance department may, at any time, require that the licensee obtain an audit prepared by a certified public accountant, at the licensee's expense, to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals that incorrect, incomplete or misleading information was submitted on or with the Sunday sales form or affidavit, then, the permit shall be automatically revoked by the finance department. No later than March 31 of the license year, licensee shall submit a report on monthly sales by category for the prior calendar year. 
(c)  All annual permit renewals shall be filed with the finance department not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All renewals are subject to audit prior to being renewed to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Sunday sales permits may be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Establishments which qualify for a Sunday sales license are authorized to apply for a temporary Sunday sales permit if they desire to open for special events or holidays. The temporary permit shall be valid for one calendar month and partial months shall be counted as a full month. Licensees must apply 30 days in advance of the issuance date. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.149, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2018-10-34, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-212. - Open area and patio sales. 
No consumption or sale of beer and wine shall be allowed in open areas and patios unless first permitted and approved by the finance department. The department shall prepare such appropriate regulations as to ensure the safe and orderly operation of these establishments, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.150, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-213—4-232. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 4-233. - Generally. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.161, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-234. - Hours of sale and operation. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall be sold and delivered to patrons for consumption on the premises only during the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Friday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 3:55 a.m. of the following day. 
(2)  Saturday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. 
(3)  Sunday hours are from 11:00 a.m. until 2:55 a.m. on Monday as permitted by section 4-236. 
(b)  Sales and deliveries during all other hours are prohibited. There shall be no consumption on the premises after prohibited hours have been in effect for one-half hour. All licensed establishments must close their premises and clear their premises of patrons within one hour after the time set by this section for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises and shall not reopen their premises to patrons until 9:00 a.m. or thereafter. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.162, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2018-10-34, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-235. - Employees. 
The following provisions apply to all private clubs holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be either of the following: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be 18 years of age or older and who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Nonalcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes, but is not limited to, host, hostess, doorperson and bouncer. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this division, the police department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the police department shall not issue a permit to the employee. 
(5)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the police department. 
(6)  This section does not apply to employees whose duties are limited solely to those of a bus person, cook or dishwasher. 
(7)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work or train on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(8)  If any permitholder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(9)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.163, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-236. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least 50 percent of their total annual income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine by the drink from 11:00 a.m. on Sunday until 2:55 a.m. of the following Monday. (See section 4-176.) Failure to adhere to these standards shall result in the automatic revocation or denial of a Sunday sales permit by the finance department. No later than March 31 of the license year, licensee shall submit a report on monthly sales by category for the prior calendar year. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the finance department. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals that incorrect, incomplete or misleading information was submitted on or with the Sunday sales form or affidavit, then, the permit shall be automatically revoked by the finance department. 
(c)  All annual permit renewals shall be filed with the finance department not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All renewals are subject to audit prior to being renewed to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Sunday sales permits may be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Establishments which qualify for a Sunday sales license are authorized to apply for a temporary Sunday sales permit if they desire to open for special events or holidays. The temporary permit shall be valid for one calendar month and partial months shall be counted as a full month. Licensees must apply 30 days in advance of the issuance date. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.164, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2018-10-34, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-237. - Open area and patio sales. 
No consumption or sale of distilled spirits or beer or wine shall be allowed in open areas and patios of private clubs unless first permitted and approved by the finance department. The department shall prepare such appropriate regulations as to ensure the safe and orderly operation of these establishments, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.165, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-238—4-267. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PACKAGE STORES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 4-268—4-297. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Distilled Spirits 

Sec. 4-298. - Types of establishments where retail sale permitted. 
(a)  No distilled spirits by the package shall be sold at retail except in the following: 
(1)  Retail establishments devoted exclusively to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(2)  Retail establishments in which space has been set aside devoted exclusively to the retail sales of distilled spirits by the package, with ingress and egress provided directly to and only to the exterior of the building in which the facility is located and not to any other enclosed part of the building in which the facility is located, except as provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(3)  In hotels, motels and high-rise office buildings where every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway, or other interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(4)  In hotels and motels with a restaurant holding a consumption-on-the-premises license, as part of room service for guests of the hotel or motel. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the retail sale within these establishments of liquid commodities and mixes normally used in the preparation and serving of distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.191, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-299. - Coin-operated or amusement machines. 
No retail dealer in liquors shall permit on the premises any slot machine of any kind or character or any coin-operated machine or any machine operated for amusement purposes. However, cigarette vending machines may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.192, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-300. - Hours of sale. 
Retailers shall not engage in the sale of spirituous liquors except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Monday through Saturday. The hours within which this business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale thereof. Retail sales of distilled spirits may be sold on Sundays during hours allowable by state law. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.193, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-301. - Employees. 
The following provisions apply to all establishments holding a license for package liquor: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until this person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and has been issued a permit by the police department indicating that the person is eligible for employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be an alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be 18 years of age or older and who sells alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this subdivision, the police department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the police department shall not issue a permit to the employee. 
(5)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the police department or the finance department. 
(6)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work or train on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(7)  If any permitholder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(8)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.194, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-302. - Location of retail liquor package stores. 
No new retail establishment selling distilled spirits by the package shall be located within 1,000 yards of an existing retail establishment selling distilled spirits by the package. This prohibition shall not apply to a hotel or a motel with a restaurant holding a consumption-on-the-premises license which sells package liquor to its guests as part of room service. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.195, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-303—4-319. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Beer and Wine 

Sec. 4-320. - Types of retail establishments. 
(a)  No beer or wine shall be sold at retail except in establishments maintaining 80 percent of the floor space and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other products and located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use or in a facility duly licensed by the city to sell liquor by the package. 
(b)  In cases where, under section 4-298(a)(4), a hotel or motel is allowed to sell liquor by the package for purposes of room service, beer and wine sales by the package shall also be permitted for purposes of room service to guests of the hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.211, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-321. - Hours of sale; Sunday sales. 
Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of beer or wine except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale thereof. Package beer or wine may be sold on Sunday during hours allowable by state law. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.212, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-322. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.213, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-323. - Wine tastings. 
Upon filing an application and payment of a filing fee and a permit fee and after investigation by the police department and review by the finance department, the finance department may issue a permit to a licensed retail package wine dealer or licensed wine wholesaler to hold a wine tasting. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of wine to the public for consumption at a location which meets legal requirements for on-premises consumption, under the following conditions: The applicant for a wine tasting must hold a valid current wine license in the state. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.214, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-324—4-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 4-341. - Generally. 
(a)  Any person desiring to sell, at wholesale, any alcoholic beverage in city shall make application to the finance department and obtain a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms and pay a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirit license. 
(c)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any distilled spirits to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.231, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-342. - Excise tax imposed; bond required. 
(a)  There is imposed an excise tax upon all alcoholic beverages purchased by persons holding a retail package license or a consumption-on-the-premises license at a rate established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The excise tax shall be collected by all wholesale dealers selling alcoholic beverages to persons holding retail licenses and shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the finance department by the tenth of each month, based upon the units of alcohol sold during the previous month. The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments. The monthly remittance shall be accompanied by a sworn statement showing, but not limited to, the type and volume sold to each retail licensee on a form or in a format as approved by the finance department. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer, prior to commencement of business operation in the city, shall post a performance bond with the finance department equal to 1½ times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the excise tax based on sales collected by the wholesale dealer from the retailers to secure the payments for the tax imposed herein. These bonds shall be secured by cash which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the finance department. 
(d)  A wholesaler may be excused from posting the performance bond after demonstrating full and satisfactory compliance with the provisions required hereunder for a period of 12 months subsequent to the commencement of business operations within the city. Continued exemption from the requirement of posting the performance bond shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the terms of this article and the payment of all sums as required by the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Any person who fails to pay any tax to the city or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city under this article within the time required shall pay a late payment penalty, in addition to the tax or amount of tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof. All interest assessed under this provision shall be at an annual rate of three percent per annum unless a higher rate is set by resolution by the city council as authorized by law. Penalties shall be assessed, in addition to specified interest charges, at the rate of ten percent of the amount due for failure to file, negligence or disregard of rules or regulations; an additional penalty of 25 percent of the amount due shall be assessed for any fraud or intent to evade. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.232, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. O2019-05-18, § 4-232, 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 4-343. - Audit. 
The city shall have the right to audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.233, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-344. - Hours of sale. 
Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.234, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-345—4-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOTTLE CLUBS 

Sec. 4-361. - Bring your own bottle establishments. 
Bring your own bottle establishments cannot hold a license to sell and may not sell or serve any alcoholic beverages. All bring your own bottle establishments must be closed and have no customers in or on the premises by 11:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.251, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-362. - Permits. 
It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the finance department and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. A bring your own bottle establishment shall be subject to all general licensing and regulations as well as the licensing and regulations for consumption-on-the-premises establishments. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.252, 5-29-2018) 
Secs. 4-363—4-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MANUFACTURERS 

Sec. 4-381. - Permits. 
It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the finance department and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.253, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-382. - Types of sales permitted. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, tastings and direct-to-consumer sales, including both on-premises and off-premises sales, from the licensed premises shall be permitted under the manufacturers' license in accordance with state law, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, and in addition to on-premises sales and package sales, a licensed brewer or brewpub may furnish or sell growlers directly to consumers in accordance with state law, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.254, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-383. - Hours of sale. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, licensed manufacturers may sell or furnish alcohol directly to consumers on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 1:59 a.m., without having to satisfy any food sales requirement. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.255, 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 4-384. - Farm wineries. 
Farm wineries shall be licensed as a manufacturer and shall be permitted to manufacture, operate, and sell alcohol to the full extent permitted under state law, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. O2018-05-17, § 4.256, 5-29-2018) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - State minimum standards adopted. 
(a)  The city enforces the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, and as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20, which codes may also be referred to as "the construction codes:" 
(1)  International Building Code, subject to the amendment set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  National Electrical Code. 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(4)  International Mechanical Code. 
(5)  International Plumbing Code. 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(8)  International Fire Code. 
(9)  International Existing Building Code. 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code. 
(b)  In addition, the city adopts by reference as though fully set forth herein, the latest edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as amended by the state department of community affairs. 
(c)  The building state minimum standard International Building Code is amended with regard to construction classification and building height, as follows: Any new building or structure designed or intended to be more than three stories in height in any respect and which individually or in aggregate with other principal buildings or structures on the same site exceeds 100,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA), within the confined exterior walls of the structures whether occupiable or non-occupiable, shall, irrespective of any conflicting allowances or provisions of any other standard, code or ordinance having force and effect in the corporate limits of the city, be of Type I or Type II construction defined in the International Building Code as amended by the state. This regulation shall not be used to relax or reduce any requirements in Table 503, Allowable Building Heights and Areas, or any other section of the current adopted International Building Code. 
(d)  The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert [City of Tucker]. 
(2)  Section 103.5. Insert [The City of Tucker Fee Schedule]. 
(3)  Section 112.4. First Insert [zero] and Second Insert [1,000]. 
(4)  Section 302.4. Insert [12 inches]. 
(5)  Section 304.14. First Insert [January 1] and Second Insert [December 31]. 
(6)  Section 602.3. First Insert [September 1] and Second Insert [May 31]. 
(7)  Section 602.4. First Insert [September 1] and Second Insert [May 31]. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (1), 8-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-11-79, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 8-2. - Appendices; referenced standards. 
Any appendices referenced in this chapter or made part of the state minimum standards codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (3), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-3. - Conflicting provisions; applicability. 
(a)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the city construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(d)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(e)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(f)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(g)  One- and two- family dwellings. In addition to those codes referenced herein, the provisions of the International Residential Code for one- and two-family dwellings, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the building, mechanical, and gas systems in new one- and two-family dwellings, including additions, alterations, renovations and general repairs of existing one- and two-family dwellings. 
(h)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (3), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-4. - Codes remedial. 
This chapter is remedial in nature and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof (which are public safety, health, and general welfare) through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (2), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-5. - Quality control. 
Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the city construction codes in this chapter except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (2), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-6. - Permitting and inspection; no city liability. 
The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of this chapter shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city and its officers and employees shall not be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (2), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-7. - Other applicable state and federal law and rules not abrogated. 
The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (2), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-8. - Maintenance. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (3), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-9. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes, provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (4), 8-9-2017) 
Secs. 8-10—8-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-37. - Construction board of appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. The council shall establish a board to be called the "construction board of appeals." Members shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(b)  Membership and terms; quorum and voting; secretary of the board; and qualifications. 
(1)  Membership and terms. The board shall be comprised of not less than three and not more than five persons. Each member shall serve a term of four years and may serve consecutive terms. 
(2)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(3)  Secretary of the board. The building official shall appoint a secretary for the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(4)  Qualifications. The council shall establish qualifications for board members. 
(c)  Powers. The construction board of appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (d) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. 
a.  The construction board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this article or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
2.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
3.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures, or service systems. 
4.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system. 
5.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
b.  In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(4)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Establishment. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(2)  Decisions. The construction board of appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (9), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-38. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (11), 8-9-2017) 
Secs. 8-39—8-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING DEPARTMENT AND BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 8-65. - Building department. 
(a)  Creation of building department. The city has established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The city council shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. The duties of the department may be contracted out in full to a third party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the construction board of adjustment and appeal, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to state law. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit a report each year covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in the report a summary of the decisions of the construction board of appeals during the year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (5), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-66. - Building official's authorities and duties. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the city's construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (6), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-67. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (8), 8-9-2017) 
Secs. 8-68—8-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 8-93. - Permit application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. A permit shall not be issued to an owner, who is neither a licensed contractor nor the occupant of a residential structure being altered. 
(b)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs, with a value of less than $2,500.00, may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless, before then, a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(a), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-94. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal," or its equivalent, be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. 
(1)  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to the drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m^ 2) or more in area. 
(2)  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. As an exception to the provisions of this subsection, single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(b), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-95. - Examination of documents, plan review. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(c), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-96. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where the building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the public works director for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect, or locate the building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(d), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-97. - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(e), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-98. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place, a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans with the words "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(f), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-99. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city council have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the city council. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(g), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-100. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation and foundation wall inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated, the reinforcement is in place, and the forms erected, prior to the placing of concrete. 
b.  Slab inspection. To be made prior to the placing of concrete. 
c.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking, bracing and fasteners are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
d.  Insulation inspection. To be made after all insulation-related materials are in place. 
e.  Moisture barrier inspection. To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finishing materials. 
f.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for immediate occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.  Note. See section 312 of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation inspection. To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame inspection. To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(h), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-101. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a commercial building, which in the opinion of the building official, may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. The temporary/partial certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited if the certificate of occupancy is not issued within 90 days. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(i), 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-102. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-75, exh. (7)(j), 8-9-2017) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Security information—Required. 
All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall furnish to the police department, on a form supplied by the police department, all information necessary to indicate the security measures located at his business, trade or profession and the persons to be notified in the event of an emergency of the business, trade or profession. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-1), 3-29-2016) 
Sec. 10-2. - Security information—Furnished with license application. 
All persons applying for a new or renewal license under the provisions of this chapter shall be required, at the time of application, to furnish the information required in section 10-1, and to keep the information current. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-2), 3-29-2016) 
Sec. 10-3. - Carnivals, sideshows, etc.; permit required prior to issuance of license. 
No license shall be granted for the operation of a carnival, sideshow or similar exhibition on a vacant lot or in any open place where performances of any kind are given or where machinery of any kind or devices of any kind are operated for amusement unless a permit is obtained. Applications for this permit, accompanied by a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of their clerk, shall be filed with the police department. The application shall contain such information as the police department requires. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-4), 3-29-2016) 
Secs. 10-4—10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAXES 

Sec. 10-25. - Payment of occupational tax. 
(a)  Each person engaged in a business, trade, profession or occupation, whether with a location within the city, or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupational tax for the business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(b)  Occupation taxes shall be based upon gross receipts in combination with profitability ratio and number of employees. The profitability ratio for the type of business will be determined from nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the federal office of management and budget, the internal revenue service or successor agencies. 
(c)  A schedule of specific business occupation taxes, as adopted from time to time by the city council is on file in the office of the clerk, which taxes shall be levied and collected in the amount and manner specified by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-27), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-27), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of the occupational tax which approximates the cost of handling and processing the occupational tax. 
Applicant or holder means the applicant for, or holder of, a business occupation tax certificate, and shall include the business and any legally or organizationally related entity to which the occupational tax certificate applies. 
Business means any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, trade, profession, occupation or other entity and the efforts or activities associated thereby for the purposes of raising revenue or producing income. 
Director means the director of finance or his designee. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without being limited to, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income; and 
f.  From all other income whatsoever arising from or growing out of the conduct of the business, trade, profession or occupation without any deduction whatsoever. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly-owned partnerships or other wholly-owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or independent agent; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the geographical boundaries of the state. 
License means a permit or certificate issued by the city that allows an entity to operate lawfully in the city. A license does not create any rights to operate in violation of any provision of this Code and it may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city at any time pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. The term "license" applies to any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Location or office includes any structure or any vehicle of a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or delivery vehicles of a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, trade, profession or business for revenue raising or income producing purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of professions and occupants means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. This definition shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required as an exercise of police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. Regulatory fees shall not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-28), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-28), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-27. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession, trade or calling. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-36), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-36), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-28. - Registration of name of business; payment of taxes required. 
(a)  No person shall be engaged in, pursue or carry on any business within the city, in any manner without having registered the name of the business with the finance department and either paid the taxes as provided by this article or produced evidence of occupational tax payment to another jurisdiction in the state or proof of payment of a local business occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business' or practitioner's sales or services in the state. The city shall not require an occupation tax on those receipts that were taxed by occupation tax in other states. 
(b)  At the time of business registration, such person shall also identify to the finance department the lines of business that the business conducts. Classification of businesses for occupation tax purposes shall be based on the dominant line of business conducted. 
(c)  Each separate business trade name shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall fully comply with all city Code requirements before engaging in, pursuing or carrying on any business within the city. 
(d)  Failure or refusal to provide information requested by the city for the purpose of classification, assessment or levying of occupation taxes, regulatory fees or administrative costs or regarding the site of a location or office and taxes or fees paid to other local governments shall be punished as a under the general penalties and shall be subject to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-29), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-29), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-29. - Estimation of gross receipts; filing of returns. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business transacted during the current calendar year and the number of employees to be employed in the business conducted. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, those businesses subject to the occupational tax shall, on or before February 1 file with the finance department's business occupation tax section a return showing all gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year ending on December 31. This return showing preceding calendar year gross receipts shall be used as an estimate of gross receipts for making payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The number of employees reported for the current year's business operations may be based upon the number of employees employed in the business conducted during the previous year. Applicants or owners engaged in the business shall be reported as employees of the business. Should a business not continue or terminate during the year, such business shall notify the finance department and file a final return reporting the actual number of employees and those gross receipts not previously reported. 
(b)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in the return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part-year bears to the whole-year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(c)  If a business is to begin on or after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business and shall be based upon estimated gross receipts of the business from the date of commencement until the end of the calendar year. The business shall also file the required registration form and shall pay the administrative fee required by this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a lawyer begins business after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax and administrative fee on such business shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the business begins. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax and administrative fee within 120 days after December 31 shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on May 1 of the year following the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupational taxes and administrative fees. In addition, a list of all delinquent lawyers may be sent to the Georgia Bar. Certain general penalties applicable to most businesses for continuing violations of this Code shall not apply to violations of this chapter by lawyers. Specifically, failing to comply with the article will not result in the city closing the business or penalizing the continued practice of law by fining, imprisoning or criminalizing noncompliance. 
(d)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have nor shall the city require a business to pay an occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the business' gross receipts. 
(e)  Real estate brokers shall pay an occupational tax for each principal office and each separate branch office located in the city based upon gross receipts derived from transactions with respect to property located within the city. Payment of the occupation tax shall permit the broker, the broker's affiliated associates and salespersons to engage in all of the brokerage activities described in O.C.G.A. § 43-40-1 without further licensing or taxing other than the state licenses issued pursuant to state law. 
(f)  For out-of-state businesses with no location in the state, occupation taxes include the gross receipts of business as defined in section 10-33. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, prima facie evidence of gross receipts generated during any period shall be a copy of the business' federal income tax return or an affidavit of the business' accounting firm. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-30), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-30), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-30. - Administrative and regulatory fees. 
A regulatory fee shall be imposed on those applicable businesses listed under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b) that the city deems necessary to regulate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-31), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-31), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-31. - Separate registration for separate locations or separate tradenames. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location or has multiple business tradenames, each location or place and each tradename shall be considered to be separate for the purpose of the occupation tax and the gross receipts of each will be returned on a form furnished by the finance department in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-32), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-32), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-32. - Renewal returns and applications; due date; penalty for late payment. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the 2016 exception reporting date of gross receipts for implementation of this article, on or before February 1 of each subsequent year, businesses liable for occupation taxes levied under this article for the year shall file with the finance department, on a form furnished by the finance department, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year ending December 31. 
(b)  Occupational taxes on businesses continuing from the preceding year shall be due and payable on January 1 of each subsequent year. Occupational tax due from businesses continuing operation in the current year from the preceding year shall be considered delinquent if not paid by April 15 of each year. Any business failing to pay the occupational taxes and administrative fees within 120 days after January 1 shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest of one percent per month as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on May 1 of the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupation taxes, regulatory fees and administrative fees. 
(c)  If any person or business whose duty it is to obtain a registration in the city begins to transact or offers to transact any kind of business after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, such offender shall be assessed interest according to the rate as provided by state law and penalties under the city Code. 
(d)  On any new business begun in the city and not subject to payment of occupational taxes to the city, failure to register the name of the business and the line of business that the business conducts will be subject to possible penalties or other violations of this Code. Registration under this section is required for ensuring business to be conducted complies with city codes or ordinances governing health, safety and other purposes. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, occupation taxes and administrative fees for lawyers shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the tax is incurred. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax and administrative fees within 120 days after December 31 shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest of one percent per month as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on May 1 of the year following the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupational taxes and administrative fees. In addition, a list of all delinquent lawyers may be sent to the Georgia Bar. Certain general penalties applicable to most businesses for continuing violations of this Code shall not apply to violations of this chapter by lawyers. Specifically, failing to comply with the article will not result in the city closing the business or penalizing the continued practice of law by fining, imprisoning or criminalizing noncompliance. 
(f)  In addition to the remedies set forth in this section, the finance department may issue an execution for failure to pay taxes against the person so delinquent and against such person's property for the amount of the occupational tax required to be paid for the purpose of carrying on any of the businesses enumerated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-33), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-33), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-33. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city, for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-34), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-34), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-34. - Persons classified as professionals under state law. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees and gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in this article; 
(2)  An established fee described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). Such fee is per practitioner who is licensed by the state to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. Practitioners paying according to this subsection shall pay the fee per practitioner and shall not be required to provide information relating to gross receipts or number of employees of the business or practitioner; 
(3)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by instrumentalities of the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to register or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-35), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-35), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-35. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; city and state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license next to the city registration in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep both the state license and the city registration there at all times while valid. 
(c)  Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry their occupational tax receipt either upon such person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in such business, and such person shall exhibit it to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-37), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-37), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-36. - Change of location. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the finance department of this move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the finance department prior to the day of the moving. A new receipt for the occupational tax will be issued for the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-38), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-37. - Transferability. 
Occupational receipts shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. Filing a new registration application and payment of applicable fees and taxes shall be required of the new owner of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-39), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-39), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-38. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of city registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-40), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-40), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-39. - Inspections of books and records; audits; confidential information. 
(a)  The finance department shall have the right to inspect the books or records of any business for which returns have been made and upon demand of the finance department such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative or agent of the city within 30 days. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classified as agents for the purposes of this article. Failure of submission of such books and records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the occupation tax registration currently existing in the city. If it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of under reporting, additional payment of occupation taxes required to be paid under this article shall be assessed the interest as provided by state law and penalties provided for by this Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no attorney shall be required to disclose any information that would violate the attorney/client privilege. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, information provided by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. §§ 50-18-71 through 50-18-77. 
(c)  Information provided to the city by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the city council of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-41), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-41), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-40. - Business classifications for determining tax levy. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, every person engaged in business requiring the payment of occupational taxes is classified in accordance to the major line of business as defined by the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS); and profitability classes are assigned in accordance with Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns publication of the United States Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service. The finance department shall review assignment of businesses to profitability classes on a biannual basis and shall administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the then most accurate profitability class. 
(b)  Classifications by business profitability have been established by the city council and are incorporated herein by reference and adopted for use in the application of this article. All separate businesses engaged in more than one business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity at each location where business is done; except, that a person whose dominant business activity is legally exempt as defined by this article shall be classified according to such person's principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of occupation taxes. 
(c)  The occupation tax shall be determined by applying the business' gross receipts and number of employees returned to the city to the business' profitability classification established for each business type. 
(d)  A copy of business classifications shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by all interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-42), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-42), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-41. - Casual and isolated transactions. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where they involve personal assets, are not the principal occupation of the individual to pay occupational tax therefor. Street vendor, transient vendor or flea market vendor activities shall not be considered to be casual and isolated business transactions and shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-43), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-43), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-42. - Exemption for disabled veterans, disabled indigent persons, certain organizations. 
(a)  Persons who qualify for a state veteran's or disabled indigent person's license shall be eligible for exemption from the city occupational tax fee. Any such person claiming an exemption shall secure evidence of qualification for the exemption from the proper authority and present it to the finance department. 
(b)  Organizations which are exempt from federal income taxation under section 501(c)(3) or section 501(c)(4) of the United States Internal Revenue Code shall be eligible for exemption from the city occupational tax. Any such organization claiming an exemption shall provide to the finance department a federal tax exemption letter showing the code section under which an exemption is claimed. However, with respect to any activity for which an organization otherwise entitled to an exemption under this section shall be liable for federal income tax on unrelated business income or shall be deemed to be a feeder organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code, the exemption from payment of occupational taxes shall not be available. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the exemption from payment of city occupation taxes, an exempt person or business shall comply with the same laws and regulations as are required of other registered businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-44), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-44), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-43. - Exclusions from article; special classifications. 
(a)  Wholesale dealers in liquor, wine, beer, and malt beverages are not required to pay the business occupation taxes provided for in this article. 
(b)  Registration and occupational tax payment is required from any satellite subscription television system. The term "satellite subscription television system" means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services utilizes a master antenna type system or earth dish system designed to receive and distribute satellite television signals; particularly, a system to provide service to one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership wherein any wiring necessary to operate the system does not cross adjacent non-owned property lines and does not cross city right-of-way in the city. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person that is subject to the city's franchise fee for the holders of a cable or video service provider state franchise. 
(c)  Registration and occupational tax payment is required from any broadcast subscription television system. The term "broadcast subscription television system" means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services transmits premium programming from one or multiple sources by transmitting or retransmitting programs to the public. 
(d)  Any vendor or exhibitor who is a member of a group or collection of vendors or exhibitors that has come together at one location for the purpose of selling arts, crafts, antiques, or other goods for a period not to exceed ten consecutive days may be registered individually, or the group or collection may be registered as a "special event." Any applicant for a special event shall be considered as the promoter of the special event and shall be responsible for registration of the special event and paying the occupational taxes. Any special event group or collection of vendors or exhibitors shall comply with the same laws and regulations as required of other registered businesses, where applicable. 
(e)  As part of the city's economic development incentives and only to the extent as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10, the city council may by ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. Exemptions under this subsection shall not exceed ten percent of the business' total annual gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-45), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-45), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-44. - Denial, revocation or suspension of business occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  Grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension of business occupation tax certificate. A business occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to any provision of this article shall be denied, revoked or suspended, and considered void, upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The original application or renewal thereof contains false or misleading information, or the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of any codes or ordinances of the city; 
(3)  The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(4)  The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate is engaging in false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(5)  The holder of the certificate is operating under a business or trade name not listed on the current application on file with the city; 
(6)  The holder of the certificate fails to maintain the initial requirements for obtaining the certificate; 
(7)  The applicant for, or holder of, a certificate is classified as, or becomes classified as, a habitual violator under O.C.G.A. § 40-5-1 et seq., or is found to be operating the business under the influence of alcohol or of illegal drugs or substances; 
(8)  The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense, the offense of false swearing, the offense of operating an adult entertainment establishment in violation of the distance requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq., or to any offense involving illegal sale of narcotics or possession or receipt of stolen property, for a period of five years prior to the filing of the application. If after having been granted a certificate, the applicant is convicted, pleads guilty or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above offenses, the certificate shall be subject to suspension or revocation; 
(9)  The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate fails to pay occupation taxes and administrative fees when due; 
(10)  The establishment has been declared a public or private nuisance or has created a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; or 
(11)  Any other violation of this article. 
(b)  False or misleading information. No business occupation tax certificate shall be issued or renewed pursuant to any provisions of this article to any applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity if, within the 12 months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity has been denied a certificate or had a certificate revoked for any location based in whole or in part upon having furnished false or misleading information in any application or having omitted material facts in any application. 
(c)  Notice of denial, revocation or suspension of certificate. Upon denial of an application seeking issuance or renewal of a business occupation tax certificate, or revocation or suspension of a business occupation tax certificate, written notification shall be provided of such decision to the applicant or holder of the certificate within five calendar days. The written notification shall state the grounds for the denial, revocation or suspension, and shall be served via hand delivery to the applicant or holder at the business location and sending a copy of such notice via registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address listed by the applicant or holder on the application for a certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-46), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-46), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-45. - Grievances regarding occupation tax assessment or classification. 
For grievances regarding the occupation tax assessed or the major line of business classification, the aggrieved person or entity shall first submit in writing a complaint to the city clerk which shall set forth in reasonable detail the matters complained of. The complaint may take letter form, and it shall be the duty of the city to review the complaint and issue a written reply to the taxpayer within 30 calendar days from the date the complaint is received. The written reply shall state in reasonable detail the basis for the decision regarding the initial assessment and classification. Should the aggrieved person or entity desire to seek review of such a decision, or if the city fails to issue a written opinion to the taxpayer within the 30-calendar-day time period, the taxpayer shall be entitled to appeal to the hearing officer pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 10-46. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-47), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-47), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-46. - Administration; procedure for grievances and appeals. 
The director of finance shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. Should an aggrieved person or entity desire to appeal a decision under this article, the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)  A notice of appeal must be filed within 15 calendar days after receipt of the decision complained of. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter and shall clearly identify all of the objections or exceptions taken to the decision complained of. The notice of appeal shall also contain an address for receipt of future notices and decisions of the hearing officer. Should the aggrieved person or entity fail to file a notice of appeal within the time allowed, the right to appeal is lost. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, appellant shall be notified, in writing, of the date, time and place where a hearing will be held. The hearing shall be held before the hearing officer within 45 calendar days of the date the notice of appeal is filed, but no sooner than ten calendar days after appellant receives notice of the hearing. The director shall transmit to the hearing officer all documents or materials constituting the record of the action or proceedings below. 
(3)  If the finance director deems it necessary that an audit of the financial books/records of appellant be conducted, the city shall notify appellant in writing of a reasonable date, time and place for the audit, which shall be conducted prior to the date of a hearing on the matter. The finance director may hire outside auditors for this purpose. The expense of hiring outside auditors shall be borne by the city if the position of the appellant is sustained by the audit. If not, the expense of the outside auditors shall be due and payable from appellant as part of the costs of appeal. 
(4)  An appeal under this section shall stay all legal proceedings with regard to collection of the occupation tax from an appellant; however, such appeal shall not preclude the city from pursuing legal proceedings to enjoin any violation of this article or of any other article of this Code. 
(5)  In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
a.  The hearing officer shall convene the hearing. The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. The hearing officer shall have the following duties: 
1.  To hear appeals from decisions of the finance department denying the issuance or renewal of any license pertaining to this chapter; 
2.  To hear appeals from the decisions of the finance department revoking or suspending any license pertaining to this chapter; 
3.  To hear appeals from the decisions of the police department denying the issuance of permits pertaining to this chapter; 
4.  To hear appeals from the decisions of the police department revoking or suspending an employee permit to this chapter. 
b.  The proceeding before the hearing officer shall be recorded, and all documents and other materials considered by the hearing officer shall be preserved as the record of the proceedings. The record of the proceedings shall be preserved for not less than 150 calendar days after the hearing. 
c.  Any alleged violations or misconduct levied against the appellant and scheduled for a hearing before the hearing officer shall be read completely to appellant at the commencement of the hearing, unless waived by appellant. 
d.  The hearing officer may receive evidence in support of the alleged violations or misconduct as filed against appellant. Decisions of the hearing officer are to be supported by the evidence accepted and admitted during the hearing. 
e.  The city shall bear the burden of proof. The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. 
f.  The order of proof shall be as follows: The city representative shall present the case-in-chief in support of the alleged violations or misconduct; the appellant may present a case-in-chief, if desired. Each party may be allowed to present one case-in-rebuttal. 
g.  The appellant and city may be represented by counsel, may present evidence, and may examine and cross examine witnesses. Additionally, the hearing officer are permitted to question witnesses. A party is permitted no more than 15 minutes to present that party's case-in-chief; a case-in-rebuttal is permitted no more than ten minutes of presentation. Presentation of augments and evidence may be in oral or written form, except that affidavits of individuals who are unavailable for cross examination shall not be accepted or admitted by the hearing officer nor considered by the hearing officer. 
h.  Following the presentation of evidence, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision within 30 calendar days of the date of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed, via registered or certified mail, to the parties or the parties' representatives. For the appellant, the decision shall be mailed to the address provided on the notice of appeal. Should the hearing officer fail to issue a timely decision, on the 31st day after the date of the hearing, appellant may seek review as if a decision adverse to appellant had been rendered. 
i.  The findings of the hearing officer shall be final unless a party files a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court within 30 calendar days of the decision of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-48), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-48), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-47. - Promulgation of rules, regulations. 
The finance department shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of the state or the constitution of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational tax. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-49), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-49), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-48. - Requirement for public hearings. 
The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the levying of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-50), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-50), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-49. - Positions not yet established. 
During the period of transition and start-up of the city, any duties required by this chapter to be fulfilled by an employee or officer of the city who has not been appointed or such position or agency not yet established shall be fulfilled by the city manager or the mayor's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-04, exh. (16-51), 3-29-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-51), 7-10-2017) 
Secs. 10-50—10-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock or goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited to, the following sales: Adjuster's; adjustment; alteration; assignee's bankrupt; benefit of administrator's; benefit of creditor's; benefit of trustee's; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee; creditor's end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvent's last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's; trustee's; and quitting business. 
Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location or will then continue business from another existing location. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-91), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-73. - Persons exempt from article. 
The provisions of this article do not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(4)  Any publisher or newspaper, magazine or other publication that publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that there has not been compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-92), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-74. - Duties of licensee. 
A licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions during the period of the licensed sale to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application, and present this duplicate to inspecting officials upon request. 
(5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale, and make this distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all these goods. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-93), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-75. - Interval between sales. 
Any person who has held a sale as regulated under this article at the location stated in the application within one year last past from the date of the application shall not be granted a license. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-94), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-76. - Location of sale restricted. 
Where a person applying for a license required by the provisions of this article operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application. No other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with this sale or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-95), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-77. - Bankrupt or fire sales. 
(a)  Sale of unaffected or undamaged goods. It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any sale, whether by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise which are or have been or which are claimed to be or claimed to have been in or damaged by a fire, or which are or have been or which are claimed to be or claimed to have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been or are claimed to be or claimed to have been the property of any bankrupt business or person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale therein any goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected or damaged. 
(b)  Adding to goods. It shall be unlawful for any person to add to, or to permit to be added to, or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or other building in the city, any goods for the purpose of adding to these goods, wares or merchandise so circumstanced or affected and on hand in this store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at this sale. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-96), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-78. - Advertising restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, in any newspaper, handbill, sign, poster or any other such printed media, or by radio or television broadcast to residents of the city, that the person is conducting a closing-out, going-out-of-business, fire or bankrupt sale or similar sale as defined in this article as a means of attracting the general public to the person's place of business when such person does not actually intend to close out or go out of business or has not purchased the license required by this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise by sign, poster, handbill, newspaper or any other such printed or written media any closing-out, going-out-of-business, fire or bankrupt sale or similar sale as defined in this article unless all the written or printed matter in this advertisement shall be of the same size and type, including the notice that sales, excise and other taxes are either included or excluded from the advertised price and also whether the advertised price includes an article of the type being advertised to be traded in on the advertised article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-97), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-79—10-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-100. - Required. 
A license issued by the finance department shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be any of the following kinds: 
(1)  Going-out-of-business sale. 
(2)  Removal of business sale. 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-116), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-101. - Application. 
A person desiring to conduct a sale for which a license is required by this division shall make a written application to the finance department setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale. 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom the applicant purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of this acquisition. 
(3)  A description of the place where the sale is to be held. 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of the termination of such occupancy. 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted. 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which it will be conducted. 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising the sale together with the proposed content of any advertisement. 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at this sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. This inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-117), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-102. - Established business required; exception. 
(a)  Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a license under this division for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license under this division. 
(b)  Upon the death of a person doing business in the city, such person's heirs, devisees or legatees or the representative of such person's estate shall have the right to apply at any time for a license under this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-118), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-103. - Inventory restrictions. 
(a)  All goods included in the inventory of an applicant for a license under this division shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
(b)  The inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated under this division. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within 30 days before the filing of an application under this division shall be deemed to be of this character. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-119), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-104. - Conditions of issuance. 
A license shall be issued under this division on the following terms: 
(1)  Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof. 
(2)  Renewal procedure. The finance department shall renew a license for one period of time only, this period to be in addition to the 30 days permitted in the original license and not to exceed 30 consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, when it finds that all of the following exists: 
a.  Facts justifying the license renewal. 
b.  The licensee has filed an application for renewal. 
c.  The licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application and inventory. For the purpose of this subsection, any application for a license under the provisions of this division covering any goods previously inventoried as required hereunder shall be deemed to be an application for renewal, whether presented by the original applicant, or by any other person. 
(3)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(4)  Salable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(5)  Surrender of general licenses. Upon being issued a license hereunder for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the finance department all other business licenses the licensee may hold at the time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this division. 
(6)  Nontransferability. Any license provided for shall not be assigned or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-120), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-105. - Fees. 
(a)  Any applicant for a license under this division shall submit to the finance department with the application the required license fee. 
(b)  Any applicant for a renewal license under this division shall submit to the finance department with the renewal application the required renewal license fee. 
(c)  The license fee shall be in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-121), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-106—10-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNSHOPS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 10-124. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person working for an owner or pawnbroker, or any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into substantial contact with members of the public, or is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person, whether an owner or not, who works in a pawnshop on a regular basis and in a managerial capacity whereby the person has charge of the business or operations of the pawnshop. The term "pawnbroker" includes any person whose business or occupation it is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or any kind of personal property as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-136), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-125. - Penalties; suspension or revocation of license. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article, or such other laws, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city council for the conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall have the license to conduct this business revoked. This revocation shall result from conviction in any court for a violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance or regulation covering the conduct of the business for which a permit and license have been issued. 
Sec. 10-126. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-138), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-127. - Annual permit. 
(a)  All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the police department and obtain an annual permit to conduct or be employed in the business. No permit shall be issued until a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, is paid to the police department. 
(b)  The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of article II of this chapter. 
(c)  The application for the permit required shall state the street and number at which it is proposed to operate the business. The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and Social Security number of all persons, including pawnbrokers, owning any interest in the proposed business, plus any additional information, including fingerprints, deemed necessary by the police department. 
(d)  No business license shall be issued to a person until the permit required by this section has been granted by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-139), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-128. - Employees. 
No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been fingerprinted by the police department and has been issued an annual permit authorizing such person to be employed by a pawnshop. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to ensure that there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-140), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-129. - Character of persons connected with business. 
No owner, stockholder, employee, pawnbroker or any other person connected with the business for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or shall have been convicted of any crime involving theft or a crime against property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-141), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-130. - Records. 
All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to them. This description shall include, to the extent possible, the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In these books there shall be entered also the full name and address of the person by whom it was deposited or sold, and the time when it was done. These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible, in no event more than one hour thereafter. The pawnbroker shall photograph the person pawning the merchandise along with a pawnbroker's ticket showing a transaction number. The pawnbroker shall obtain the right index fingerprint provided it has not been amputated; if so, the next adjoining finger shall be acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-142), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-131. - Daily reports; fingerprinting, photographing of persons pawning articles. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the police department in such form as may be prescribed by the police department of all property pledged, traded or bought by such pawnbroker during the 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. These reports shall be typewritten. In addition to any other information required by the police department, the reports shall show: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnbroker. 
(2)  The time of transaction. 
(3)  The serial numbers of pawn tickets. 
(4)  The amount paid or advanced. 
(5)  A full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design; kind and number of stones in jewelry and all identifying names, marks and numbers. 
(6)  A description of the person selling or pawning, including name, address, race, weight and height. 
(b)  Insufficient reports shall be rejected, and any pawnbroker making them shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(c)  In addition to the other records and information, each pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pawning any articles with such pawnbroker the fingerprint of the right-hand index finger, unless this finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person pawning the articles shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. All prints shall be made on forms approved by the police department and the pawnbroker shall obtain all other information called for on the form approved. Fingerprints and the information as required in this section shall be obtained from all persons each time these persons pawn any article with a pawnbroker, regardless of whether the person may have previously pawned an article with the pawnbroker and been fingerprinted. 
(d)  In addition to other records and information, each pawnbroker shall photograph each customer with the photograph showing the pawnbroker's ticket and transaction number. This photograph shall be reduced to a negative form and maintained by the pawnbroker as a permanent record. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-143), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-132. - Hours of operation. 
Pawnbrokers may not keep open their places of business except between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-144), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-133. - Waiting period prior to disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the term "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold these goods so taken in pawn or purchase for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-145), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-134. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, the pawnbroker's agents or employees to receive goods in pawn from minors. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-146), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-135—10-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; additional local requirements authorized, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers or manufacturers' representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems or a person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers or manufacturers' representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems when the purchase is for resale in its original form or is changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding or recasting, or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Employee means any person working for a dealer, whether or not the person is in the direct employment of the dealer, who, in the performance of duties or the management of the business affairs of the dealer, handles precious metals or gems, or who prepares any reports or records which are required by this article. The term "employee" does not include any employee of any bank, armored car company, private security company, or other business entity which is acting in the sole capacity of bailee-for-hire in relationship to the dealer. 
Gem means any precious or semiprecious stone cut and polished. 
Precious metal means gold, silver, platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Purchase means buy, barter, trade, accept as collateral for a loan, or receive for the purpose of melting down, crushing or otherwise altering the appearance of the item. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-165), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-153. - Purpose; applicability of state law. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate and establish qualifications for dealers of precious metals, gems and goods made from precious metals and gems, who engage in business in the city. It is a further purpose of this article to enhance and supplement state law. Any permit fee required by the terms of this article shall be collected in addition to any license or registration fee as may be imposed on dealers by any state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-167), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-154. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to pawnshops, pawnbrokers, or employees of pawnbrokers who maintain permanent places of business within the city and are in compliance with article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-168), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-155. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer or employee to violate any of the provisions of this article, whether or not such dealer or employee is the holder of a current, valid permit issued according to the terms of this article. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record or form required by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a dealer or employee of a dealer. 
(b)  Willful violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation of the dealer's business license. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-169), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-156. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-170), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-157. - Records of transactions. 
(a)  Every dealer shall maintain a book in permanent form in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems, the following: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase transaction. 
(2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller. 
(3)  The name, age and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from each seller's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the seller. 
(4)  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial model or other number, and all identifying marks ascribed thereon. 
(5)  The price paid for the goods purchased. 
(6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price if payment is made by check. 
(7)  The signature of the seller. 
(b)  The permanent record book required in this section shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order, and shall be numbered in sequence. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least two years. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or any reasonable time. The book shall be kept at the business premises during ordinary hours of business. 
(c)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail may record the post office record of the mail parcel in lieu of the seller's age, driver's license number and signature as required in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-171), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-158. - Daily reports. 
(a)  Every dealer shall record, on cards or forms furnished or approved by the police department the details of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems. These records shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase of such items, and each card or form shall bear the number of the corresponding entry made in the book required by section 10-157. Each record shall include such information as may be reasonably required by the police department and shall include, as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  An accurate description of all articles received in the transaction with the particular seller. This description shall include to the extent possible the maker of each article, any identifying mark, number or initials, any pattern or shape, and a statement of the kind of materials of which it is composed. 
(2)  The date and time of the transaction. 
(3)  The name and address of the dealer. 
(4)  The name of the person making the purchase. 
(5)  The full name, date of birth and address, race and gender of the seller, as well as a general description of the seller. 
(6)  The number of the seller's valid state driver's license or state-issued I.D. card, or other similar identification which bears a photograph of the seller. 
(7)  Signature of seller. 
(8)  Such other information as may be required by any state law regulating dealers of precious metals and gems. 
(b)  Each card or form required by this section shall be delivered or mailed to the police department within 24 hours after the date on which the transaction occurred, and shall be handled in the following manner: 
(1)  All such forms or cards shall be maintained in a locked container under the direct supervision of the police department and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
(2)  The police department may allow any person to inspect the records for the purpose of locating stolen property, providing such person demonstrates theft of precious metals or gems by presenting an incident report or other similar document. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-172), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-159. - Photographs of articles and sellers; photocopies of documents. 
(a)  Every dealer shall take a well-focused, properly exposed color photograph of all precious metals, gems or goods made from precious metals or gems, which are purchased by the dealer. In the case of flatware, a photograph may be made of a representative place setting. 
(b)  In addition to photographing the items purchased, the dealer shall take a well-focused, properly exposed color photograph of the seller, and shall attach the photograph to the corresponding form or card required by section 10-158. In addition to the required photographs, the dealer shall attach to the form or card a photocopy of any bill of sale, receipt or other document tending to show the seller's ownership of the items purchased by the dealer, if any such documents exist, and a photocopy of the seller's driver's license or other identification authorized by this article. 
(c)  All photographs required in this section shall be made with a self-developing camera and film system, or such other system as may be authorized in writing by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-173), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-160. - Hours of operation. 
Dealers may not keep open their places of business except between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-174), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-161. - Waiting period prior to disposing of articles. 
Any dealer who in the course of business acquires precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems shall hold these items for at least seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment, grinding, melting, crushing or otherwise altering the appearance of the items. This section does not prevent any dealer from storing such items off the business premises, or from placing such items in the hands of any bank or security company for safekeeping, provided that no such item shall be removed from the city during the above-described holding period. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-175), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-162. - Inspection of items held by dealer. 
All items held by any dealer in accordance with the terms of section 10-161 shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any authorized law enforcement officer or, if the items are stored off the premises, within one business day thereof, during normal business hours. If the provisions of this section are in conflict with the provisions of section 10-161, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-176), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-163—10-192. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-193. - Required; prerequisite to issuance of business license. 
(a)  No business license shall be issued to conduct the business of purchasing precious metals or gems until the annual permit required by this section has been issued by the police department. 
(b)  No dealer shall engage in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems without having first obtained an annual permit issued by the police department and no dealer shall allow an employee to be involved in any way in the purchase of precious metals or gems until that employee has first obtained an annual employee permit from the police department and no person shall work as an employee of a dealer until such person has first obtained an annual employee permit. No annual employee permit shall be issued unless the dealer with whom employment is authorized is a holder of a current dealer's permit. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-191), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-194. - Application. 
(a)  The application for the annual dealer's permit required by this division shall include such fingerprints, photographs and information as may be reasonably required by the police department, but shall in any case include the following: 
(1)  The name, age and business address of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  The telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The name, age and business address of all other persons having an ownership interest or actually employed in the business other than publicly held corporations. 
(4)  The address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises. 
(5)  The applicant shall be required to notify the police department within seven calendar days of any change of address of the applicant or business or any change of ownership in the business. 
(b)  The applicant shall attach to this application a completed and signed employee or owner application as described in section 10-196 for each person named in the dealer's application. Each such application shall be signed by the owner, managing partner, corporate president or chief executive officer of the business, and there shall be a description of the capacity in which the signator is acting. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-192), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-195. - Denial. 
No permit required by the provisions of this division shall be issued under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The applicant has no permanent place of business other than a van, mobile home, trailer or similar nonpermanent structure. 
(2)  No owner, corporate officer, majority stockholder, partner or managing director of the business entity applying for the license has been a legal resident of the state for a minimum of 90 days preceding the date of application. 
(3)  Any person required to be listed in the application for a dealer's permit has been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any felony under the laws of this state or of the jurisdiction in which the verdict or plea was entered. This subsection does not apply to any person who has been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any felony after ten years have expired from the date of the plea, conviction or completion of sentence, whichever is later. 
(4)  The person is not eligible to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems by the terms of any law of this state requiring such registration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-193), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-196. - Employee or owner application. 
(a)  Persons required to obtain an employee permit by this division shall complete an employee or owner application which shall state relevant information including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Date of birth. 
(3)  Driver license, state identification card or Social Security number. 
(4)  Race. 
(5)  Sex. 
(6)  Residential address and telephone number. 
(7)  Last previous residential address. 
(8)  Height and weight. 
(9)  Hair and eye color. 
(10)  Name, address and telephone number of the dealer. 
(11)  Either a statement that the applicant has never been convicted of, plead guilty to or been sentenced to probation for any offense other than a minor traffic violation, or a list of all such pleas, convictions and sentences of probation. 
(b)  The application form shall also provide a place for the applicant's signature. Persons required to be listed in a dealer's application shall also complete an employee or owner application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-194), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-197. - Fingerprints. 
All persons required to complete an employee or owner application shall also submit to fingerprinting by the police department or by any agency or individual designated by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-195), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-198. - Issuance; fee. 
(a)  The police department shall provide the permit application forms required by this division, and shall review each completed application prior to issuing any permit. No employee or dealer permit shall be issued if it appears that the applicant or any person required to complete an employee or owner form has been convicted of, or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any felony. 
(b)  After ascertaining that all requisite forms have been completed, all fingerprint cards have been submitted, that no applicant or listed person is disqualified by virtue of a prior criminal record, and that all other requirements of this division have been complied with, the police department shall approve the application, subject to payment of an annual permit fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-196), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-199. - Expiration and renewal. 
Each permit required by this division shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is at least one year from the date of issue and must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Any permit holder may reapply for a permit at any time following the 60th day preceding the date of expiration. It shall be unlawful for any dealer to apply for a renewal unless all of the dealer's employees are holders of current, valid employee permits. No permits shall be renewed unless the dealer is the holder of a current, valid business license. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-197), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-200. - Revocation and surrender of permits. 
(a)  Any dealer or employee permit issued in accordance with provisions of this division shall be revoked by operation-of-law upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  The conviction of the dealer or employee for violating any state law or city ordinance pertaining to making false statements for the purpose of obtaining registration or authorization to become a dealer or employee of a dealer. 
(2)  The conviction of the dealer or employee for violation of a provision of this division after the dealer or employee has been previously convicted of a violation of this division within the preceding three years. 
(b)  Upon revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the police department within one business day of the conviction resulting in revocation, and failure to do so shall constitute a separate violation for each day the permit is withheld. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-198), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-201. - Appeals. 
(a)  In any case in which it appears to the police department that an applicant is not entitled to the issuance of a dealer or employee permit under the provisions of this division, the police department shall so notify the applicant in writing by mailing the notice to the last address furnished to the police department by the applicant. If the police department refuses to issue a permit, or if a permit is surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this division, the applicant or permit holder shall have an absolute right of appeal to the city council according to the procedures set forth herein. 
(b)  The appeal shall be perfected by filing with the police department a notice of appeal to the city council. The notice of appeal to the city council must be filed with the police department within 14 days following the mailing of the notification of denial or surrender of the permit and it shall be the duty of the police department, upon receipt thereof, to transmit such notice of appeal to the city clerk, together with copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to place the appeal upon the agenda of the board the first available date for hearing on the matter. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to so notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and place when the matter shall be heard. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-199), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-202—10-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS, DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES AND SIMILAR OCCUPATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-226. - Definition. 
In this article the term "solicitor" includes any person who solicits orders door-to-door or house-to-house on behalf of a business, individual, vocation or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-216), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-227. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Persons, businesses and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law, or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the state, are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit organizations or corporations registered with the secretary of state, or tax-exempt organizations which have been recognized as such by the federal Internal Revenue Service be treated as exempt from the provisions of division 2 of this article, provided that such organization first supplies proof of the recognized status to the police department, and has received from such department written confirmation of its exempt status. The organization shall then furnish each of its agents or representatives with a copy of the confirmation letter. The organization shall then furnish the regulatory enforcement unit of the police department with a list of such agents or representatives, and shall promptly notify the unit of changes in the list. 
(c)  Any sales representative who calls upon prospective customers at their prior invitation shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of division 2 of this article. 
(d)  Any sales representative who does not demand, accept or receive payments in advance of final delivery and who has had, for the previous six months, a regularly established place of business or permanent residence in the city from which the sales representative transacts business or solicits orders on a continuing and ongoing basis within the city, shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of division 2 of this article. Any person who is exempt under this subsection must be soliciting orders only for goods capable of being delivered at one time and must have on such person proper identification which substantiates the claim to an exemption. In this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or an identification card issued by the police department, but shall not include a birth certificate. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1, 5-9-1989; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-217), 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Exemption for blind persons, disabled veterans, etc., from license fees, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-228. - Violation of other ordinances and laws. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person while engaging in any activity for which a permit is required by this article to: 
(1)  Violate any city ordinance. 
(2)  Violate any criminal law of this state or violate any state or federal consumer protection law. 
(b)  In this section the term "consumer protection law" includes the Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. §§ 10-10-410 et seq., 43-17-1 et seq. and the Federal Consumer Credit Protection Act (truth-in-lending and truth-in-leasing). 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-218), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-229. - Hours of operation. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the conduct for which a permit is required by this article between the hours of sunset and 9:00 a.m., according to the standard time in effect. 
(Ord. No. 89-10, § 4, 5-9-1989; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-219), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-230. - Restriction on number of persons soliciting. 
It is unlawful for more than two individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or services, or religious or charitable purposes. Each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this provision shall be deemed to have violated this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-220), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-231. - Persons with criminal records. 
It is unlawful for any person with a criminal record as described in section 10-272, whether or not otherwise eligible for an exemption under section 10-227, to engage in any of the activities for which a permit is required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-221), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-232. - Frequency of solicitation of same premises. 
It is unlawful for any person to make more than one solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services within any consecutive two-week period, without receiving a prior invitation therefor from the occupant of any such premises. This section includes solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents or representatives of any person more than once during such period without a prior invitation. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 5, 5-9-1989; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-222), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-233. - Solicitation to be at main entrances. 
It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a place of residence at any entrance or part of the building other than the main entrance to the residence. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-223), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-234. - Announced purpose of call. 
At each dwelling, whether it is an apartment unit or private residence, the solicitor shall inform the occupant in unambiguous terms of the purpose of the call and shall not represent that the solicitor is participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that the solicitor is offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-224), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-235. - Identification to prospective customers. 
It is unlawful for any person, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer, to fail to verbally identify himself for the purpose of the solicitation, and the company and product line represented. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-225), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-236. - Fraud, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation to misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation or use any false or deceptive statements or any misrepresentation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plan, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the status or purpose of the person making the call. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-226), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-237—10-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-266. - Required. 
Any person engaged in or desiring to engage in any type of selling, soliciting, canvassing, survey-making or any other business, occupation or vocation, which by its nature requires going from door to door or house to house in the residential areas of the city, whether on a temporary or a permanent basis and whether or not it is for any religious, charitable, nonprofit or profit-making organization, shall obtain a solicitor's permit from the police department. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-241), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-267. - Application. 
(a)  Questionnaire. The police department shall prepare a questionnaire requiring pertinent information regarding the physical description, identity, and background of each applicant for a permit, to include the following: 
(1)  Name, local address and telephone number. 
(2)  Date and place of birth. 
(3)  Driver's license number and issuing state. 
(4)  Social Security number (if different from driver's license number). 
(5)  Race and sex. 
(6)  Height and weight. 
(7)  Eye color and hair color. 
(8)  Name, address and telephone number of the organization represented. 
(9)  Name and telephone number of immediate supervisor. 
(10)  Product or service. 
(11)  A list of all arrests, convictions and the disposition of each charge, other than minor traffic violations. 
(b)  Statement to be included with questionnaire. The questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: "Georgia Code section 16-10-71 provides that a person who makes a lawful oath or affirmation or who executes a document knowing that it purports to be an acknowledgment of a lawful oath or affirmation commits the offense of false swearing when, in any matter or thing other than a judicial proceeding, he knowingly and willfully makes a false statement." 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 3(a), (b), 5-9-1989; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-242), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-268. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon filing of an application for a solicitor's permit, the police department shall review the application for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has plead to, or has been convicted of, a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the application has been properly completed, and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas of conviction, the finance department shall approve the application. 
(b)  In any case in which it appears to the finance department that a solicitor's permit should not be issued to an applicant, the finance department shall so inform the applicant, and upon the applicant's request, shall furnish the applicant with a reasonably detailed written statement of the reasons why the permit will not be issued. 
(c)  Following approval of the permit application and prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall obtain a business license and pay the required license fee. 
(d)  Upon payment of the business license fee, the applicant shall receive from the finance department a copy of the license application, which the applicant shall then carry to the police department. Upon payment by the applicant of a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, the police department shall photograph the applicant and provide the applicant with a permit bearing the applicant's photograph, name, and organization, and identifying the applicant as a solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 3(c), 5-9-1989; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001) 
Sec. 10-269. - Expiration and renewal. 
Each solicitor's permit shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is one year from the date of issue. Application for renewal may be made at any time following the 60th day preceding the date of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-244), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-270. - Selling, renting, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person to lend, rent or sell a solicitor's permit card to another. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-245), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-271. - Display. 
The police department shall furnish to each holder of a solicitor's permit a device suitable for attaching the permit card to the outer clothing. No person shall act as a solicitor without wearing and displaying the permit in a conspicuous manner. Such a person shall display such identification to any authorized person or potential customer upon request. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-246), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-272. - Denial; suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No solicitor's permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of any misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five years prior to the date of application, nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted of a felony, except that a permit may be issued to a convicted felon if it appears that such person either has been pardoned, or that such person has been free from any legal restriction for a period of five or more years prior to the date of application. In this section the terms "conviction" and "found guilty" include verdicts or pleas of guilty, entered by a court of this state, a court of any sister state, or any federal district court. Any permit issued as the result of willful false statements or omissions in the solicitor's application for the permit shall be deemed null and void from the time of its issue. 
(b)  The permit of any solicitor charged with a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude shall be deemed suspended from the time of lawful arrest, formal accusation or indictment, whichever shall first occur; such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charge is dismissed, dead-docketed, nol-prossed or no-billed. 
(c)  The permit of any solicitor who is convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or violence, shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. The permit of any solicitor convicted of having violated any provision of this article after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. 
(d)  Any suspension or revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor while such person's permit has been suspended or after it has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-247), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-273. - Surrender. 
Each solicitor's permit shall remain the property of the city. Each permit holder shall surrender the permit card to the police department no later than three business days following the expiration, suspension or revocation of the permit or upon the demand of the police department or finance department, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-248), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-274. - Appeals. 
A person to whom the city refuses to issue a solicitor's permit or whose solicitor's permit is suspended or revoked may appeal pursuant to section 10-272. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-249), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-275—10-296. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local ordinances applicable only to massage therapists not licensed by state, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22. 

Sec. 10-297. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director means the director of finance, or his designee. 
Massage or massages or massage therapy means the manipulation or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including, but not limited to, the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, and cold packs. The term "massage" or "massages" or "massage therapy" shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, or medicine is required by the state. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric, or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a massage therapist for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs or contracts with one or more massage therapists, or operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, and which, for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages. The term "massage establishment" shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Massage therapist means any person who, for good or valuable consideration, administers a massage. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-266), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-266), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-298. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Massage therapist license. It shall be unlawful for any natural person to administer massages without having obtained a state-issued massage license. 
(b)  Massage establishment license. It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor; or for any person, natural or corporate, to allow a massage therapist to administer massages without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-267), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-267), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-299. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner: 
(1)  Any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of said profession; 
(2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state; or 
(3)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(c)  Except as specified in subsection (b) of this section, the requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, state or federal law, and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-268), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-268), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-300. - Application process. 
(a)  Application requirements. Any person desiring to obtain a massage establishment license shall make application to the finance department. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. All applications shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant; 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(3)  Sworn affidavits of at least three bona fide residents of the city that the applicant is personally known to them and they believe the person to be of good moral character; 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair; 
(6)  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, pleas of guilty, or pleas of nolo contendere for violations of any law and the grounds therefor; 
(10)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the county police department and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application. Payment of all fees charged by the county police department in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant; 
(11)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, independent contractor agent and partner, general or limited, associated with the operation of the licensed establishment; 
(12)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in the county; 
(13)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must reside in the state and must submit written, reliable proof thereof. Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in the city, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the county authorized to receive legal process and notices under this article on behalf of the applicant. 
(b)  Fees. All license applications shall be accompanied by a fee as elsewhere established by the city council to defray the costs associated with issuance of said licenses. All fees associated with the background check required by subsection (a)(10) of this section shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be in addition to the application fee. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 99-60, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-269), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-269), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-301. - Minimum standards. 
No applicant shall be issued a license for a massage establishment unless all of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant, including the partner applying on behalf of a partnership and an agent applying on behalf of a corporation, must be of good moral character. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if said applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within a period of four years prior to the filing of the application; 
(2)  A corporate applicant must be Chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the establishment. The corporate applicant must identify an agent for service of process in the county; 
(3)  The owner/applicant, or corporate agent must be a resident of the state; 
(4)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided also that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code; 
(5)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city building code, and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
(6)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any licensed massage establishment; 
(7)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Standard Mechanical Code and the Georgia Energy Code; and 
(8)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license hereunder, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-270), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-270), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-302. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review of applications. If a license application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the director. The director shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the police department. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the police department, or its designee, shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the director. 
(b)  Action on applications. Upon receipt of this background investigation, and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the director shall act on the application. The director shall deny any application: 
(1)  That fails to meet each of the application requirements specified herein; 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in section 10-301; 
(3)  When any of the grounds for revocation specified in section 10-308 occurred at the location specified in the application during the past business license year; or 
(4)  That contains false information in the application or attached documents. 
Otherwise, the director shall approve the application and the license shall be issued by the finance department upon the payment of any applicable city business or occupation tax. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year. If an application for a license is denied under this article, the applicant shall not be authorized to reapply for said denied license for a period of one year from the date of denial. 
(c)  Appeals of denials of applications. 
(1)  In the event the director denies a license or apprentice permit application, such denial shall be in written form, addressed to the applicant at the application address, and shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. Within 15 days of the date of issuance of such notice, the applicant may appeal the denial by submitting a written notice of appeal to the finance department. The hearing officer, shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the finance department. The hearing officer shall provide written notice of the hearing date, time, and place to the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant and the director may each present evidence relating to the grounds for denial. The appellant may be represented by counsel at the expense of appellant and shall have the right to present evidence and cross-examine the witnesses. 
(2)  The hearing officer shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. An appeal shall be sustained upon a finding by the hearing officer that the director's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that he acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, or may modify, the decision appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director and may issue or direct the issuance of a license provided all requirements imposed by applicable laws are met. The findings of the hearing officer shall be final, unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-271), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-271), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-303. - Transfers and sales prohibited. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this article are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-272), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-270), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-304. - Change of location. 
A change of location of massage establishment premises may be approved by the finance department provided all general ordinances are complied with and a change of location fee as elsewhere established by the city council is first paid. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-273), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-273), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-305. - Renewals. 
All valid licenses may be renewed for additional one-year periods provided a renewal application meeting all of the requirements for an initial license application is submitted prior to expiration of the existing license and approved by the director according to the same standards for initial licenses. The fee for said annual renewal shall be as elsewhere established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-274), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-274), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-306. - Further requirements. 
The following additional requirements shall apply to all license holders and establishments: 
(1)  All massage therapists and all other persons on the premises, with the exception of the customers, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this provision, "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck and means having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this subsection shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(2)  Massage of the human genitals or anus within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(3)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(4)  Every person to whom a license shall have been granted shall display said license in a conspicuous place on the premises that is clearly visible to the visiting public. 
(5)  The city finance department or the police department, shall have the right to inspect any licensed massage premises and its records at any time, with or without notice, during business hours to ensure compliance with this article. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment unless at the time of such patronage such person carries with him a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician, or unless such person provides a written consent to massage therapy treatment signed by the underage patron's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of each person patronizing such massage establishment and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage establishment or massage therapist administering massage to an underage patron. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license for a massage establishment under this article to file with the finance department the names of all employees and independent contractors other than those holding massage therapist licenses, their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of said employees and independent contractors with the names of new employees and independent contractors must be filed with said department within ten days from the date of any such change. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city through the finance department or the police department. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the licensee establishment to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of all employees, independent contractors, customers and all other persons on the premises in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 99-60, § II, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-275), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-275), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-307. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be revoked except for due cause as herein defined without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter set forth before the hearing officer. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. In the event the license holder cannot be found, and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder or the registered agent thereof at his place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. The notice shall state the grounds for revocation of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(b)  Due cause, for revocation of such license, shall be as provided in section 10-308. 
(c)  In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
(1)  The charges and specifications against the licensee shall be read along with any response filed by the licensee. 
(2)  The hearing officer shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the licensee and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges, and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The city representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; the licensee shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The licensee and city may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, the hearing officer may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. Following the presentation of evidence, the board may have a reasonable time within which to issue its decision. 
(5)  The findings of the hearing officer will be final unless within 30 days of the date of the decision, the applicant files a petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-276), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-276), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-308. - Grounds for revocation. 
(a)  The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The holder allows or permits any person who is not a licensed massage therapist to administer a massage in said establishment; 
(3)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any federal, state, or city laws designated for the health, protection and safety of the occupants or general public; 
(4)  The premises are in violation of the city building or life safety codes; 
(5)  The original application or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The holder of the license, including any person with an ownership interest in the license, has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under state law; 
(7)  Any of the license holder's employees, independent contractors or agents has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under state law, in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment; 
(8)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, independent contractors, agents, customers, or others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; or 
(9)  The holder, his employees, agents, or independent contractors associated with the establishment have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article. 
(b)  Any massage establishment who has his or its license or permit revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license or permit for a period of 12 months immediately following the date of revocation. 
(c)  Any location at which a license or permit for a massage establishment has been revoked shall be disqualified from receiving such a license or permit for a period of 12 months immediately following the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-277), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-277), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-309. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine or imprisonment. Violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this article may be abated as a nuisance. 
(c)  The violation of all provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-278), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-278), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-310. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
(a)  Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition or in lieu of all other remedies, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  No massage establishment shall operate at any location nor on any premises which does not comply with all zoning, building code, fire safety code, and other ordinances and laws of the city and state. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-279), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-279), 7-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-311. - Existing practices. 
Any person who operates a massage establishment upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall have through December 31, 2016 to comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-280), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-73, exh. (16-279), 7-10-2017) 
Secs. 10-312—10-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ESCORT OR DATING SERVICES 

Sec. 10-341. - License. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business of providing or arranging dates, escorts or partners for persons shall, before engaging in such business, file an application for a business license on a form supplied by the finance department and shall comply with all the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The applicant for a dating or escort service license must be an owner, partner or majority stockholder. 
(c)  Each applicant shall submit the following information, as a minimum: 
(1)  Trade name and business address. 
(2)  Applicant's name and residence address. 
(3)  Names and residence addresses of all interested persons, to include owners, partners, stockholders, officers and directors. 
(4)  Manager's name and residence address. 
(5)  Employees' names and residence addresses. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-311), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-342. - Qualifications of license applicant, others connected with business. 
No applicant, owner, partner, stockholder, officer, director or any other interested person connected with the business for which a license is applied under this article shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, lottery or illegal sale or possession of narcotics within the preceding ten-year period; any subsequent convictions of the above nature automatically acts to void any such license and permits held. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-312), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-343. - Police department permit required. 
All applicants for an escort or dating service business license, along with their employees, must also file for a permit with the police department accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by action of the city council a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk and providing the information in section 10-341 as well as any additional information and fingerprinting as deemed necessary by the police department for the purposes of conducting a background investigation of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-280), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-344. - Employees. 
No person under 18 years of age shall be employed by an escort or dating service in any capacity and not before such person has been fingerprinted by the police department. When determined that the employee applicant has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude for the preceding three-year period, an annual personal identification card authorizing such person to be employed by the escort or dating service will be issued. It shall be the responsibility of the business license applicant to ensure that the provisions of this section are complied with and that no employee possesses an expired identification card or permit while in the business' employ. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-314), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-345—10-361. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - POOLROOMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-362. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pool or billiards includes any game played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue. 
Poolroom means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of pool or billiards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-280), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-363. - Inspection of licensed establishments. 
The police department may inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-333), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-364. - Gambling. 
No gambling or other games of chance shall be permitted in a poolroom. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-334), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-365. - Manager. 
All poolrooms which have three or more pool tables shall have a manager or designated employee on duty during operating hours whose responsibility is the operation of the pool tables. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-335), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-366—10-388. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-389. - Required. 
No person shall operate a poolroom without a business license issued by the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-351), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-390. - Application. 
(a)  All persons desiring to operate a poolroom shall make application for a business license on a form prescribed by the finance department. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner-applicant. 
(2)  The address of the licensed establishment. 
(3)  The number of pool tables to be operated at the licensed establishment. 
(4)  If the owner-applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners. 
(5)  If the owner-applicant is a corporation, the names of the officers. 
(6)  The name and address of the agent for service of process. 
(7)  The name of the manager, and if the manager changes, the owner-applicant must furnish the finance department and police department with the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. 
(8)  The name of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, or other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the licensed establishment. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the finance department to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. Failure to furnish data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(e)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this division, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-352), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-391. - Persons eligible. 
(a)  No poolroom license shall be granted to any illegal alien. 
(b)  Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this section. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to one of the partners. 
(c)  No license shall be granted to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(d)  No license shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony within ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(e)  No license shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. The finance department may decline to issue a license when any person having an interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth for the licensee. 
(f)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this division to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person shall be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent with the finance department in such form as is prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-353), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-392. - Expiration; renewal; transfer. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file application with all applicable fees with the finance department on the form provided for renewal of the license for the following year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year or the applicant shall pay a late payment penalty in addition to an assessment of interest. No renewal licenses shall be granted after January 1, but such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all requirements for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(c)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the full calendar year. License fees shall not be prorated and are nonrefundable. 
(d)  No license shall be transferred without prior approval of the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-354), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-393. - Fee. 
No poolroom license shall be issued until a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, is paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-355), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-394. - Issuance. 
Before a poolroom license is granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council regulating the operation of poolrooms. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-356), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-395. - Suspension or revocation. 
A poolroom license may be suspended or revoked by the finance department for failure of a licensee to comply with the provisions of this division or where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or false information in the license application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-357), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-396. - Appeals. 
(a)  No poolroom license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing. 
(b)  The finance department shall provide written notice to the owner-applicant and licensee of the order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the owner-applicant and licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this division. Any owner-applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city may have a review thereof in accordance with the appeals procedures specified in section 10-46. For purposes of this section notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-358), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-397—10-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 10-421. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for luxury limousines, with a designed seating capacity of no less than five and no more than nine passengers behind the operator of the vehicle. Limousines shall not have a door at the rear of the vehicle to allow entry or exit of passengers. No vehicle shall be allowed to operate as both a taxicab and a limousine. All vehicles for hire shall obtain either a taxicab permit or a limousine permit. 
Open stand means locations on city streets, including the locations on the premises of MARTA stations that may be used by any taxicab on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis, and not by private vehicles or other public conveyances. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle used to transport passengers for a fee or fare and which is fitted with a taximeter or other device that is used to compute such fee or fare. 
Taxicab company means an entity licensed to do business by the state with its primary business being the operation of motor vehicles used to transport passengers for a fee or fare within the city. 
Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a motor vehicle and designed to measure the distance traveled by such vehicle, or an instrument or device attached to a motor vehicle and designed to compute and indicate the fare or fee to be charged to the passengers. 
Vehicle for hire means a limousine, taxicab or other passenger-carrying vehicle that is used to transport passengers for a fee. Vehicles regulated by the state public service commission, and passenger vans with a capacity of 15 or more passengers, shall not be considered a vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 01-04, pt. 1, 4-26-2001; Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-375), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-422. - Doing business defined. 
Any person shall be deemed doing business in the city under this article if such person is picking up passengers in the city and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed as doing business in the city under this article if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates vehicles for hire on such person's own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-376), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-423. - Compliance. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the city without first meeting the requirements of this article. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, any vehicle for hire that has a current valid county permit is authorized to operate in the city and is exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-377), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-424. - Taxicab company permit holder's responsibilities for violations. 
Taxicab company permit holders are responsible for violations of this article by their employees and independent contractors, including company drivers and dispatchers. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-378), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-425. - Notice. 
For the purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by mail within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-379), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-426. - Hearings. 
(a)  Decisions of the finance department that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant or licensee under this article may be appealed to the finance director or the director's designated representative. Decisions of the police department that adversely affect or aggrieve any permittee may be appealed to the chief of police or the chief of police's designated representative. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the director of finance or the director's authorized representative or any permittee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the chief of police or the chief of police's designated representative may request an appeal to a five-member review board appointed by the city manager. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the finance director's or chief of police's office of the deciding department within 15 days after the final decision. 
(b)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing the written petition, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the deciding department director or his designated representative. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(c)  The findings of the review board shall be forwarded to the director of the department originating the review board appeal after the conclusion of the hearing. It shall be the duty of the department director or his designated representative to notify the appellant of the action of the review board. 
(d)  The findings of the review board shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, §§ 1, 4, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-380), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-427. - Audits; filing returns. 
Each company and individual licensed under the provisions of this article shall be subject to the provisions of article II of this chapter for audits and the filing of returns. No licensed business or individual shall fail to comply with the audit requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-380), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-428. - Taxicab company permits, generally. 
(a)  An applicant for a taxicab company permit is required to provide information showing its qualifications on a forms provided by the police department. 
(b)  Applicants must be approved by the police chief or his designee, and such clearance shall include a background investigation and fingerprinting of the applicant. 
(c)  No taxicab company permit shall be issued to any taxicab company owning or leasing less than one vehicle. 
(d)  No taxicab company permit shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant has a valid and current business license to do business in this state. 
(e)  All permits required by the provisions of this article shall expire on the same date as the expiration of the business license. 
(f)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor or individual then all partners, officers or directors holding ten percent or more interest in the company or entity shall be required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  All applicants must: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; 
(3)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following offenses under federal law or the law of this or any other state: any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; criminal solicitation to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; any misdemeanor crime of violence or theft, any misdemeanor crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or any crime involving moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant from applying for a permit; 
(4)  Provide a verifiable dispatch location staffed by company agents or employees, have a published telephone number and have sufficient parking to accommodate its vehicles for hire when not in use; 
(5)  Provide proof that the applicant has a dedicated two-way communication system with a dispatcher that personally mans such communication system during the entire time that the applicant's business is open for service, or that any taxicab is available for transportation of fee-paying passengers. The dedicated two-way communication system must be a federal communications commission licensed two-way radio network. Citizens Band radios, ham radios, cell phones and text paging devices shall not qualify as a dedicated two-way communication system; 
(6)  File applications for the initial permitting and inspection of the taxicabs, with a list of all drivers that will be scheduled for driver permitting, indicating whether drivers are company employees or contract drivers. A copy of each contract driver's insurance coverage must be included in the application; 
(7)  Provide a copy of the applicant's rate schedule and the daily hours of operation; and 
(8)  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual residing in the county who will be the registered agent for the purpose of service of process or receipt of citations. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 01-04, pt. 1, 4-26-2001; Ord. No. 05-02, pt. 1, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-382), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-429. - Insurance. 
(a)  All companies and drivers permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall provide with their application, and shall maintain for the duration of the permit, a certificate of insurance showing proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by a state approved insurer. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third parties against personal injury and property damage in amounts specified by this section. 
(b)  All companies and drivers permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall provide with their application, and shall maintain for the duration of the permit, minimum motor vehicle insurance coverage per vehicle as required by state law. 
(c)  All permit holders must provide the police chief or his designee with an annual certificate of insurance showing the existence of such policies of insurance as required by this article. The annual certificate of insurance must be provided to the police chief or his designee 30 days prior to the expiration of any such insurance. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 88-19a, § 1, 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 01-04, pt. 1, 4-26-2001; Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-383), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-430. - Taxicab driver's permits, generally. 
(a)  No person shall drive a taxicab without a valid driver's permit issued pursuant to the requirements of this article. All drivers must have held a valid state driver's license for a minimum period of 12 consecutive months before applying for a driver's permit pursuant to this article. If an applicant's driver's license is suspended for a nontraffic-related violation or conviction then the applicant is exempt from the requirement that he hold a valid state driver's license for 12 consecutive months before applying for a driver's permit. If an applicant's driver's license has been suspended for a nontraffic-related violation or conviction no taxi driver's permit shall be issued by the city unless and until the applicant provides written certified proof from the state that the applicant's driver's license has been fully reinstated and is valid. No company permitted for operating taxicabs shall employ or otherwise associate with, including as an agent or independent contractor, any driver who has not first met the requirements of this article and been issued a valid driver's permit. 
(b)  No drivers' permit shall be issued to any person who is not employed by or represented by a licensed company. All drivers' permits shall expire on the drivers' birthday, and shall be renewed annually. 
(c)  Driver permits must be posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Licensees under this article are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has a current driver permit in the driver's possession and posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being operated along with a visible vehicle inspection sticker. 
(d)  No request for a driver's permit will be processed unless the permit applicant presents a letter on company stationery to the police department from a licensed company requesting issuance of a driver's permit to the named individual. The driver's permit applicant will further furnish information requested on a form to be provided by the police department and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. Driver permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Possess a current valid state driver's license. Such license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(5)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, or for the violation of any of the following offenses under federal law or the law of this or any other state: any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these offenses; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(6)  Have not been convicted of four or more moving traffic violations, or one or more mandatory suspensions as defined by state law, within the 12-month period preceding the date of application or renewal of the application. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(e)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or other licensing or permitting information previously supplied to the police department within ten days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 01-04, pt. 1, 4-26-2001; Ord. No. 05-02, pt. 1, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 08-21, pt. I, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-384), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-431. - Determination of permit or inspection fees; proration of license, permit or inspection fees. 
Fees for vehicle inspections and driver permits under this article shall be recommended by the police department for approval by the city council. Fees required by this article are nonrefundable and are not prorated. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-385), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-432. - Transfer and term of permits and vehicle stickers. 
(a)  No company permits, driver's permits, licenses or city inspection stickers for individual vehicles required by this article are transferable; and they shall expire annually as provided in this article. If not renewed in compliance with this article, all such licenses, permits and inspection stickers shall expire annually and be of no further force and effect. 
(b)  All city inspection stickers required by the provisions of this article shall expire on the date the Georgia motor vehicle license tag expires. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-386), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-433. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Suspension. For reasons set forth below, a business license or a driver's permit issued under this article may be suspended until these conditions no longer exist: 
(1)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or driver's permit. 
(2)  Violation of any part of this article. 
(3)  For driver's permits only, have not been convicted of four or more moving traffic violations, or one or more mandatory suspensions as defined by state law, within the 12-month period preceding the date of application or renewal of the application. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse, or allowing a vehicle to operate in the city without a city inspection sticker. 
(b)  Suspension for six months. For reasons set forth below, a business license or a driver's permit issued under this article may be suspended for six months: 
(1)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the police department. 
(2)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, sex or sexual orientation. Sexual orientation means the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(c)  Revocation. A business license or a driver's permit issued under this article may be revoked where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information, or omits information, requested in the application. 
(d)  A taxicab company permit, driver's permit or business license may be revoked for a violation of this article. If any permit holder, or employee or independent contractor of a permit holder, is found to have violated this article on three or more occasions in a 12-month period, such permit may be revoked. 
(e)  A permit may be revoked if any driver affiliated in any way with such permit is found to have violated this article on five or more occasions in a 12-month period. 
(f)  In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the permit holder may also be cited for violating the provisions of this article, and such citations shall be prosecuted in accordance with the requirements of this article in the municipal court. 
(g)  The requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, state or federal law and shall not authorize violations of any other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 01-04, pt. 1, 4-26-2001; Ord. No. 05-02, pt. 1, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-387), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-434. - Vehicle condition and equipment; inspection and inspection sticker. 
(a)  Drivers and company licensees are responsible for maintaining each vehicle for hire in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out under inspection requirements outlined in this section. 
(b)  Drivers are not to drive and company licensees are not to allow drivers to operate a vehicle without the required markings, a taximeter, top light and inspection sticker as outlined in this section. Required markings shall also include the name of the company painted or affixed by decal to the outside right and left front doors and the schedule of rates, including minimum fares, painted or affixed by decal to the outside right and left rear doors. Magnetic signs, or non-permanent signs or markings, shall be prohibited. Limousines are excepted from having markings, top lights, two-way radios or taximeters; however, limousines are required to have a plate attached to their front or rear bumper indicating the company business name. 
(c)  All vehicles for hire to be used by a licensee in the city shall be inspected annually and approved by the police department. Once a vehicle meets the requirements of the inspection, a sticker will be affixed to the left side of the windshield. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems to ensure each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to ensure there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. 
(3)  The vehicle shall have a spare tire and jack, a functional two-way radio and a taximeter. The taximeter is to be positioned so that it is visible from the passenger compartment. Taximeter accuracy shall be verified according to the police department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. Limousines are excepted from having a two-way radio and a taximeter. 
(4)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and shall be subject to immediate vehicle inspection sticker removal by the police department. Additional inspection requirements will be outlined in the police department's vehicle rules and regulations governing passenger-carrying vehicles. 
(d)  The inspection sticker is proof that the company met the licensing and insurance requirements at the time of license issuance and that the vehicle passed the last vehicle inspection. Each vehicle operator must have in the vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any company or vehicle letting insurance coverage lapse shall have the inspection sticker removed by the police department and the business license suspended or revoked by the finance department. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the finance department, the license reinstated and the vehicle reinspected and new inspection stickers issued by the police department. 
(e)  No business licensed for operating vehicles for hire shall use any vehicle that has not been inspected and had the city inspection sticker affixed. 
(f)  Inspection stickers are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle and are nonrefundable if the vehicle is wrecked or taken out of service for any reason. The finance department and police department must be notified within ten days of any vehicle being taken out of service; stickers from vehicles taken out of service must be turned in to the police department. Stickers for replacement vehicles or additional vehicles are issued under the same procedures as original inspection stickers. 
(g)  The maximum number of inspection stickers issued in any calendar year shall not exceed 1,000. 
(h)  Inspection stickers shall expire on the date the state motor vehicle license tag expires. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 01-04, pt. 1, 4-26-2001; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-388), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-435. - Miscellaneous requirements and regulations. 
(a)  All taxicab drivers shall maintain in each taxicab a suitable map or street guide of the metropolitan Atlanta area. 
(b)  All taxicab drivers shall make a reasonable search of their vehicle immediately following each trip, and upon discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in the taxicab, shall immediately notify the dispatcher so that the dispatcher can attempt to locate the owner to return the property. If the owner cannot be located within 24 hours, the dispatcher shall forward the property to the police department. The city shall reflect the initial receipt of the property in a log that shall be maintained and available for inspection by the police chief or designee for one year. 
(c)  All taxicab drivers shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. 
(d)  No taxicab driver shall refuse to accept a passenger, unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. All employees and independent contractors of companies permitted pursuant to this article shall be courteous and respectful to members of the public. 
(e)  No taxicab driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of that passenger's race, color, gender, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age or disability. 
(f)  All taxicab drivers shall provide receipts upon request of a passenger, showing the amount of fare paid, the name of the company, the taxicab identification number, the number of passengers, and origin and termination location of trip. 
(g)  No taxicab driver shall refuse to transport a blind or disabled person or that person's guide or service dog. No taxicab driver shall charge any extra fee for the guide or service dog to accompany said blind or disabled person. 
(h)  All taxicab drivers shall practice good personal hygiene, and wear proper dress while operating a taxicab. Proper dress means shoes (not sandals), ankle length pants, and a shirt or blouse with sleeves and a collar. Hats must be of the baseball style or a chauffeur's cap. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. 
(i)  Taxicab company permit holders are responsible for ensuring that any driver who is affiliated in any way with such permit complies with the requirements of this article. In addition to being cited for a violation of this article, violations of this section may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(j)  Failure of a taxicab driver to comply with this article shall result in the issuance of a citation or the driver's arrest and the impoundment of the taxicab. 
(k)  No taxicab driver's permit shall be issued to a driver not affiliated with a taxicab company properly permitted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-389), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-436. - Trip sheets or logs. 
Drivers must maintain daily trip sheets or logs of all passengers, the time, place of entry, the destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. Trip sheets must be maintained in the vehicle for 48 hours and, thereafter, transferred to and maintained at the licensed business premises for a period of time to be specified by the police department in that department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 1, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-390), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-437. - Drivers smoking, playing radios, etc. 
A driver while operating a vehicle for hire is not to smoke or play a radio or tape player if objected to by a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-391), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-438. - Cruising and use of vehicle stands. 
Licensees under this article are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. Cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the unincorporated area for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. Licensees shall ensure that their drivers use open stands on a nonexclusive, first-come-first-served basis. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-392), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-439. - Call jumping. 
Licensees under this article shall not participate in nor allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another company. 
(Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-393), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-440. - Age of vehicles for hire, taxicabs and limousines. 
No vehicle having a vehicle age greater than eight years may be operated as a taxicab, vehicle for hire or limousine in the city. For the purposes of this section, the term "vehicle age" means the vehicle's model year. 
(Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-385), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-441. - Schedule of fares. 
(a)  All permitted taxicab drivers shall charge the following schedule of fares: 
(1)  To the first one-eighth of a mile: $2.25; 
(2)  Each additional one-eighth mile: $0.25; 
(3)  Waiting time: $21.00 per hour; and 
(4)  For each additional passenger in excess of one riding in the vehicle on the same trip: $1.00 per extra person. Children under five years of age shall not be charged the extra person fee, and only one child over the age of five in the company of an adult may be charged the extra person fee. 
(b)  All taxicab drivers permitted under this article shall have the right to charge a $6.00 charge if the meter is not utilized. 
(c)  Taximeters shall be calibrated by the permitted taxicab driver or taxicab company to calculate the fares in accordance with the schedule set forth in this section. The permit holder shall install lead and wire seals to the taximeter once it is calibrated so that no adjustments, alterations or replacements may be made to the taximeter that affects in any way its accuracy or indications. 
(Ord. No. 29-03, pt. I, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 05-15, pt. I, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-395), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-442. - Temporary fuel surcharge. 
(a)  The police chief or designee shall assess fuel prices in the city every three months, the first assessment to occur immediately after approval of this section and again thereafter on November 1, February 1, May 1, and August 1 of each calendar year and repeating every November 1, February 1, May 1, August 1 or an assessment may be needed based on a sudden increase in gasoline prices between those dates. 
(b)  At the time of the assessment, if the police chief or designee finds that the price of fuel in the city exceeds by 20 percent the average price of fuel in the Atlanta metropolitan area in the preceding year, as published by the American Automobile Association, the police chief or designee shall be authorized to institute temporary fuel surcharges as set forth in this article. 
(c)  Within ten days of the assessment of fuel prices, if the price exceeds the standards of subsection (b) of this section, the police chief or designee shall notify all taxicab companies, taxicab drivers, taxicab trade associations, and all other affected persons or entities operating in the taxicab industry within the city of temporary fuel surcharges that may be imposed on customers. 
(d)  If the police chief or designee authorizes the assessment of temporary fuel surcharges, all taxicab companies and drivers shall charge, in addition to the schedule of fares provided in the city fee schedule, the following fuel surcharges: 
(1)  A $2.00 fuel surcharge per metered taxicab trip; 
(2)  For each additional passenger in excess of one riding in the vehicle on the same trip, an additional $2.00 fuel surcharge per extra person. Children under five years of age shall not be charged the extra $2.00 per person fee, and only one child over the age of five in the company of an adult may be charged the extra $2.00 per person fee. 
(e)  No other temporary fuel charges may be assessed against customers and the temporary fuel surcharges applied only remains in effect until the time of the next periodic fuel price assessment by the police chief or designee. 
(f)  All taxicab drivers must and shall conspicuously display a printed passenger notice on the taxicab dashboard describing the temporary fuel surcharge. 
(g)  The printed notice shall advise passengers that a temporary fuel surcharge will be added to the metered fare or to the flat rate fare due to increases in gasoline prices in the city and shall advise passengers of the amount of the fee as described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 08-21, pt. I, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-397), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-443—10-467. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-468. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means any one or more of the following: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, printed material, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to the terms "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this definition, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It may be presumed that a business has a significant portion of its stock in trade in adult material if any one of the following criteria is satisfied: 
(1)  20 percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; 
(2)  20 percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; 
(3)  20 percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; 
(4)  20 percent or more of the retail floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); 
(5)  20 percent or more of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or 
(6)  20 percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. 
Adult business means an establishment, other than those expressly specified in this section, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building, or enclosed or semi-enclosed room or booth within an enclosed building, with a capacity of less than 50 persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, digital video devices (DVDs), movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to the terms "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this definition, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It shall be presumed that a business shall have a significant portion of its stock in trade in adult material if any one of the following criteria is satisfied: 
(1)  20 percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; 
(2)  20 percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; 
(3)  20 percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; 
(4)  20 percent or more of the floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); 
(5)  20 percent or more of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or 
(6)  20 percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. 
Erotic entertainment/dance establishment means a nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by dancers, entertainers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 00-20, pt. 1, §§ I, II, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 42-02, pt. I, 12-19-2002; Ord. No. 21-03, pt. I, 8-26-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-401), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-469. - Certain activities prohibited. 
(a)  No person or licensee shall admit or permit the admission of any individual under the age of 18 or allow such individual to remain within a licensed premises. 
(1)  A licensee is defined herein as any person, association, partnership, corporation or other business entity which has obtained a valid city license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  A licensed premises is defined herein as any adult entertainment establishment which has obtained a valid city license. 
(b)  No person or licensee shall sell, exchange, barter, trade, give or offer to sell, exchange, barter, trade or give, to any individual under the age of 18 any entertainment, service, material device or thing offered, for sale or otherwise, at an adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or semi-nude where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between patron and employee. 
(d)  No licensee shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this rule. 
(e)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into her vagina or his anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(f)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation. 
(g)  No licensee shall suffer or permit a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(h)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in, or simulate bestiality. 
(i)  No person other than a dancer or entertainer while on any licensed premises, shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view with less than a complete and opaque covering of his genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, and if a female, her breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(j)  No employee or person while on a licensed premises shall or be permitted to dance or perform nude or semi-nude in such a manner as to simulate specified sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or other person not employed therein. 
(k)  No person, while on a licensed premises, shall, while nude, or semi-nude, be permitted to sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap or body of any patron, spectator, employee or other person therein, or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by said patron, spectator or other person. 
(l)  No licensee shall suffer or permit the use of any areas on the premises of such establishment for sexual contact or private dancing performance or entertainment. 
(m)  No dancer or entertainer while on a licensed premises shall dance on a platform intended for that purpose which is not raised at least 18 inches from the floor. Furthermore, no dancing shall occur closer than four feet from any patron. 
(n)  No licensee shall suffer or permit any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces or promotes conduct or activities prohibited by this article. 
(o)  No erotic entertainment/dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances upon the premises of the licensee. 
(p)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-402), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-470. - Distance requirements. 
Adult entertainment establishments, businesses, or uses shall be located within the following distances as defined and measured as stated herein: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet to another adult entertainment establishment and shall comply with any distance requirements imposed by this Code. The measurement of distances for the purpose of this subsection shall be from structure to structure along the shortest possible course, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e., "as the crow flies." 
(2)  An adult entertainment establishment shall not be located on property which is within 1,000 feet of an R or RM use or district. The measurement of distances for purposes of this subsection shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e., "as the crow flies." 
(3)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet of any governmental facility, church, residence, park, library, school ground, or college campus and no closer than 500 feet from a church. The measurement of distances for purposes of this subsection shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e., "as the crow flies." 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 00-20, pt. 1, § III, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 32-02, pt. I, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-403), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-471. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity, to engage in, operate, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises, an adult entertainment establishment without first having complied with the provisions of this article, or without a currently valid city license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued hereunder shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under state or federal law or under any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city. The license shall be conspicuously displayed at all times within the premises. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-404), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-472. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Employees of adult entertainment establishments shall be not less than 18 years of age. 
(b)  No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers, waiters, bouncers, bartenders, disc jockeys, and musicians, who has been convicted in this or any other city, county or state or in any federal court within five years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, or any other felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. The term "be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises and elsewhere than on the licensed premise, for compensation or otherwise. Notwithstanding, this provision shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair or maintenance services for licensee. 
(c)  A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall be required for all employees thereof. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors, such as entertainers, employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment, shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. Each independent contractor shall be required to have and maintain his separate business license. Notwithstanding, this provision shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair or maintenance services for licensee. 
(d)  No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee for and obtained a work permit from the county police department. 
(e)  An application for a permit shall include the applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases or any other name by which the applicant has ever been known, address, business name and address, date of birth with written proof thereof, and prior arrest record of the applicant. The county police department shall make a complete search relative to any police record of the applicant. If there is no record of a violation, or of any other section of this article, the county police department shall issue a permit to the applicant. A permit will be issued or denied within ten business days after submission of a properly completed application. If the permit is not issued or denied within the specified time frame, then the permit shall be deemed approved. 
(f)  Any applicant denied a permit may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police may be appealed within ten days after notification of denial. The applicant must submit in writing a notice of appeal to the city council by filing with the city clerk. Said notice shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or request, the date of the adverse decision and receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the city council, and the name and address of the applicant. Said appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five no more than 30 days after receipt of said notice of appeal. The decision of the city council will be final unless the applicant files a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court within 15 days of the date of board's decision. 
(g)  Any permit for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked or suspended. The police department may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for employment. 
(h)  Employees holding permits issued pursuant to this article shall at all times during their working hours have said permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 00-20, pt. 1, §§ IV—VI, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 11-02, pt. I, § 4, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-405), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-473. - Licensing and licenses. 
(a)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. 
(b)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provisions of the ordinances of the city." 
(c)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to any person who is less than 21 years of age. 
(e)  Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by the city at the finance department. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and shareholders; if other business entity, then the names of all persons holding any ownership or managerial interests therein. 
(f)  All applications shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the city and pay an administrative investigation fee to be determined by the finance department. Failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request means an automatic denial of the license. 
(g)  For the purpose of this article, the term "applicant" shall include a person and, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, directors, principals, and shareholders of said partnership or corporation. 
(h)  Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(i)  All applicants for licenses shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. The applicant's structure or premises shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code. An applicant shall obtain and file with the license application a certificate of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant seeks to operate the business contains the required zoning and land use for the legally intended use of the business and its premises. The director of planning shall within 30 days after receipt of a complete application, either issue or deny the certification of zoning compliance. If the certificate is not issued or denied within 30 days after the application is submitted, then the certificate shall be deemed issued on the 31st day. 
(j)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(4)  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 00-20, pt. 1, § VII, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 21-03, pt. I, 8-26-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-406), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-474. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses hereunder shall give notice that application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the business license division in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published. 
(b)  The first advertisement shall not appear more than 30 days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten point capital and lower case and shall be at least one-inch column. The advertisement need not appear on the same day as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(c)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and the date, time and place of hearing, and a statement that any objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the supervisor on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(d)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign stating the following: 
"City adult entertainment license applied for. Any objection to this application must be made at or prior to _____ o'clock ___.m., on the _____/_____/_____ day of _____ 20___ at _____ (address) which is the date and time of hearing. If prior to the hearing, objections must be in writing." 
The sign shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks, or other public property which adjoin or adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the notice of intent to engage in business through the date of the granting or denial of a license. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-407), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-475. - License fees and penalty for late payment. 
(a)  The annual license fee shall be set by the city council from time to time by resolution. Licenses shall be issued for a calendar or any partial year and shall expire on December 31 of each year. No license shall be issued or renewed until and unless all fees and penalties due the city are first paid. 
(b)  In addition to and not in the alternative to any other penalty which may be provided herein, any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to the city of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax or other charge, for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full, including penalties. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-408), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-476. - License application investigation. 
(a)  Within five days after receipt of a complete application that includes all of the information required in section 10-473, the finance department shall transmit a copy to the police department, development department, fire department, and health department for review and comment. Each reviewing department shall review and make any appropriate written comments to the finance department within 20 days of the reviewing department receiving the license application. The city shall then have a reasonable time, not to exceed 20 days after the finance department has received all final documents from the reviewing departments, within which to investigate a license application. The investigation shall be conducted to ensure that an applicant meets the terms and requirements of this article. The director of finance shall within 45 days after receipt of a complete application, issue or deny the license. If the director of finance or his designee does not issue or deny the license within 45 days after the completed application is submitted, then the license shall be deemed approved on the 46th day. Upon completion of the investigation, a license shall be granted if: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located within or outside this state within five years of the date of the application; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws and ordinances, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(7)  Neither the applicant nor any of his employees, agents, partners, directors, officers, stockholders, or managers have, within five years of the date of the application, committed or performed or knowingly allowed to be committed or performed any of the specified sexual activities, defined in section 10-468, in or upon the premises where the adult entertainment establishment is to be located or knowingly allowed such premises to be used as a place wherein solicitations are made for any of the specified sexual activities; 
(8)  On the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(9)  The proposed premises meets the distance requirements set forth in section 10-470; 
(10)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of city, county or state or federal law; 
(11)  No individual having an interest either as an owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, is in violation of section 10-477; 
(12)  The applicant is not overdue on payment to the city on taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against, or imposed on the applicant; and 
(13)  The applicant is not residing with or married to a person: 
a.  Who has been denied an adult entertainment license within 12 months immediately preceding the date of the application; 
b.  Whose adult entertainment license has been revoked within 12 months immediately preceding the date of the application; or 
c.  Whose adult entertainment establishment license is under suspension at the time of the application. 
(b)  No further action shall be taken by the city or by any applicant with respect to any application until completion by the city of its investigation. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 00-20, pt. 1, §§ VIII—XI, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 21-03, pt. I, 8-26-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-409), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-477. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application for any felony or misdemeanor or any state of the United States or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations, or for whom an outstanding warrant exists on which no service has been perfected. Where the violation is for misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a county or municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the city council after hearing, may, after investigation, waive same as a disqualification. Such a hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided in section 10-485(c). 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 00-20, pt. 1, § XII, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-410), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-478. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval of application. 
(a)  All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application; and if not so obtained, the permit granted shall be void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the business license department the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-411), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-479. - Causes for mandatory denial of license. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to an applicant if, within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application, one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
(1)  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of the ordinance applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
(2)  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
(3)  When any application for a license to transact any business within the control of the police powers is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause by the city council. 
(b)  The 12-month waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of lack of qualifications of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-412), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-480. - License; refusal, appeal, procedure. 
(a)  If, following investigation of the application, the director of finance determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, the director shall, within the time frame specified in section 10-476(a), notify the applicant that the application is denied. The applicant may appeal such denial in the manner provided in this section. 
(b)  Should an applicant desire to appeal a decision under this section, the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)  A notice of appeal must be filed with the director of finance within 15 calendar days after receipt of the decision complained of. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter, and shall clearly identify all of the objections or exceptions taken to the decision of the director of finance. The notice of appeal shall also contain an address for receipt of future notices and decisions of the zoning board of appeals. Should the aggrieved person or entity fail to file a notice of appeal within the time allowed, the right to appeal is lost. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, the director shall notify the appellant, in writing, of the date, time, and place where a hearing will be held. The hearing shall be held before the zoning board of appeals within 45 calendar days of the date the notice of appeal is filed with the director, but no sooner than ten calendar days after appellant receives notice of the hearing. The director shall transmit to the zoning board of appeals all documents or materials constituting the record of the action or proceedings below. 
(3)  If the director deems it necessary that an audit of the financial books/records of appellant be conducted, the city shall notify appellant in writing of a reasonable date, time and place for the audit, which shall be conducted prior to the date of a hearing on the matter. The director may hire outside auditors for this purpose. The expense of hiring outside auditors shall be borne by the city if the position of the appellant is sustained by the audit. If not, the expense of the outside auditors shall be due and payable from appellant as part of the costs of appeal. 
(4)  An appeal under this section shall not preclude the city from pursuing legal proceedings to enjoin any violation of this article or of any other article of this Code. 
(5)  Zoning board of appeals. In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
a.  The proceeding before the zoning board of appeals shall be recorded, and all documents and other materials considered by the zoning board of appeals shall be preserved as the record of the proceedings. The record of the proceedings shall be preserved for not less than 150 calendar days after the hearing. 
b.  Any alleged violations or misconduct levied against the appellant and scheduled for a hearing before the zoning board of appeals shall be read completely to appellant at the commencement of the hearing, unless waived by appellant. 
c.  The zoning board of appeals may receive evidence in support of the alleged violations or misconduct as filed against appellant. Decisions of the zoning board of appeals are to be supported by the evidence accepted and admitted during the hearing. 
d.  The city shall bear the burden of proof. The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. 
e.  The order of proof shall be as follows: The city representative shall present the case-in-chief in support of the alleged violations or misconduct; the appellant may present a case-in-chief, if desired. Each party may be allowed to present one case-in-rebuttal. 
f.  The appellant and city may be represented by counsel, may present evidence, and may examine and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, members of the zoning board of appeals are permitted to question witnesses. A party is permitted no more than 15 minutes to present that party's case-in-chief; a case-in-rebuttal is permitted no more than ten minutes of presentation. Presentation of arguments and evidence may be in oral or written form, except that affidavits of individuals who are unavailable for cross-examination shall not be accepted or admitted by the zoning board of appeals nor considered by the board. 
g.  Following the presentation of evidence, the board shall issue a written decision within 30 calendar days of the date of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed, via registered or certified mail, to the parties or the parties' representatives. For the appellant, the decision shall be mailed to the address provided on the notice of appeal. Should the zoning board of appeals fail to issue a timely decision, on the 31st day after the date of the hearing appellant may seek review as if a decision adverse to appellant had been rendered. 
h.  The findings of the zoning board of appeals shall be final unless either party files an appeal to the city council. 
(c)  The decision of the zoning board of appeals may be immediately reviewed as a matter of right upon the filing by the applicant of a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court. The decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be final if the applicant does not file a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 00-20, pt. 1, § XIII, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 21-03, pt. I, 8-26-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-413), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-481. - License not transferable; restrictions on additional partners or shareholders; location and name change. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be sold, given, transferred or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons or entities. Any such sale, gift, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the licensee, shall immediately notify the finance department. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a closely held corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(b)  No licensee shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. The licensee upon change of the name of the establishment must notify the city finance department 30 days prior to the change. An application for a license due to a change of location is subject to all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-414), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-482. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions (felony). 
No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application for any felony. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-415), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-483. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
Where a building where the adult entertainment establishment is to operate is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building or renovation show clearly compliance with all other provisions of this article. No business shall be conducted therein until the premises have been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article and other city ordinances and state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-416), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-484. - Annual renewal required. 
(a)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be issued for a calendar year or any partial year and shall expire on December 31 of each year. All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the city. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall meet and qualify under all requirements of this article for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-417), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-485. - Suspension, revocation and probation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be suspended, revoked, or placed on probation except for due cause, as herein defined. If the director of finance determines that the due cause exists, the director shall notify the licensee in writing that the license issued hereunder is suspended, revoked, or placed on probation. 
(b)  "Due cause" for suspension, revocation, or probation or such license shall consist of the violating of any local, state, or federal laws, regulations, statutes or ordinances regulating such business or for any reason which would authorize the refusal to issue or renew such license. 
(c)  The applicant may appeal any action taken under this section in the manner provided in section 10-480(b) through (e). 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 21-03, pt. I, 8-26-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-418), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-486. - Falsifying information in applications. 
Any material omission, untrue, or misleading information contained in or left out of an original or renewal application for any license or permit issued pursuant to this article shall be unlawful, shall be cause for denial thereof, and shall be punishable as a violation of a city ordinance and applicable state statutes. If any such license or permit has previously been granted under the above circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of same. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-419), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-487. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit city representatives from the police department, finance department, health department, fire department, and planning or development department to enter the premises of any adult entertainment establishment or proposed adult entertainment establishment at any time between 30 minutes prior to opening for business and 30 minutes after closing to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this article or who refuses to permit inspection of the premises by representatives of the police department, finance department, health department, fire department, or planning or development department, shall be assessed a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also constitute "due cause," as defined in section 10-485, for the suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this article may be abated by the city as a public nuisance. 
(d)  The violation of any provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any courts of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of this city. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 21-03, pt. I, 8-26-2003; Ord. No. 13-16, pt. I, 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-420), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-488. - Zones where establishments permitted. 
No license for an adult entertainment establishment may be issued for any premises or location, unless the location has been zoned C2 or M, under the zoning laws of the city and meets all the requirements of the city zoning regulations for adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-421), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-489. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
(a)  Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted on any premises which does not comply with all zoning, building code, fire and other city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-422), 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 10-490—10-516. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MULTIFAMILY RENTAL DWELLINGS 

Sec. 10-517. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified building inspector means a person who has been authorized to perform inspections pursuant to the process established by this article, provided that such person maintains the qualifications for certification as established by this article. 
Code compliance certificate means a certificate, in a form authorized by the chief executive officer or his designee, executed by a certified building inspector showing compliance with those minimum requirements described in the inspection report attached thereto. 
Inspection report means the report attached to the code compliance certificate describing minimum requirements for inspection of each unit. 
Lease means any written or oral agreement that sets forth all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
Multifamily rental dwelling means any multifamily structure, multifamily building, or other facility that is leased to a residential tenant for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. The term "multifamily rental dwelling" includes, but is not limited to, multifamily dwellings, multifamily apartments, duplexes, boardinghouses, roominghouses, group homes, and flats. 
Multifamily rental unit means any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is leased or available for lease to an occupant. 
Occupant means any person who is a tenant, lessee, or a person residing within a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a premises. 
Premises means any lot or parcel of real property on which exists one or more multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, pt. I, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-500), 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 10-518. - Certification process, requirements, forms and appeals. 
(a)  Process. The city manager or his designee shall create the process for certifying building inspectors, shall establish the requirements and application for becoming a certified building inspector, and shall administer the process. When applicable, a nonrefundable administrative fee set by the city council shall be required to be submitted with all applications to be a certified building inspector. Persons who have successfully completed the certification process issued by the city manager or his designee shall be designated as certified building inspectors authorized to perform the inspections required by this article. 
(b)  Code compliance certificates and inspection reports. The city manager or his designee is authorized to create the forms for code compliance certificates and inspection reports. At a minimum, inspection reports submitted to the city must contain the certified building inspector's signature and date of certification. A certified building inspector shall personally perform the inspections required by this article. The certified building inspector signing the inspection report and performing the inspection shall not be an employee of, otherwise related to, or affiliated in any way with any owner or occupant of the multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental dwelling unit being inspected. Failure to have a certified building inspector personally perform an inspection shall nullify any such code compliance certificate. 
(c)  Certified building inspectors. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. At a minimum, a certified building inspector shall be a licensed architect or engineer or shall hold one of the following certifications from the International Code Council: commercial building inspector, residential building inspector, or building plan examiner. 
(2)  Denial of certification. Upon receipt of a complete application to be a certified building inspector, the city manager or his designee shall have 45 days to grant or deny the application. If denied, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for the denial at the address set forth on the application. 
(3)  Revocation of certification. Upon a certified building inspector's conviction of a violation of section 10-520(c), or if a certified building inspector no longer meets the minimum requirements set forth in this article, the city manager or his designee shall revoke the authority of that individual to act as a certified building inspector. The city manager or his designee shall notify the individual in writing of the reasons for the revocation at the address set forth on the application to be a certified building inspector. 
(4)  Appeals. Any applicant or certified building inspector who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
a.  A writing identifying the grounds for appeal must be filed with the executive assistant within 30 days after the date of the decision for which review is sought. 
b.  The executive assistant shall review the appeal and respond in writing within 30 days by either affirming or reversing the decision for which review is sought. 
c.  A decision of the executive assistant under this article may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the county superior court filed within 30 days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, pt. I, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-501), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. O2018-06-25, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 10-519. - Inspection, certificate and fee required. 
(a)  Code compliance certificate. A code compliance certificate shall contain the certification of a certified building inspector that all multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units subject to this article have been inspected within the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of certification and are in compliance with applicable provisions of this Code and the requirements set forth in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. 
(1)  Commencing on January 1, 2019, all owners of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units within the city that receive income from four or more such units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 for having a location or office within the city shall file, simultaneously with their business occupation tax return, code compliance certificates covering 100 percent of the owner's multifamily rental units located within the city. 
(2)  After submission of the initial code compliance certificates, owners shall submit code compliance certificates annually with their business occupational tax return. Each subsequent code compliance certificate shall show an internal and external inspection of at least 20 percent of the units on a premises and all units on a premises shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five years. All units inspected shall be listed individually on the code compliance certificate submitted by the certified building inspector. 
(b)  Fee. A nonrefundable administrative fee set by the city council shall be required to be submitted with all code compliance certificates. 
(c)  Inspections and repairs. Upon initial inspection of multifamily rental dwellings and multifamily rental units subject to this article, should a certified building inspector determine that further work is necessary to comply with the minimum standards set forth in this Code, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the building official, outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If the plan is accepted by the building official as reasonable and justified, an extension of the time for compliance with this article may be granted for up to one year so that necessary repairs may be completed. No extension shall be granted if life or safety issues are involved, and none of the units where life or safety issues are involved shall be leased until brought into compliance with the minimum standards set forth in this Code. For the years subsequent to the initial year, the one-year extension for repairs is not available. 
(d)  Written record of inspection. Each owner and certified building inspector shall, for a period of five years from the date of inspection, keep a written record of inspection for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit, including the date of the inspection, items inspected, and all violations, if any, observed. These records shall be presented to the building official within ten business days after a request is made in writing to the owner or inspector. Failure to provide these records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for such dwellings or units. 
(e)  Exemptions. Provided all other required permits, certificates or permissions are obtained from the city, this section shall not apply to multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units for a period of five years following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling or unit. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, pt. I, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-502), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. O2018-06-25, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 10-520. - Violations. 
(a)  No business occupation tax certificate shall be issued to any owner until the owner provides the city with a code compliance certificate in the form and manner required by this article. 
(b)  Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this article, upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fine or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-7. 
(c)  An owner who knowingly furnishes or participates in furnishing a code compliance certificate to the city falsely certifying that all multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units inspected are in compliance with the requirements set forth in the code compliance certificate shall be guilty of a violation of this article for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the certification is shown to be false. 
(d)  A certified building inspector who knowingly furnishes or participates in furnishing an inspection report containing false information that a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit meets the minimum housing standards of the city as shown by the inspection report shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, pt. I, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2016-08-26, exh. (15-500), 9-12-2016; Ord. No. O2018-06-25, 6-27-2018) 
Secs. 10-521—10-548. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - HOTELS, MOTELS AND EXTENDED STAY HOTELS 

Sec. 10-549. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the continued availability of quality transient lodging within the city, proper maintenance of hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels and to protect the health, safety and welfare of hotel, motel, and extended-stay hotel inhabitants. 
(b)  Unless otherwise stated in this article, the requirements of this article apply to those who occupy, visit, patronize, frequent, operate, keep, conduct, or own a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel within the city, regardless of the date of the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel's construction. 
(c)  This article is essential to the public's interest, safety, health, and welfare, and this article shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-600, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-550. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bona fide employee means a person who works in the service of the hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel (i.e., the employer) under a contract of hire, whether express or implied, where the employer has the power or right to control or direct the details of what work is to be performed and the manner in which that work is to be performed. 
Electronic records means the identifying information for all patrons and their guests contained in the electronic guest registration system as listed in section 10-551, which is recorded at the time of registration and maintained for a period of no less than 180 days after the rental agreement's termination. 
Extended-stay hotel means any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more than five dwelling units with provisions for living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary residence is offered for pay: 
(1)  To persons for non-transient extended stays or stays longer than 30 days, regardless of the presence of rentals or leases for shorter periods of time; or 
(2)  For stays longer than 15 days in rooms equipped with kitchen facilities. 
Guest means a person who is not a patron who is present on the premises of a hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel with the express permission of: 
(1)  A guest or patron of the hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel; and 
(2)  The owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel. 
Hotel or motel means any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more than five dwelling units with provisions for transient living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary lodging of 30 days or less is offered for pay to guests, is not intended for long-term occupancy, and does not otherwise meet the definition of an extended-stay hotel as defined in this section. 
Housekeeping means the cleaning of guest rooms, guest bathrooms, public areas, changing of linen and removal of trash from guest rooms and common areas. 
Kitchen facilities means kitchen amenities, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, ovens, and kitchen-type sink. Amenities limited to a microwave, mini-refrigerator, or an appliance designed to produce coffee or tea do not constitute kitchen facilities for purposes of this definition. 
Loitering means when a person is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
Manual records means the identifying information for all patrons and their guests contained in the form of a paper record or reservation book as listed in section 10-551, which is recorded at the time of registration and maintained for a period of no less than 180 days after the rental agreement's termination. 
Patron means a person who pays a fee to the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel. 
Public nuisance means a condition, obstruction or use of property allowed or continued by any person, legal entity or agent, that interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the neighborhood, community, or members of the public; or which can cause hurt, damage, inconvenience or affect or offend an ordinary, reasonable person. 
Vehicle is any car, truck, trailer, motorcycle, or other machinery used for transporting people or goods and is normally required to be registered with a state in order to be legally operated or towed on a public roadway. 
Visitor means a person, who is not a patron or guest, who is on the premises of a hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel at the invitation of a patron or guest, but without the express permission of the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-601, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-551. - Provisions applicable to hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels. 
(a)  For any hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel permitted for construction after July 23, 2018 any public-facing entry points to the premises must require a magnetic or electronic keycard/locking device for access. Public-facing entry points shall be locked between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and shall be equipped with an alarm or other device that will alert hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel security or other employees that the door has been opened. These requirements are not applicable to entry points that enter directly into the lobby of the hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel as long as the lobby is manned by a bona fide employee 24 hour a day. These requirements are also not applicable to entry points that enter directly into a banquet hall, conference room, or other facility utilized for a special event or meeting hosted by a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel as long as there is a bona fide employee staffing the banquet hall, conference room, or other facility utilized for the duration of that event. 
(b)  Notwithstanding sections 10-552 and 10-553, an owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel may designate no more than three rooms for the purpose of allowing any number of bona-fide employees and their family to reside on the premises. Rooms designated for employee residences must be clearly marked as distinct from rooms held out for rent and, where practical, must be located adjacent to other rooms designated for employee residences. Rooms designated for employee residences may not be held out for rent to the public. 
(c)  No owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall provide lodging at an hourly rate. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-602, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-552. - Provisions applicable to hotels and motels. 
No hotel or motel located within the city shall allow any person to occupy such hotel or motel for more than 30 consecutive days, nor more than 60 days during a 180-day period. No guest residing for more than 30 consecutive days shall begin a new rental agreement with the hotel or motel without a two-day vacancy between stays. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-603, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-553. - Provisions applicable to extended-stay hotels. 
(a)  No extended-stay hotel located within the city shall allow any person to occupy such extended-stay hotel for more than 180 consecutive days unless otherwise permitted in this section. No guest residing for more than 180 consecutive days shall begin a new rental agreement with the extended stay hotel without at least a two-day vacancy between stays. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a stay in excess of 180 consecutive days may occur in the following situations: 
(1)  Where there is a written contract or documented agreement between an extended-stay hotel and a business, corporation, firm or governmental agency to house employees or individuals on valid work orders; 
(2)  Where there is documentation, consistent with HIPPA privacy rules, that a hotel guest is considered family or is providing care for a patient who is admitted at local hospital; or 
(3)  When an insurance company or federal, state or local agency has provided documentation that a hotel guest has been displaced from their home by a natural disaster or fire. 
(c)  Extended-stay hotels are required to comply with all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(d)  All extended-stay hotels constructed after July 23, 2018, must provide a minimum of 1,000 square feet for recreational use by guests. In computing the 1,000 square feet requirement, swimming pools, fitness or recreation centers and other recreational facilities may be used in determining the square footage required by this subsection. An extended-stay hotel is considered constructed only once a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-604, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-554. - Responsibilities, access, and registration requirements. 
(a)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall, without delay, report violations of law to the county police department that were either witnessed or made known to them by an employee, patron, guest, visitor or other person on the premises. 
(b)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall, at all times, maintain a manager on duty capable of assisting, communicating, and cooperating with the police or other law enforcement officials in maintaining the public health, welfare, and safety. 
(c)  All information required to be procured and kept pursuant to this article shall be kept strictly confidential in accordance with state and federal law and shall not be provided to any person except to a federal or state law enforcement officer or to any officer empowered to enforce this article. 
(d)  All information required to be procured and kept pursuant to this article shall be provided to any federal or state law enforcement officers, or local sworn enforcement officer empowered to enforce this article, upon demand of the officer and a representation by said officer that a reasonable suspicion exists that such information is relevant to a then-pending inquiry or investigation. Nothing in this requirement shall be construed as giving any such officer any greater right or license to enter a room or invade privacy than the officer shall otherwise possess as a matter of law, probable cause, constitutional law, statutory right, or warrant. 
(e)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall keep a record of all rental agreements between the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel and all patrons and their guests and make these records available to the city within a reasonable time upon request. For the purposes of this section, the term "record" means the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel's electronic guest registration system which stores guest identifying information. In the event the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel does not have an electronic guest registration system, the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall record the guest, patron and their guest's information in a paper record or reservation book. The following information, at a minimum, must be recorded at the time of registration and maintained for a period of no less than 180 days after the rental agreement's termination: 
(1)  The full name, phone number, and home address of each patron and overnight guest. If the patron is a tourism company or other business, only the patron shall be required to provide this information; 
(2)  The total number of occupants (patrons and guests) registered in each room; 
(3)  The room number assigned to each patron and guest; 
(4)  The day, month, year and time of arrival of each patron and guest; 
(5)  The day, month, and year each patron and each guest is scheduled to depart; 
(6)  Upon departure, record of departure day, month, and year for each patron and guest; 
(7)  The rate charged, and amount collected for rental of the room; 
(8)  The method of payment for each room; and 
(9)  Documentation used to verify a stay in excess of 180 consecutive days as stated in section 10-553. 
(f)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall require each patron to provide proper identification prior to renting a room when registering in person. Proper identification is defined as a current and valid government-issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. A record of the provided identification shall be kept on file for the duration of the occupancy and for 180 days thereafter. 
(g)  Annually, the city shall provide every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel with a list of crimes and ordinance violations that occurred on the property in the previous year. 
(h)  No person shall procure or provide lodging in any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel, or any services therefrom, through misrepresentation or production of false identification, or identification which misrepresents the identity of the person procuring or sharing in such lodging or service. 
(i)  Change of location or name. 
(1)  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on a hotel, motel, or extended-stay motel/hotel under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the occupation tax certificate. 
(2)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where a hotel, motel, or extended-stay motel/hotel is located shall require inspection and shall comply with all applicable codes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-605, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-555. - Vehicles, parking, and registration. 
(a)  All handicap parking must be in compliance with state and local laws. 
(b)  All vehicles parked on any hotel's premises must be in good working order. 
(c)  Vehicle maintenance in hotel parking lots is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-606, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-556. - Room requirements, equipment and services. 
(a)  Every operator, owner, keeper, or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall keep and maintain in each and every rental unit, a telephone equipped to place a direct call to 911. 
(b)  No operator, owner, keeper, or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall rent or provide a room for any number of persons greater than the sleeping accommodations provided within the particular rental unit or temporary sleeping accommodations provided by the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
(c)  No operator, owner, keeper, or proprietor, patron, visitor or guest of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall be allowed to congregate within any room or single rental unit a number of persons which is greater than two times the number of persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided within the single room or rental unit except when temporarily designated as a hospitality suite by the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
(d)  Daily housekeeping shall be included within the standard room rate of any hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel. At a minimum, rooms must be cleaned before each new guest checks in and no less frequently than once every seven days. Each hotel, motel, and extended-stay hotel must maintain a log that documents when each room is cleaned. The log must be maintained for 120 days for extended-stay hotels and must be maintained for 30 days for hotels and motels. Any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel must make these records available to the city within a reasonable time upon request. 
(e)  The utilization of clothes-lines or other clothes-drying equipment or facilities outside of a room that are located on or are visible from the outside of a room are prohibited. Balconies and railings are not to be used for hanging towels, personal items or any other articles of clothing. 
(f)  No occupational tax certificate shall be issued for the purpose of conducting business from a guest room of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel, and no home occupation shall be conducted from such room. 
(g)  Each existing and newly constructed guest room of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall, at a minimum, be brought into compliance, within three years of the date of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, with sprinkler requirements for new construction set forth in NFPA 101, 2012 edition. The fire marshal is authorized to provide notice to the building owner or agent of any hotel or dormitory that is not in compliance with NFPA 101, 2012 edition. Within 60 days of receiving such notice of noncompliance, the building owner or agent of such owner shall file an intent to comply with this requirement with the fire marshal. Unless otherwise noted, it is intended that the provisions of this section be applied to new as well as existing facilities, equipment, structures, or installations that are approved for construction or installation prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Existing facilities, equipment, structures, or installations will have three years from July 23, 2018 comply with the provisions of this section. The following extensions and exemptions to this requirement may apply: 
(1)  Hotels, motels, or extended-stay hotels in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, may receive a two year extension for the installation of the approved supervised sprinkler system by signing an affidavit, made available to the fire marshal upon request, complying with the implementation of the following within 60 days of approval of this article. 
a.  No smoking allowed except in designated areas; and 
b.  No kitchen facilities are installed or operated within any dwelling unit. Microwaves are allowed. 
(2)  Automatic sprinkler protection shall not be required in buildings where all guest sleeping rooms or guest suites have a door opening directly to either of the following: 
a.  Outside at the street or the finished ground level; 
b.  Exterior exit access arranged in accordance with NFPA 101:7.5.3 in buildings three or fewer stories in height (see subsection (3) of this section). 
(3)  NFPA 101:7.5.3 Exterior Ways of Exit Access. 
a.  7.5.3.1 Exit access shall be permitted to be by means of any exterior balcony, porch, gallery, or roof that conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  7.5.3.2 The long side of the balcony, porch, gallery, or similar space shall be at least 50 percent open and shall be arranged to restrict the accumulation of smoke. 
c.  7.5.3.3 Exterior exit access balconies shall be separated from the interior of the building by walls and opening protectives as required for corridors, unless the exterior exit access balcony is served by at least two remote stairs that can be accessed without any occupant traveling past an unprotected opening to reach one of the stairs, or unless dead-ends on the exterior exit access do not exceed 20 feet (6100 mm). 
(h)  Each new and existing guest room of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall be equipped with a hard-wired smoke detector or smoke alarms whose device housing is tamper-resistant and is powered by a non-replaceable, non-removable energy source capable of powering the alarm for a minimum of ten years from the manufacturer's date on the device. All smoke detectors or alarms must be installed and approved by the fire marshal within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(i)  All new hotels, motels and extended stay hotels must have in place laundry facilities consisting of washer and dryer machines which shall be made available to patrons for a fee. This equipment shall be maintained and in good repair at all times. Laundry supplies (detergent, softener, etc.) may also be made available to patrons for a fee. Washers and dryers should be provided at a ratio of one washer and dryer for every 150 rooms. For existing hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels, Laundry equipment must be installed and in working conditions within 120 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-607, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-557. - Common area requirements and parking illumination. 
(a)  The open parking area and all areas surrounding any building or proposed building being a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of at least one footcandle with a minimum allowable intensity of three-tenths of a footcandle. The covered parking area of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of five-tenths of a footcandle. 
(b)  Any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel must provide and maintain security in its parking area. This may include the following: live patrol guard, security fencing that is decorative and consistent with the zoning code, or other security measure approved in writing by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-608, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-558. - Smoking. 
(a)  Smoking is prohibited in all hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel spaces with the exception of designated smoking rooms. Designated smoking rooms rented by guests shall not comprise more than 20 percent of the total number of rooms available for rent. 
(b)  Smoking is prohibited in all areas except in designated smoking areas. Smoking is expressly prohibited in exterior breezeways, stairwells, or within 25 feet of any guest room. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-609, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-559. - Video surveillance systems. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "video surveillance system" (VSS) means a continuous digital surveillance system including cameras, cabling, monitors, and digital video recorders (DVR). 
(b)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any new or existing hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel is required to install a VSS within one year of July 23, 2018. All hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels, which have installed a VSS prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall ensure said systems are in full compliance with this section and request an approval assessment from the chief of police within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  All VSS shall be maintained in proper working order at all times, be kept in continuous operation 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and meet the minimum technological standards established in this section. The hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall retain the continuous digital images recorded by this system for no less than 21 days. 
(d)  All VSS shall have no less than one camera dedicated to each register or check-out stand, entrance/exit, interior hallway and lobby, swimming pool area, exercise facility, loading dock, and parking lots or areas designated for customer or employee parking use. The placement of cameras included in VSS required under this section must be approved by the county police department. The chief of police will conduct an assessment of each site required to install a VSS prior to installation of said system, and upon approval will issue an approval notice which will be placed in plain view inside the common area of the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. This approval notice will also inform customers and employees of the presence of the VSS. Existing VSS at any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived will be evaluated to ensure full compliance with this section. 
(e)  The VSS shall be subject to regular inspection by the county police department, who is authorized to inspect any such system, at reasonable times to determine whether it conforms to this section. If the VSS does not conform, the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel, in question, shall take immediate steps to bring the system back into compliance. 
(f)  The county police department will develop and maintain VSS standards that provide the minimum standards for VSS equipment, installation, and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-610, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-560. - Loitering. 
(a)  All hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel operators will advise patrons and guests verbally, upon registration, and through posted signage that loitering is prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall loiter in or upon any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel parking lot, public parking structure or in or around any building to include breeze ways, stairwells or hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel rooms either on foot or in or upon any conveyance being driven or parked thereon, without the permission of the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor or the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-611, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-561. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable. Any person or entity violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this article may be abated as a nuisance. 
(c)  The violation of all provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies of law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(d)  If a person is convicted of a violation of this article, the court shall impose a fine in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  First conviction in a calendar year: a minimum of $250.00; 
(2)  Second conviction in a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction: a minimum of $500.00; 
(3)  Third conviction in a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction: a minimum of $750.00; and 
(4)  Fourth conviction in a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction: a minimum of $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-612, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-562. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
(a)  City employees, including employees or agents of the county police department, county fire department, city code enforcement division, and board of health shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this section. Sworn officers of the county police department, county fire department, city code enforcement division, board of health, and designated civilian employees shall have the authority to inspect establishments governed under this section during the hours in which the premises are open for business. 
(b)  These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this section and state law. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-613, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-563. - Right of entry. 
(a)  When there is probable cause to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists a condition in violation of this Code, personnel identified in section 10-562 are authorized to enter the structure or premises, including individual rooms, at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this Code. 
(b)  If such structure or premises is occupied, city or county personnel shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If entry is refused by occupant, city and county personnel shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, city and county personnel shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused by the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure refuses entry, city and county employees shall have recourse to all methods of entry allowed by law, and the owner and responsible party shall be in violation of this article and subject to punishment. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-614, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 10-564. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article may be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies, commence actions or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by state law and this Code. 
(Ord. No. O2018-06-28, 16-615, 7-23-2018) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION, PROTECTION AND CONTROL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment building means buildings containing three or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as an apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, or by any other name. 
Battery backup means any emergency power supply for power-assisted gates operated by electrical power. 
Breakaway security gate means any gate designed to fall away under pressure. 
Case hardened metal means a steel alloy formed by diffusing carbon or nitrogen into the outer layer of the steel at high temperature such that the metal cannot be cut with a saw, and will not shatter. 
Combustible means any material that is capable of supporting ignition or the process of burning under heat exposure. 
Delayed response means any postponement of an emergency vehicle gaining access through security barriers. 
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any hazardous substances or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that the substances or waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including groundwater. 
Dormitory means buildings or spaces in buildings where group sleeping accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same family group in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories or other housing for students, fraternity houses, military barracks; with or without meals, but without individual cooking facilities. 
Emergency shutoff button means a device used to release hydraulic pressure on power-assisted gates operated by hydraulic power. 
Fire apparatus means any vehicle or equipment used by fire and rescue services. 
Fire marshal means a qualified officer who will perform fire marshal services for the city. 
Gamewell lock box means a box, sometimes called an elevator lock box, which must be opened with a special key carried on fire response vehicles. 
Gravity gate means a gate with no power assistance and which operates freely under manual manipulation. 
Hazardous explosive chemicals means all picric acids, nitro-based chemicals, ethers, peroxides, oxidizers, and other chemicals as may be determined by the fire marshal to be hazardous explosives. 
Hazardous substance means a substance that satisfies any one of the following requirements: 
(1)  A substance which, because of the toxic or hazardous properties which it exhibits, is determined by the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to represent a significant risk to the public health and safety as a foreseeable result of use, handling, accidental spills, exposure or contamination; 
(2)  A substance that is known to present a significant risk of personal injury or illness as the foreseeable result of use, handling, accidental spills, exposure or contamination; or 
(3)  A substance or material that has been determined to pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to 40 CFR 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste. 
Hazardous waste generation means the act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
High-rise residential occupancy building means residential properties, hotels, dormitories, apartments, lodginghouses or roominghouses, or board and care facilities three or more stories in height. 
Hotel/motel means a building in which separate sleeping rooms are rented that provide sleeping accommodations for 15 persons or more on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel, or by any other name. 
Improper storage means storage of chemicals past the expiration date on the label or chemicals stored in any area or container not designed for storage of the particular chemical. If there is no date listed for the expiration date, the expiration date shall be 12 months past the date that the chemical was received by the person or entity storing the chemical. 
Knox box rapid entry system means a key box that is authorized by section 506 of the International Fire Code and allows firefighting access for fire department purposes. Examples of structures or areas in which a key box is required include commercial and industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system or structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency; multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to all the living units; governmental structures and nursing care facilities; hazardous material occupancies; and occupancies where a large number of medical or fire alarms occur and entry can be delayed. 
Lodginghouse or roominghouse means a building in which separate sleeping rooms are rented which provides sleeping accommodations for 15 or fewer persons on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals, but without separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. 
Pad lock means any lock that is not constructed of case hardened metal. 
Power-assisted gate means any gate that is operated through a power source, whether electrical, hydraulic or pneumatic. 
Residential property means buildings containing three or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as an apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, condominium or by any other name. 
Substance means any element, entity, compound, combination, or any mixture thereof, whether organic or inorganic. 
Toggle switch means a device used to operate a power-assisted gate and override the power supply to the gate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-1), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-2. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to both public and private property, and to all structures and their occupants, except as otherwise specified herein or by other applicable law. 
(b)  The city shall have the authority to contract with any other government entity for the enforcement of this chapter and to enter into any intergovernmental agreements for the provision of fire and rescue services. 
(c)  During the duration that the intergovernmental agreement for the provision of fire rescue services between the city and the county, sworn county fire and rescue personnel shall be considered sworn fire and rescue personnel of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-2), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-3. - Duties of the fire marshal. 
(a)  Pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement for the provision of fire rescue services with the county (the "Fire IGA"), the services to be performed by the fire marshal shall include the inspections of new buildings and renovations to existing buildings for compliance with the fire code, including the following: 
(1)  Reviewing and approving plans for both new construction and renovations of existing structures; 
(2)  Final inspections for life safety for all commercial and multifamily buildings; 
(3)  Inspections for new business licenses or change of occupancy, in conjunction with the building official; and 
(4)  Inspections required for setting occupancy load, in conjunction with the building official. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall possess the education, training and experience required by state law for the position. 
(c)  The fire marshal or his designee shall remit all site plans receiving an approval for life safety by the fire marshal to the county's fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-25), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-4. - Responsibility for violations. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter, to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any provision or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-85), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-5. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter as hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications of plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall, for each and every such violation or noncompliance, be guilty of an ordinance violation and, where applicable, state or federal law. Upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, the individual shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment in accordance with the city Charter. 
(b)  The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor shall the violation be permitted to continue. Any person convicted of a violation under this chapter shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the application of the penalty stated in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-86), 2-27-2017) 
Secs. 16-6—16-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-29. - Adoption of state fire safety rules. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq., the city has adopted as if fully set forth herein the state minimum fire safety standards promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner. In the event the fire marshal determines that the provisions of the state minimum fire safety standards conflict with the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted in section 16-30, then the most restrictive provision as determined by the fire marshal shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-58), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-30. - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20 and 8-2-25, the city has adopted as if fully set forth herein the International Fire Code, including chapter 1, Administration. As allowed in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, the provisions of the International Fire Code are modified and amended in sections 16-31 through 16-34. In the event the fire marshal determines that the provisions of the International Fire Code conflict with the provisions of the state minimum fire safety standards adopted in section 16-29, then the most restrictive provision as determined by the fire marshal shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-59), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-31. - Amendments to the International Fire Code. 
(a)  The International Fire Code is hereby amended by omitting section 108, Board of Appeals, of chapter 1, Administration, and section 108 shall not be adopted by the city. 
(b)  The International Fire Code is hereby amended by adopting Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution and Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-60), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-32. - Spread of fire. 
(a)  All combustible landscaping materials shall be placed at least 36 inches away from the edge of any building having an external skin of either combustible sheathing or combustible siding. Aluminum siding, vinyl siding, non-treated wood siding and similar materials shall be considered combustible for the purpose of this section. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit the planting of shrubs, trees and other live plant materials closer than 36 inches away from the edge of any other building. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 16-35, it is unlawful for any person to ignite a fire of any type within ten feet of a combustible building, including ignition under combustible overhangs and balconies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-61), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-33. - Automatic fire extinguisher system required. 
(a)  All new or substantially rehabilitated multifamily dwelling properties shall be fully sprinkled in accordance with the latest adopted edition of the National Fire Protection Association publications 13 (NFPA 13) or 13R (NFPA 13R). 
(b)  All high-rise residential occupancy buildings shall have an approved sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-62), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-34. - Security gate/barrier installation requirements other than one- and two-family dwellings. 
(a)  Installation requirements for all gates. 
(1)  All gates shall have a minimum width of 20 feet to allow for fire apparatus access. 
(2)  All gates shall have signage indicating gate direction of travel. 
(3)  All objects on a gate that may obstruct the path of emergency vehicles must be covered with reflective paint, tape or lights sufficient to guide vehicles around the obstruction. 
(4)  The owner of the property shall ensure that all hydraulic gates are disabled and left in the open position when the temperature is expected to drop below 25 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(5)  If a gate is located on a turn, the turn must have a 35-foot clear inside radius and a 50-foot clear outside radius. 
(6)  Gate installers shall provide information on the operational features of the gate to the fire marshal prior to the installation of any security gate. 
(7)  The fire marshal prior to installation of any security gate must approve its operational features. 
(8)  When gates are opened for emergency access, they shall remain open until reactivated. 
(9)  Construction plans or blueprints shall be submitted to the community development department for approval by the fire marshal prior to an owner or applicant beginning work on the installation of a gate. 
(b)  Installation requirement for power-assisted gates. 
(1)  Property owners shall ensure that Gamewell lock boxes or any means of security approved by the fire marshal shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Power-assisted gates shall contain a toggle switch to manually operate the gate and override the power. 
(3)  The property owner shall install in gates operated by electrical means a battery backup to keep the toggle switch operational. 
(4)  The property owner shall also ensure that the power-assisted gate is equipped to operate manually. 
(5)  Property owners shall ensure that hydraulic gates have an emergency button or knob to release pressure. The button or knob shall be located at the hydraulic arm, and one shutoff is required for each arm. If the emergency shutoff is used, the gate must be capable of being secured to prevent it from swinging back to the closed position. 
(c)  Installation requirements for gravity gate locking devices. 
(1)  Pad locks may be used to secure a gate only if the pad lock is not constructed of case hardened metals. 
(2)  Gates shall be installed to allow fire apparatus to access the property and not impede the flow of traffic. This includes a sufficient distance to allow gates to open if swinging in the direction of the fire apparatus. 
(d)  Installation requirements for chain and pole security barriers. 
(1)  Property owners must seek approval from the fire marshal prior to the use of chain and pole barriers. 
(2)  Chains and pole barriers must not be constructed of case hardened metal. 
(e)  Installation requirements for breakaway security gates. 
(1)  When the security gate arm is raised, the property owner must ensure that the arm remains raised until reset for normal operation. 
(2)  The mechanism for overriding the gate shall be accessible to the employees of the fire rescue service provider. 
(3)  When in use, the gate arm should be open to an angle greater than 90 degrees to the terrain of the driveway. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-63), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-35. - Open burning. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning in any area of the city except as follows: 
(1)  Open burning in a reasonable fashion for the purpose of cooking food for immediate human consumption; provided, however, except for one- and two-family dwellings, it is unlawful to use charcoal burners or other open flame cooking devices on combustible balconies or within ten feet of combustible construction. 
(2)  Operation of devices using open flames such as candles, lanterns, tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment where appropriate safety measures are used. 
(3)  Warming fires in a barrel of 55-gallon capacity or less, or other commercially sold outdoor fireplace devices, provided that: 
a.  The fire does not produce dense smoke or obnoxious odors; and 
b.  The fire is attended by an individual over the age of 17 years. 
Untreated wood or lumber shall be the only material or substance allowed in the warming fire. 
(b)  Open burning allowed as set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Materials such as heavy oils, gasoline, asphaltic materials, plastic, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any other material producing dense smoke or obnoxious odors shall not be used for starting, maintaining, or being placed into an open fire. 
(2)  All burning shall be located on private property, so as not to interfere with any traffic on public streets or sidewalks. 
(3)  No burning shall be allowed in violation of restrictions imposed by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or the state environmental protection division or other rules and regulations adopted herein, including the state minimum fire safety standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-146), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-36. - Construction plans approval. 
It is unlawful to construct, erect or alter any building without construction documents approved by the fire marshal for fire department accessibility, fire hydrant requirements, fire code requirements, occupancy load, aboveground and underground flammable and combustible liquids tank installations and fire protection and suppression systems, including, but not limited to, sprinklers. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-26), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-37. - False fire alarm. 
It is unlawful for any person to transmit or cause to be transmitted in any manner to fire and rescue services a false report of a fire, knowing at the time there is no factual basis for believing that a fire exists. The violation shall be prosecuted under applicable state law as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-3), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-38. - Improper storage of hazardous explosive chemicals prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person or institution to keep hazardous explosive chemicals, which are used or stored for which the expiration date has passed. 
Secs. 16-39—16-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 16-65. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. In the event that any definitions used in this division conflict with those contained in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq., the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq., shall control. 
Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in parts 1500 and 1507 of title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations (16 CFR 1500 and 1507), the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in part 172 of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR 172), and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. The term "consumer fireworks" shall not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using the paper caps; nor shall the term "consumer fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snakes and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedos, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. The term "fireworks" does not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using the paper caps; nor does the term "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-176), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-66. - Fireworks activities restricted. 
Except as permitted under state law and as otherwise permitted in this article, it is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, or to use or explode or cause to be exploded, or to possess, manufacture, or store any consumer fireworks or fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-177), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-67. - Location and hours of use regulated. 
(a)  It is unlawful to use fireworks, consumer fireworks or any items defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1(b)(2) indoors. 
(b)  Except as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, it shall be lawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or explode or cause to be exploded any consumer fireworks: 
(1)  On any day beginning at the time of 10:00 a.m., up to and including the ending time of 9:00 p.m.; 
(2)  On any day after the time of 9:00 p.m. and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m. if the use or ignition is lawful pursuant to city noise regulations in the location in which the use or ignition occurs; 
(3)  On January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31 of each year after the time of 9:00 p.m. and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m.; and 
(4)  On January 1 of each year beginning at the time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the ending time of 1:00 a.m. 
(c)  Any person may use or explode or cause to be exploded any consumer fireworks on any day at a time provided for under this subsection if the person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership is issued a special use permit by the city for the use or explosion of consumer fireworks. The special use permit shall designate the time and location that the person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership may use or explode or cause to be exploded the consumer fireworks. The fee assessed by the city for the issuance of a special use permit pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed $100.00. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or explode or cause to be exploded any consumer fireworks within 100 yards of a nuclear power facility or a facility engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or the production, refining, processing, or blending of gasoline for retail purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-178), 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 16-68. - Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks. 
Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks shall be allowed if properly permitted according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. ch. 25-10. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-56, exh. (12-179), 2-27-2017) 
Chapter 18 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 20 - HUMAN RELATIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 22 - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
100-year floodplain means land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected to a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Aggrieved person means a person whose property is the subject of the action appealed from or a person's who has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
Agricultural operations means those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard, the preparation and planting of pasture land, farm ponds, dairy operations, livestock and poultry management practices and the construction of farm buildings. 
Alley means a minor way, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise fronting on a street. 
Appeal means a review authorized by this chapter of any final order, requirement, or decision of the community development director or the mayor based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter, excluding section 22-34. 
Applicant means any person who acts in the person's own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
As-built drawings means amended site plans specifying the location, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of public improvements, including water, sewer, road and drainage structures and stormwater management facilities as they have been constructed. 
Bank (stream bank) means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Basement means a space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than 6½ feet. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
BNR means the board of natural resources. 
Bicycle lane means that part of a street or highway adjacent to the roadway, designated by official signs or markings for use by persons riding bicycles. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the community development director may delineate the outline of the block. 
Board means the mayor and city council of the City of Tucker, Georgia. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting system. 
Buffer area means that portion of a lot set aside for open space and/or visual screening purposes, pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code and all conditions of zoning, to separate different use districts, or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. 
Buffer, city, means an area of land 50 feet in width immediately adjacent to the state buffer. The first 25 feet adjacent to the state buffer shall be undisturbed. The outer 25 feet may be disturbed but shall contain no impervious surfaces. 
Buffer, state, means an area of land 25 feet in width immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer, stream, means the state buffer and the city buffer as measured horizontally from the top of the stream bank. 
Buildable area means the area of a lot remaining after all setback requirements, including buffer areas, have been met. 
Builder as used in sections 22-183 and 22-184 means a person who constructs a structure or dwelling for residential occupancy by humans. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building permit means required written permission issued by the development director for construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure. 
Building setback line means the minimum horizontal distance required between the public right-of-way or the utility easement abutting a private street and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof except projections that are authorized exceptions to building setback line requirements in chapter 46 and any zoning conditions approved by the mayor and city council pursuant thereto. The size of the utility easement for a private street shall be equal to the required size of the public right-of-way and shall not be any smaller in width or length than what would be required for a public right-of-way. 
CPESC means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree trunk, applied only to new or replacement plantings that is taken six inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Channel protection means the protection of stream channels, in accord with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, from bank and bed erosion and degradation by preserving or restoring the applicable stream buffer, by providing extended detention, and by integrating erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
City means the City of Tucker, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. When appropriate to the context, the term "city" also includes authorized officers, employees and agents thereof. 
City arborist means the city official having the primary responsibilities of administration and enforcement of the tree protection ordinance. 
City separate storm sewer system means a stormwater conveyance or system of stormwater conveyances that are all of the following: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the county; designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(2)  Is not a combined sewer; 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW); and not located within the boundaries of a city located within the county or owned or operated by any other government entity. 
City stormwater management manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
City zoning ordinance or zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Collector street means a street or road designated as a collector street in the thoroughfare plan. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Comprehensive plan means the city comprehensive plan adopted by the mayor and city council, as it may be amended from time to time, which divides the city into land use categories and which constitutes the official policy of the city regarding long-term planning and use of land. 
Conservation easement means a restriction or limitation on the use of real property which is expressly recited in any deed or other instrument of grant or conveyance executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein and whose purpose is to preserve land or water areas predominantly in their natural scenic landscape or open condition or in an agricultural farming, forest or open space use and includes conservation easements authorized by state law. 
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development or changed use, including particularly any preparation for, building of or erection of a structure. 
Construction waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, asbestos-containing waste, wood, tree stumps, tree tops, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, glass, wire, plastics, and other typical construction waste products and refuse. 
Critical root zone means an area of root space that is within a circle circumscribed around the trunk of a healthy tree using a radius of one foot per inch DBH. 
Crosswalk means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded, and which is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads or lots. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
DBH (diameter at breast height) means the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of 4½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4½ feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
DNR means the department of natural resources of the state. 
Deck, elevated means an open, unenclosed structure elevated above pervious natural grade that is attached to the primary structure. 
Density factor means a unit of measurement used to prescribe the calculated required tree coverage on a site. 
Department means the community development department. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge of the stormwater, as the term "detention" is defined by state law, the city stormwater management manual or this Code. 
Detention facility means a facility that provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
Developer means any person who acts in the person's own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development means all activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion of replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy, or habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of land, dairying or animal husbandry. Such activities include, but are not limited to, land-disturbance (clearing and grubbing the land of vegetation and stumps, and grading) and the construction of improvements such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways or parking areas, water sewer mains, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks or other structures permanently placed in or on the property. Where appropriate to the context, development also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases. 
Development permit means any permit that authorizes land-disturbance for the use, construction thereon or alteration of any real property within the limits of the city. 
Director means the director of the community development department, or his designee. 
Director, EPD, means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the county soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage means the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area, either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owners of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage plan means a plan prepared using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards, which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including, but not limited to, both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels and detention facilities that comprise the storm drainage system. 
EPD means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), and/or shear walls. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity and that conforms to the requirements of the Manual for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia. 
Exceptional and historical trees means those trees or stands of trees which are exceptional representatives of their species in terms of size, age or unusual botanical quality, or are associated with historically notable events. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before June 6, 1974. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which properly compacted soils have been added, the depth above the original ground. 
Final stabilization means that all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines, a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region, or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the usual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood hazard map means the official city map designating the elevation and boundaries of flooding and associated floodways under base flood conditions maintained by the city, based upon the flood insurance study for the city, the United States Corps of Engineers or other reputable reports accepted by the roads and drainage director, and based upon competent engineering studies prepared by a currently state-registered professional engineer, or the city. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain, in article III of this chapter, means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of a flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., the top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term "floor" does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Footpath, in article III of this chapter, means any unpaved, narrow and pervious trail in a stream buffer allowing for pedestrian travel. 
Frontage, lot, means the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is the manual adopted by the mayor and city council that provides the criteria, technical design specifications and standards for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter. 
Governing authority means the mayor and city council. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition. This includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Historic structure. See chapter 8. 
Impervious surface means any surface that is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, surfaces such as concrete or asphalt as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, and other similar structures. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the soil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement executed by an owner in a form approved by the director that will provide the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which, when properly recorded in the deed records, constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Intermediate regional flood (IRF) means a 100-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also known as the base flood, or 100-year flood. 
Intermediate regional floodplain means the land area within the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as defined on the flood hazard map. Also known as area of special flood hazard, or 100-year floodplain. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 22-33(b)(3)e. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement, piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, computer design, or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Live detention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for stormwater storage for a specified period of time. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of the city. 
Local street means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties in residential, industrial or other developments. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Lot, double-frontage, means a lot that abuts two parallel streets or that abuts two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. A double-frontage lot may also be referred to as a through lot. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
Maintenance of detention facility means preserving the enclosed walls or impounding embankments of the detention facility in good condition; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and freedom from excessive sediment; removing obstructions affecting operation of outlet devices and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
Major thoroughfare/major arterial means a street, road or highway shown as a major thoroughfare in the City of Tucker Transportation and Thoroughfare Plan. 
Manufactured home means a new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured home" includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law found at O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Minor subdivision plat means the combination of two lots or the subdivision of one lot into to two lots, any subdivision of three or more lots is a major subdivision. See Subdivision. 
Minor thoroughfare/minor arterial means a street, road or highway shown as a minor thoroughfare in the transportation and thoroughfare plan. 
Multi-phase residential development means any development undertaken by a single developer or a group of developers acting in concert, to develop lots for sale in a residential subdivision where such land is developed pursuant to multiple preliminary or final plats and such land is contiguous or is known, designated, or advertised as a common unit or by a common name. 
Multiuse trail means a recreation corridor intended for the use of non-motorized forms of transportation such as, but not limited to, walking, running, bicycles, in-line skates, as identified in a master plan for multiuse trails in the city approved by the mayor and city council. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New construction means any structure for which the permitted date of construction commenced after adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 6, 1974. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component and practice of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, vegetated channels and natural depressions. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Open space means that portion of a lot, including yards, established pursuant to the requirements of this chapter as open space, which is open and unobstructed from ground level to the sky, with the exception of natural foliage or accessory recreational facilities or walkways, which is accessible to all persons occupying a building on the lot and is not a part of the roof of any portion of any building. 
Operator means the parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, the proprietor; the term "owner" may also include a tenant, if chargeable under the lease for maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant including a developer. 
Parcel, in article III of this chapter, means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. 
Planning director means the director of the community development department of the city or designee. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Potential purchaser, as used in sections 22-183 and 22-184, means a person purchasing property in a residential subdivision or a multi-phase residential development from a developer and/or builder for occupancy as a residence or as a residence to be rented or leased to others. 
Predevelopment refers to the wooded conditions of a site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Protected zone means all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, including all areas required as yard areas, buffer areas, stream buffers, state buffer zones or landscaped areas according to provisions of the city zoning ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval. 
Public facilities means the roads, water, sewer, schools, traffic control devices, and electrical service. 
Public works director means the director of the public works department or designee. 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Reach means a longitudinal segment of a stream or river measured along specified points on the stream or river. 
Reasonable access means a 15-foot access easement from the public right-of-way to the stormwater management facility and a ten-foot drainage and maintenance easement on all four sides of the stormwater management facility. 
Recreation areas means those portions of open space designed and intended for active recreational use, such as sports fields and other play areas. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Residential shall have the same meaning as given in chapter 46 except that it shall not include apartments. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Rock outcropping means a single, contiguous piece of exposed rock that has a horizontal surface area equal to or greater than 200 square feet. 
Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land that reaches the drainage system. 
Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
SS&WCC means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
SWCD means the Soil and Water Conservation District of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sediment basin means a detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process that may be constructed as part of or separately from a detention facility. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Sedimentation facility means a detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process which may be constructed as part of or separately from a detention facility. 
Seller as used in sections 22-183 and 22-184 means a builder or developer. 
Significant tree means any existing, healthy, living tree eight inches DBH or greater in size. 
Site plan means that plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit which shows the means by which the applicant will conform with applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the DeKalb County, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Specimen tree means any tree that has been determined to meet the criteria within section 22-34 for the determination of specimen trees. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation except as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approach and technique that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. Examples of stormwater hotspots include, but are not limited to, the following: gas/fueling stations, vehicle maintenance areas, vehicle washing/steam cleaning facilities, auto recycling facilities, outdoor material storage areas, loading and transfer areas, landfills, construction sites, industrial sites, and industrial rooftops. 
Stormwater management facility means those structures and facilities that are designed for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff into and through the drainage system. 
Stormwater management manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater quality site development review tool is an Excel spreadsheet tool available from the city community development department or website for use by both local government review staff and the development community to quickly evaluate the water quality performance of stormwater management plans for development sites. All new development and redevelopments in the city use the stormwater quality site development review tool to facilitate the evaluation of the project in accordance with recommendations of this chapter and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stream, in article III of this chapter, means state waters, and natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground, and includes, but is not limited to, all natural or manmade streams depicted on the city geographic information system (GIS) map maintained by the city GIS director. Stream starts at the location of a spring, seep or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow. No stream shall be excluded from this definition due to its failure to be identified on the GIS map. Field verification shall be performed to make a final determination as to the existence of a stream where a dispute exists. Such field verification may be performed by the director. 
Stream channel , in article III of this chapter, means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Streambank means as measured horizontally from that point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action. 
Street, private, means an access way similar to and having the same function as a public street, providing access to more than one property but held in private ownership. Private streets, when authorized, shall be developed in accordance with the specifications for public streets established in subdivision II, division 2, article III of this chapter. 
Street, public, means any right-of-way set aside for public travel deeded to the city and any right-of-way that has been accepted for maintenance as a street by the city. 
Street right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are rip rap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. The term "structure" does not include telephone poles and utility boxes. 
Subdivision means any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing and future use, into three or more lots, tracts or parcels. Where appropriate to context, subdivision may also be used to reference the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of division. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a structure taking place during the life of a structure, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures that have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by a code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alteration to a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Thoroughfare plan means a comprehensive street plan of the city indicating proposed location and right-of-way widths for major thoroughfares, minor thoroughfares, collector streets and other streets. 
Tree means any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant which has a trunk caliper of two inches or more measured at a point six inches above the ground and which normally attains a height of at least ten feet at maturity usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree harvesting means the felling, loading, and transporting of timber products done pursuant to a special exception issued by the zoning board of appeals. 
Tree replacement means the replacement of trees and landscape plant materials into the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by the zoning regulations or the tree protection ordinance. 
Tree save area means the boundaries of the area surrounding trees wherein it is essential that they remain undisturbed in order to prevent damage and loss of trees that are to be retained on-site during the development and building process. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 
Trout waters, first order, means streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Trout waters, primary, means streams or waters supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. 
Trout waters, secondary, means streams or waters in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
Used for includes the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by: covering the soil with permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Water quality protection means the requirement that all developments must improve the quality of stormwater runoff from the development site. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-1), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-2. - Motor vehicles in parks. 
Any bike path or park trail designated as an alternative transportation road is subject to the requirements of section 32-22. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-2), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-3—22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-23. - Preamble. 
(a)  This article establishes public policies for the protection of the natural environment and specifies standards for land development to ensure achievement of these public policies. 
(b)  By declaration of public policies for environmental protection, the mayor and city council expresses its intent to protect the public interest by seeking to ensure, where appropriate, maintenance of the natural environment, prevention of its degradation and ensuring high quality land development. The board further declares its intent that these policies shall constitute the public policy framework within which a comprehensive program for protection of the natural environment and implementation of a comprehensive drainage improvement program shall be accomplished. 
(c)  The development process, as established by this article, is guided by the policies and provisions contained in the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-27), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-24. - Purposes. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to establish public policies for the protection of the natural environment and to establish requirements, standards and procedures for land development. The public policy objective of protecting the natural environment is to be achieved by: 
(1)  Regulating the alteration of land and topography. 
(2)  Regulating the removal and requiring the replacement of certain vegetation. 
(3)  Requiring erosion control and sedimentation control. 
(4)  Protecting city streams and floodplains from substantial alteration of their natural functions and from sediment and debris accumulation. 
(5)  Specifying standards for drainage system design. 
(6)  Assuring the continuous and efficient operation of the drainage system. 
(7)  Protecting the water quality within intermittent and perennial streams throughout the city. 
(b)  It is the mayor and city council's intent that land development be accomplished in conformity with the public policy statements. To that end, the plans required under applicable provisions of this article shall be reviewed by the city to enable a full exchange of information between the city and the applicant as to the city's public policies for land development. However, these policies shall not be used as a control or regulatory mechanism nor be construed as land development standards enforceable under applicable provisions of this article. 
(c)  The mayor and city council further declares its intent that these public policies be evaluated periodically so as to reflect the community's interests in protection of the natural environment and to give direction to city actions in matters affecting the natural environment and land development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-28), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-25. - Scope and applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all development activity within the city. 
(b)  Sections 22-27, 22-28, 22-29, 22-30, 22-31, 22-32, 22-33, 22-35, 22-36, and 22-37, shall not apply to any portion of a property included within the limits of a valid and complete application for a land-disturbance permit or for preliminary plat approval which are received by the director prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Such applications will be subject to the provisions of this chapter in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  Before filing a land development application on a project for review and approval, the applicant shall meet with the department to discuss the procedure for approval of a land development permit and the requirements as to the general layout of streets, parking, open space/lot coverage, street improvements, drainage, sewage, fire protection and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services, including schools. The department and the applicant shall review the applicant's stormwater management plans, inspection and maintenance requirements and water quality control requirements. The department may advise the applicant, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed project with those officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the project coming within their jurisdiction. This meeting will also allow city officials to discuss with the applicant the necessary regulations that will properly accomplish the project. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, a valid and complete application for a land-disturbance permit shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Six copies of complete civil plans, that include a site plan, a grading and drainage plan, a utility plan, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, a landscape plan, and a tree survey; 
(2)  One hydrology report and completed stormwater quality site development review tool documentation; 
(3)  An application signed by the owner of the property, or a completed indemnification agreement signed by the owner of the property; and 
(4)  Payment of the appropriate development review application fee. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, a valid and complete application for a preliminary plat approval shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Four copies of the preliminary plat site plan that is in conformance with the zoning of the property in effect at the time of the application, and, a tree survey; 
(2)  An application signed by the owner of the property, or if the application is not signed by the owner, a completed indemnification agreement signed by the owner of the property; and 
(3)  Payment of the appropriate development review application fee. 
(f)  In no event shall any project excepted from the provisions of this article pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, be extended for a greater time period than 18 months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-29), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-29), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-26. - Amendment procedure. 
This article may be amended by the mayor and city council after giving public notice and holding a public hearing thereon in accordance with all applicable procedural requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-30), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-27. - Administration and enforcement generally. 
The city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article as follows: 
(1)  The director is designated to administer and enforce the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control, drainage and water quality provisions of this article for all development and construction projects with the following duties and responsibilities: 
a.  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
b.  Advise permittee when additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known to be required, that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit; and 
c.  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  The director shall administer and enforce those provisions of this article that apply to developed and occupied areas and to property in an undeveloped state affecting city responsibility for maintenance of the storm drainage system. The director shall ensure that maintenance is provided within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-31), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-28. - Inspection; right of entry. 
(a)  Upon presentation of city identification to the applicant, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, city employees may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development or construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with all ordinance provisions. 
(b)  All new developments and redevelopments shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city. The applicant shall execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement that will bind all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice. 
(c)  City employees may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage easement. All stormwater management facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, shall be accessible at all times for city inspection. Where stormwater management facilities are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for inspection and maintenance functions. 
(d)  The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. The warrant shall authorize the director to conduct a search or inspection of property without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; and 
b.  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by law. 
(2)  The inspection warrant shall be validly issued only if it meets all of the following requirements: 
a.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant; 
b.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection; 
c.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal; and 
d.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-32), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-32), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-29. - Emergency maintenance operations. 
(a)  The director may conduct emergency maintenance operations on private land and on drainage systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the roads and drainage director create a condition potentially injurious to life, property and the public road system. 
(b)  The provisions of section 22-34 shall not apply in the case of tree trimming, removal or cutting necessitated by emergencies such as floods, windstorms, ice storms or other disasters. 
(c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any drainage system shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-33), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-30. - Issuance of notice of violation; variances; specification of time period for correction; appeals. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the director determines that development activity or inactivity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plans, that approved and required erosion and sedimentation control facilities or devices have been altered, damaged or destroyed, or that any other activities violate the provisions of this article, the director shall issue a notice of violation. Whenever the director determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, the director shall issue a notice of violation. The provisions of this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provisions applicable to this article. The notice of violation of the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto shall be addressed to the owner of the property or the owner's agent and to the person, tenant, firm, corporation, property owner or property owner's agent found to be violating the provisions of this article and shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred; 
(3)  List the specific provisions of this article which have been violated; 
(4)  State that, if these repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the inspector, summons shall be issued for the person, firm, corporation, owner, or owner's agent to appear in recorder's court. However, in the judgment of the director, where the violation is willful, in wanton disregard of the provisions of this article or constitutes a public health and safety hazard or endangers the ecosystem, the director may issue a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(b)  Penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended. Any person, firm or corporation that shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation in municipal court shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with chapter 1. Where any offense or violation continues from day-to-day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this article exists, and any architect, builder, engineer, contractor, or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits, or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Variances. 
(1)  Except as further limited herein, an applicant may request a variance from the terms of the requirements of sections 22-32, 22-33, 22-35, and 22-36. The director shall have no power to consider or to grant variances which are the responsibility of the director of the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 and other relevant state statutes and regulations. Where variances involving the same project are requested from both the director of the EPD and the community development director, the community development director shall take no action on any such request for variance until the director of the EPD grants the variance or otherwise approves the request pending before the EPD. Receiving a variance from the director of the EPD does not obligate the director to permit the project to proceed if the project does not also meet all the other requirements of this article. No variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be authorized except as specifically authorized in this section or specifically authorized in another section of this chapter. 
(2)  Applications for variances authorized in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be made in writing to the director and shall contain all of those materials and documents required by the director that are necessary to demonstrate that said request meets the criteria for granting variances. 
(3)  In considering a request for a variance to the terms of this article authorized in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the director shall use all of the following criteria: 
a.  The request, while not strictly meeting the requirements of this article, will in the judgment of the director be at least as protective of natural resources and the environment as would a plan which met the strict application of these requirements. In making such a judgment, the director shall examine whether the request will be at least as protective of the natural resources and the environment with regard to the following factors: 
1.  Stream bank or soil stabilization; 
2.  Trapping of sediment in surface runoff; 
3.  Removal of nutrients, heavy metals, pesticides and other pollutants from surface runoff; 
4.  Terrestrial habitat, food chain, and migration corridor; 
5.  Buffering of flood flows; 
6.  Infiltration of surface runoff; 
7.  Noise and visual buffers; 
8.  Downstream water quality; and 
9.  Impact on threatened and endangered species, as those species are designated by law or federal or state regulation. 
b.  By reason of exceptional topographic or other relevant physical conditions of the subject property that were not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for any development under any design configuration unless a variance is granted. 
c.  The request does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief and does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties that are similarly situated. 
d.  The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the area in which the property is located. 
e.  The literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of this article would cause an extreme hardship, provided the hardship was not created by the owner. 
(4)  The director's decision shall be in writing, shall state the basis for the decision, and shall be made no more than 30 days following application. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals. Appeals shall be made to the zoning board of appeals, as established in chapter 46, and shall be administered in accordance with the notice requirements, criteria and procedural requirements set forth therein, except as otherwise specified below. 
(2)  Basis for appeal. Whenever the director approves a variance pursuant to section 22-30(d)(2) and it is alleged that said variance request did not meet the standards of said section, or where the director denies a variance request pursuant to section 22-30(d)(2) and it is alleged that said variance request did meet the standards of said section, or where it is alleged by the applicant that there is error in any final order, requirement, or final decision made by an administrative official based on or made in the interpretation or enforcement of this article, the aggrieved person, or any city official, department, board or agency affected by said order, requirement or decision, shall have the right to appeal said final order, requirement or decision to the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  Initiation of appeal. Appeals shall be made by filing with the secretary of the zoning board of appeals an application for appeal specifying the grounds thereof, within 30 days after the action appealed from was taken. 
(4)  Appeal stays all legal proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in that official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the superior court of the county on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(5)  Time and notice of hearing. The zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal and shall give notice thereof pursuant to the requirements of section 46-1527 as well as due notice to the parties in interest. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by an agent, or by an attorney and may present oral and/or written documentation, testimony and evidence in accordance with the rules and procedures set by the zoning board of appeals. 
(6)  Decision of the zoning board of appeals. Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the zoning board of appeals shall make a determination on each appeal. The zoning board of appeals shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the final hearing. An appeal shall be sustained only upon an express finding by the zoning board of appeals that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the zoning board of appeals may reserve or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(e)  Appeals of final decisions. All appeals of final decisions of the zoning board of appeals under the provisions of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the zoning board of appeals, or any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court of the county for a writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the zoning board of appeals is rendered. 
(2)  In any such petition filed, the zoning board of appeals shall be designated the respondent in certiorari and the city shall be designated the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the zoning board of appeals shall be authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ for the zoning board of appeals as respondent. Service upon the city as defendant shall be as otherwise provided by law. Within the time prescribed by law, the zoning board of appeals shall cause to be filed with the clerk of the county superior court a duly certified record of the proceedings had before the board, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if any, and the written decision of the board. 
(f)  Standards This article is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship, provided that when the regulations of this article are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this article shall govern. Further, where there is a conflict between any standard or requirement within this chapter, or between this chapter's standards and any other provision of this Code, the more restrictive standard or requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-34), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-34), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-31. - Plan submission requirements. 
(a)  All site plans submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of this article shall meet the requirements for their preparation and shall also provide information to enable a determination to be made by the director as to plan conformance with the public policy statements of this article. 
(b)  All persons proposing developments, redevelopments or construction shall submit site plans to the director illustrating the means by which conformance with policy provisions may be achieved and illustrating compliance with applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit. 
(c)  Electric, telephone and gas utilities shall submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major transmission installations located within rights-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions shall be exempt from these requirements for new residential construction with the exception that individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the intermediate regional floodplain shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with this article and other applicable provisions of this Code. Owners and developers of individual single-family lots shall be required to use best management practices to prevent sedimentation from leaving the site. 
(d)  Grading, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage plans shall be prepared under the supervision of a currently state-registered professional engineer, architect or landscape architect, or combination as may be appropriate for project planning and design. Tree protection plans may be prepared by and implemented under the supervision of a currently state-registered forester, landscape architect or engineer as may be appropriate for project planning and design. When the hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles for flood routing, super critical flow, high energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, floodplain studies or other advanced hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis shall be made by a currently state-registered professional engineer proficient in hydrology. 
(e)  Site plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with this article shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable provisions in chapter 46 and all conditions of zoning and shall include the following: 
(1)  Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this article for grading, vegetation alteration, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage system alteration or development. Grading plans shall illustrate existing and proposed contours to the two-foot interval at a minimum; golf courses and other open space areas shall be exempt from this requirement but general grading plans for golf courses and other open space areas shall be submitted. Water quality plans shall include the identification of existing wetland areas within the development site and shall demonstrate use of the stormwater quality site development review tool. Related plans shall show locations of structures, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits, buffer areas, stream buffers, state buffer zones, and proposed alterations to the existing site; 
(2)  A hydrologic engineering analysis of stormwater runoff under pre-developed and post-developed site conditions and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected drainage basin. In determining downstream effects from stormwater management structures, BMPs, and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed. This analysis shall include a determination of the culvert, floodplain and channel cross-section area required to carry the affected runoff at the intermediate regional flood stage level. The requirement for a complete hydrologic study may be waived in writing by the director for any development where the site plan submitted illustrates pre-developed or proposed improvements sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this article; 
(3)  Delineation of the boundaries, contour elevations and floodways of the intermediate regional floodplain for streams draining in excess of 100 acres. Unless shown on the flood hazard map, the intermediate regional flood contour elevations and floodways shall be established by engineering field control surveys and then be added to the flood hazard map upon approval of the director and be clearly designated on each site plan, subdivision plat and construction plan. The actual building site in relation to the intermediate regional floodplain boundaries shall be shown; the same information shall be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of each property so affected. The elevation contours representing the intermediate regional flood conditions shall be shown when they are located outside established ditch banks. A benchmark suitable for determining intermediate regional flood elevations shall be established; 
(4)  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage plans as related to other major items of construction; 
(5)  Upon development project completion, location, size and invert elevations of piped segments of the storm drainage system, of control weirs, BMPs and water surface elevations and volumes in detention ponds shall be shown on the final plat for a subdivision, and on a final plan for other developments which shall be submitted to the director prior to approval. The currently state-registered professional engineer, architect or landscape architect reviewing the construction shall provide a certificate that the development is in substantial compliance with approved plans. As-built elevation certifications prepared by currently state-registered land surveyors or currently state-registered professional engineers for all developments, including fill, allowed within a flood-prone area, shall be submitted to the director; and 
(6)  A separate tree protection plan in conformance with the requirements of section 22-34. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-35), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-35), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-32. - Grading. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Encourage the design of residential grading plans to provide natural a appearance of land contours and to provide ease of use in public areas. 
(2)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon existing vegetation. 
(3)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon the drainage system by strict erosion control and sedimentation control measures. 
(4)  Minimize erosion and shear failure potential by encouraging limited cutting and filling. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  All grading operations shall be conducted in compliance with the approved site plans. 
(2)  Before beginning construction activity, the intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours shall be identified on the property by staking or other identifying mechanisms no less than every 100 feet, and shall be identifiable throughout project development. 
(3)  Finish grade slopes on residential projects and lots shall not be steeper than three-to-one (3:1), unless absolutely impractical due to vegetation, topography, or soil conditions. Three-to-one (3:1) finish grade slopes shall transition to two-to-one (2:1) slopes at all perpendicular stream crossings. 
(4)  Large-scale general grading shall include installation of approved soil and erosion control measures and be limited to phases approved by the director and completed prior to commencing building construction. 
(5)  Prohibit grading and filling in floodplains, except for the construction and maintenance of perpendicular crossings of public utilities, drainage conveyances, roadways, sidewalks, and multipurpose trails constructed in accordance with the city design standards and specifications. Any variance from the requirements of this subsection shall be in accordance with the requirements of section 22-30 and with the following requirements: 
a.  If the required hydrologic studies reveal that a request for filling or grading within the intermediate regional floodplain would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, the development permit shall be denied unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the intermediate regional floodplain. Altered sections of the intermediate regional floodplain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt buildup. 
b.  Excavation within floodplain areas shall not be permitted unless the excavation can be accomplished in such a manner that the existing low level drainage pattern through the floodplain shall be maintained. The area of compensation within the floodplain shall be considered as ineffective flow area for the purpose of calculating floodplain elevations to meet no-rise certification requirements. The amount of compensation shall be limited to 300 cubic yards per acre of floodplain area. 
(6)  The burying, piling, or concealing in any way of construction waste is prohibited, except where permitted within an M-2 (Industrial) District, as defined in chapter 46, and by a permit issued by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city under chapter 8 until the applicant provides a written certification to the director of development or his designee, accompanied by a landfill receipt that proves that all construction waste has been removed from the property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-37), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-33. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Minimize the removal of vegetation; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of bare earth to precipitation by encouraging the scheduling of land development in increments of workable size which can be completed within a single construction season or within a time period compatible with the type and size of the project; 
(3)  Provide for the reestablishment of vegetation within a reasonable period following completion of final grading and utility installation; 
(4)  Give priority to the paving of streets, parking lots and other areas within a reasonable time following completion of final grading; and 
(5)  Encourage the use of erosion control and sedimentation techniques found in the Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia, as published by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  Land-disturbing activity. Any land-disturbing activity permitted under this article shall be carried out in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, this chapter, and the permit conditions specified by the director. 
(2)  Issuing authority; adopting rules exceeding minimum requirements. Nothing contained in state law or this chapter shall prevent the issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements contained in this section or in state law. 
(3)  Exemptions. This section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
a.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mine Act of 1968; 
b.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
c.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
d.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in subsection (b)(4) of this section and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article II of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the community development director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 22-33(b)(4) and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the development department; 
e.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
f.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; providing, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsection (b)(4)c.15 and 16 of this section, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
g.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
h.  Any project involving less than 5,000 square feet of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (b)(3)a, b, c, d, e, f, g, i, or j of this section; 
i.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any city or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.2; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case, a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
j.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
k.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(4)  Minimum requirement for soil erosion and control and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
a.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities that are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosions and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection (b)(4)b and c of this section and any other applicable provision of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, stormwater management facilities, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with the requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. The community development director may require that land-disturbance activity be phased. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall address appropriate measures to effectively control soil erosion during successive phases of construction. 
b.  Minimum requirements. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in subsection (b)(4)b and c of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design by phases, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director of the environmental protection division (EPD) or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director of the EPD. This subsection shall not apply to any land-disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than one acre. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director of the EPD may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the BNR, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
c.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations shall be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans shall conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented as provided in sections 22-34 and 22-36; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills shall not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment shall cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediment on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(4)b.2 of this section; 
15.  Except as provided in subsection (b)(4)c.16 of this section, there is established a 25-foot state buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director of the EPD determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director of the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table yearround; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. (which is part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act), shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director of the EPD as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(i)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quality to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(ii)  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
A.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
B.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
16.  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the BNR, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director of the EPD may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
(i)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(ii)  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
A.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
B.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
d.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(5)  Application/permit process. 
a.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
b.  Application requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the community development director to perform such activity, and providing a copy of the notice of intent, if applicable, to the EPD. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the community development director and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, at a minimum, the data specified in subsection (b)(5)c of this section. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by eight copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD rule 391-3-7-.10. 
3.  A permitting fee, as determined by the mayor and city council shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
4.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land-disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
5.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 45 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 45 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the community development director. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection (b)(4)c.15 and 16 of this section and bonding if required by subsection (b)(5)b.7 of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the city and the district enter into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 45 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 45 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
6.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the community development director may deny the permit application. 
7.  The community development director shall require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the mayor may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
c.  Plan requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection (b)(4)b and c of this section, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for the site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
d.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the community development director of a completed application, provided variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary; no permit may be issued unless all applicable fees have been paid. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the community development director unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the community development director has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsection (b)(4)c.15 and 16 of this section are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b.7 of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activity by the governing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this section, and any other ordinances relating to land development as are applied to private persons, and the director shall enforce such requirements upon the governing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6.  No permit shall be issued until the applicant files documents with the community development director demonstrating compliance with all applicable local, state and federal requirements. 
(6)  Inspection and enforcement. 
a.  The community development director will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbance activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person by the community development director. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
b.  The community development director shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
c.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or the division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
d.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of the city. The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the city for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the city's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if the city's program is found to be deficient or ineffective. 
e.  The division may periodically review the actions of the city which has been certified as a local issuing authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of the city's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the city. If such review indicates that the city has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the city governing authority in writing. Upon receipt of the notification, the governing authority shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the city does not take necessary action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the city as a local issuing authority. 
(7)  Penalties and incentives. 
a.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the city. 
b.  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the community development director or other city authorized representative, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this section on a site, the community development director shall issue a written notice of violation. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the community development director shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred, provided that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state, the community development director shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation on a site, the community development director shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
3.  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of land-disturbance without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the community development director, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the community development director. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
c.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served by the community development director upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection (b)(5)b.7 of this section. The community development director may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
d.  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this section, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the development director issued as provided in this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, or the maximum amount authorized by section 1-7. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of city ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought under city ordinances approved under this section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation; however the maximum assessment shall not exceed the amount authorized by section 1-7. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(8)  Education and certification. 
a.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
b.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person; said person shall meet the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission, and maintain evidence of the certification present whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on the site. A project shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site, or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale, permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
c.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit, but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site, may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this section. 
d.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(4), but shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(9)  Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
a.  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to an appeal before the zoning board of appeals pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in section 22-30(d). 
b.  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by administrative appeals from a decision or order of the zoning board of appeals authorized by subsection (b)(9)a of this section shall be as provided for in section 22-30(d). 
(10)  Validity and liability. 
a.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this section shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this section. 
b.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this section nor the compliance with provisions of this section shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city, the district, its officers or employees for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this section shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-38), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-38), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-34. - Tree protection. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of these standards is to facilitate the preservation and/or replacement of trees as a part of land development in the city. 
(2)  The mayor and city council hereby finds that the preservation of existing trees is a public purpose that protects the public health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics of the city and all its citizens. 
(3)  The citizens of the city and their many communities enjoy many benefits that can be directly attributed to our trees. 
a.  Trees produce oxygen, which is essential to the well-being of all animal life, including humans. 
b.  Trees help to reduce the amounts of airborne pollutants. For example, trees remove carbon dioxide that is a major environmental concern due to its current high levels. 
c.  Trees and their foliage intercept dust and particulate matter, thereby helping to purify our air and limiting health risks. 
d.  Trees and their root systems reduce soil erosion and stormwater runoff. This decreases sedimentation problems and improves water quality. 
e.  Trees provide food and shelter for desirable urban wildlife. 
f.  Trees provide screening, which in turns aids in the reduction of noise and glare. 
g.  Trees help moderate our air temperature to provide us with a comfortable environment. 
h.  Trees provide scenic amenities to soften the harshness of city buildings and streets. They are aesthetically pleasing to all that view them. 
i.  Trees may affect property values and can have a positive impact upon the economy of an area. 
j.  Trees can enhance the natural functions of streams and related buffers. 
(4)  Protect specimen and historical trees in a manner consistent with the city tree protection administrative standards which shall be promulgated by the director. The director shall maintain a list and map of these trees in the office of the director through the assistance of the following offices: 
a.  County board of education. 
b.  County extension service. 
c.  County chapter, Georgia Conservancy. 
d.  State forestry commission. 
(5)  Provide standards for the preservation of trees as part of the land development process. 
(6)  Prevent clear-cutting and mass grading of land that results in the loss of mature trees, and to ensure appropriate replanting when tree loss does occur. 
(7)  Protect trees during construction to enhance the quality of life in the city. 
(8)  Protect trees in construction of public facilities and utilities. 
(b)  General applicability. 
(1)  The terms and provisions of the tree protection ordinance shall apply to all real property in the city except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(2)  The terms and provisions of the tree protection ordinance shall further apply to any residential or nonresidential development which requires the issuance of a land-disturbance permit, development permit, or building permit, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(3)  The terms and provisions of the tree protection ordinance shall also apply to development on any city-owned property, including property owned by city agencies, boards, and authorities, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(4)  The local issuing authority status of the city shall not impact the enforcement of the tree protection ordinance. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Removals. 
a.  The removal of five or fewer trees, other than specimen trees, on any single-family residential property, within a single calendar year. 
b.  The removal of more than five trees, other than specimen trees, from an owner-occupied, single-family lot may be approved by the city arborist if the owner must remove trees in order to build a newly permitted structure, or to build an addition to or make improvements to an existing structure, or to improve the health of other trees in the landscape. 
(2)  Zonings conditioned to a specific site plan prior to adoption of the tree protection ordinance on July 11, 2016, provided that said zoning contains specific conditions for both tree preservation and tree replacement. 
(3)  The removal of trees found to be diseased or insect infested by the county extension service, the state forestry commission, a certified arborist, or urban forester. 
(4)  Grandfathered projects. 
a.  Section 22-34 shall not apply to any portion of a property included within the limits of a valid and complete application for a land-disturbance permit or preliminary plat approval where said application has proceeded through and completed first round red line review by the development department nor to commercial site plans that have been reviewed and red lined by the development department and which were received by the director prior July 11, 2016, provided that all time constraints relating to the permit issued shall be observed. 
b.  The requirements of this section 22-34 may be waived by the director for a land-disturbance permit which is to proceed with development of a larger project, at least 75 percent of the land area of which has already received a permit initiating clearing or grading activities prior to July 11, 2016. 
c.  In no event shall any grandfathered project be extended for a greater time period than 12 months from July 11, 2016. 
d.  The mayor and city council may grandfather a project not specifically covered under the foregoing subsections upon application of an applicant or owner of property, provided that an applicant can demonstrate that: 
1.  Failure to grandfather the applicant's project will cause the applicant substantial economic hardship; 
2.  The proposed development activity will not substantially harm the public health, safety, aesthetics and welfare of the citizens of the city; 
3.  The proposed development activity is otherwise consistent with all pertinent development standards and is compatible with surrounding land uses; and 
4.  Applicant has on file with the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived an application for a building permit, land-disturbance permit or preliminary plat review or has submitted construction plans for development department review. 
Incomplete applications shall not be processed for hearing before the mayor and city council. Any application by an applicant for whom the department of community development did not have on file an application for a building permit, land-disturbance permit preliminary plat review or construction plans on July 11, 2016, shall not be processed for hearing before the board. Such applications shall stand automatically denied. 
e.  Upon submission of a written application by the applicant or owner for a hardship waiver to the director, the mayor and city council shall, within 21 days of receipt of such application, schedule a public hearing. At said public hearing, the applicant or owner and any other interested parties shall have the opportunity to be heard with regard to the application, and the mayor and city council shall render its decision either granting, with or without conditions, or denying the application prior to the succeeding regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council. 
f.  In the event a hardship waiver is granted by the board, the applicant shall be required to comply with the vegetation protection ordinance in effect immediately prior to July 11, 2016. 
(5)  The removal of trees from horticultural properties, such as farms, nurseries or orchards. This exemption shall not include tree harvesting. 
(6)  The removal of any tree which has become, or threatens to become, a danger to human life or property. In order for this exemption to be considered, a letter must be submitted by a certified arborist and approved by the director of community development. 
(7)  Agricultural activities on land zoned R-200. 
(8)  Approved utility construction within permanent utility easements. 
(9)  Construction, expansion, and operation of county landfills. 
(10)  Building permits that do not require or authorize land-disturbance. 
(d)  Definitions. See section 22-1. 
(e)  Procedures. 
(1)  Application requirements. 
a.  Pre-application conference. Prior to submission of an application for development, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the city arborist to discuss the tree protection ordinance as it relates to the applicant's property. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to clarify the provisions and procedures of the tree protection ordinance and review applicable standards and guidelines for the submittal of documents and required tree protection, replacement, and maintenance measures. 
b.  Tree survey. Except as provided elsewhere in this section, a tree survey shall be required as part of any application for a land-disturbance permit, development permit, building permit or preliminary subdivision plat. Except as provided elsewhere in this section, all trees 18 inches (DBH) and larger shall be identified. Specimen trees shall be identified by size, species and location. Trees larger than two inches (DBH) may be identified and counted for unit credit on the tree protection plan. Single residential lots on which the applicant intends to reside may be exempted from the tree survey requirements at the discretion of the director. With the prior approval of the city arborist sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested areas. 
(2)  Tree protection plan. A tree protection plan shall be submitted with other permit drawings as part of the development permits process. This plan may either be a separate drawing, or part of a landscape plan, and shall include the following information: 
a.  Definition of spatial limits: 
1.  Limits of land-disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching; 
2.  Tree save areas; 
3.  Specimen trees; and 
4.  Areas of revegetation. 
b.  Detailed drawings of tree protection measures and their location: 
1.  Location, species and size (DBH) of existing significant trees and an indication of which significant trees would remain on the site. 
2.  Tree fences; 
3.  Erosion control fences; 
4.  Tree protection signs; 
5.  Tree wells; 
6.  Aeration systems; 
7.  Transplanting specifications; 
8.  Staking specifications; and 
9.  Other applicable drawings as determined by the director. 
c.  The tree protection plan shall show all utility lines existing and proposed, including irrigation and electric lighting lines. The applicant shall coordinate the location of these utility lines with the utility companies in order to prevent root damage within the critical root zones of protected trees, and to minimize damage to trees located in protected zones. 
d.  Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of tree protection measures. 
e.  Calculations of tree density proposed on-site per subsection (f)(4) of this section, tree preservation and replacement requirements. 
f.  Tree protection inspection. Following the receipt of a complete application, the city arborist shall schedule and conduct an inspection of the proposed development site. The applicant or applicant's designee shall be advised as to the date and time of the inspection and given an opportunity to participate. 
g.  Following inspection said plans shall be reviewed by the director for conformance with applicable zoning conditions, the tree protection ordinance, and any applicable administrative guidelines, and will either be approved or denied. Reasons for denial shall be noted on the tree protection plan or otherwise stated in writing. 
h.  No development or building permit shall be issued until the tree protection plan has been approved by the city arborist. 
i.  All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to land-disturbance. 
j.  Single lots in platted residential subdivisions on which the applicant intends to reside may be exempted from the tree protection plan requirements at the discretion of the director. 
(3)  Final inspection. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the director with respect to any permit subject to this section 22-34 unless and until the city arborist shall have inspected the site and confirmed that all existing trees to remain are in healthy condition and all replacement trees have been planted in accordance with this section. 
(4)  Issuance of permit. Issuance of a building or land development permit shall be conditioned on the approved tree protection plan and conformance to the provisions of these regulations. Any permit may be voided if its terms are violated. 
(f)  Tree preservation and replacement requirements. The following tree preservation and replacement requirements are hereby established: 
(1)  If significant trees exist on a tract of land for which a permit subject to this section is sought, either 120 inches (DBH) per acre or 25 percent of existing significant trees per acre of such significant trees, whichever is less, shall be preserved on the site. Except for zoned C-1, C-2, M, or M-2 sites, trees and tree save areas counting toward this requirement shall not be located in required buffer zones. Trees and tree save areas counting toward this requirement on-sites zoned C-1, C-2, M or M-2 may be located in stream buffers and state buffer zones, transitional buffer zones and designated floodplains. If the city arborist determines that special constraints of a site result in an inability to build or develop without removing significant trees on a site, where there are only 120 inches (DBH) per acre or less of existing significant trees, the arborist may permit the removal of one or more significant trees. Trees removed pursuant to this section must be replaced with trees one times the diameter inches of those removed. 
(2)  There shall be at least two two-inch (DBH) overstory trees in every front yard of properties zoned RE, RLG, R100, and R85. There shall be at least one two-inch (DBH) overstory tree in every front yard of properties zoned R60 and RSM. 
(3)  The applicant shall landscape the areas with trees and other plant materials in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Residential developments. All residential subdivisions shall have an average density of 15 density units per acre. Required trees may be located on individual lots or in subdivisions in which there is commonly-owned property may be located on such commonly-owned property. 
b.  Nonresidential and multifamily developments. The quantity of total existing/replacement trees on-site must be sufficient so as to produce a total site density factor of no less than 30 density units per acre. 
c.  With the exception of C-1, C-2, M, or M-2 zoned property, the total tree density units required for a parcel or lot shall be computed based on the area of the parcel or lot, excluding all area within the 100-year floodplain. Total tree density units required for C-1, C-2, M, or M-2 zoned property shall be computed based on the area of the parcel or lot, including all area within the 100-year floodplain. 
(4)  Procedures for calculating the required tree density are provided in charts 1, 2 and 3 in subsection (f)(4)a, b and c of this section. Tree unit values are assigned as follows: 
a.  Chart 1. Conversion from diameter to density factor units for existing deciduous trees to remain on-site. 

 
b.  Chart 2. Conversion from diameter to density factor units for evergreens and conifers. 

 
c.  Chart 3. Conversion from caliper diameter to density factor units for deciduous replacement trees. 

 
d.  Container-grown pine trees are given a replacement value as follows: 

 
The use of one- and three-gallon pines will be permitted only with prior approval. There will be no replacement value given for such trees. 
(5)  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to allow the removal of any tree or vegetation in a required stream buffer, transitional buffer zone or state buffer zone except buffer improvements as authorized by the director. 
(6)  Tree relocation and credit for existing trees replacement units will be granted to trees relocated on-site. Tree relocation is subject to approval of the city arborist. Existing trees between two caliper inches and 7.9 caliper inches may be used for credit on the tree replacement plan. 
(7)  Understory vegetation. Tree preservation areas shall leave intact the naturally occurring ground cover and understory vegetation except where directed otherwise by the city arborist in order to allow the removal of undesirable ground cover or understory vegetation. 
(8)  Specimen trees. 
a.  Specimen trees shall be identified by a certified arborist, and shall be located on the tree protection plan. 
b.  Standards for the identification, preservation, and protection of specimen trees shall be as follows: Any tree in fair or better condition which equals or exceeds the following diameter sizes: 
1.  Large hardwoods, i.e., oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, and similar species: 30 inches DBH. 
2.  Large softwoods, e.g., pines, evergreens, and similar species: 30 inches DBH. 
3.  Small trees, e.g., dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, and similar species: Ten inches DBH. 
c.  A tree in fair or better condition should meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  A life expectancy of greater than ten years. 
2.  A relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow, and less than 20 percent radial trunk dieback. 
3.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
d.  A lesser-sized tree can be considered a specimen if: 
1.  It is a rare or unusual species or of historical significance. 
2.  It is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a project or landscape. 
3.  It is a tree with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
e.  A certified arborist may identify and require the preservation of a tree stand if it contains one or more specimen trees and the specimen trees are interlocked with other members of the stand in such a way as to imperil the specimen tree if other members of the stand were to be removed. 
f.  It shall be prohibited to cut specimen trees existing on a tract of land that is the subject of a land-disturbance permit, development permit or building permit without a special exception granted by the community development director or his designee if removal of the specimen tree has not been approved by the city arborist. 
g.  Any specimen tree removed from a parcel shall be replaced by 1.5 times the equivalent inches (DBH) of replacement trees or existing trees in excess of the requirements of subsection (g) of this section, tree preservation and replacement requirements, using species with potentials for comparable size and quality at maturity. 
(9)  Protection of trees during construction. Methods and standards for tree protection shall be established in administrative guidelines to this section 22-34. 
a.  Trees identified to be preserved and counted as credit for meeting required unit density shall have four-foot orange tree protection fencing installed at the outer edge of the critical root zones. 
b.  No person engaged in the construction of any structure or improvement or any activity shall encroach or place solvents, material, construction machinery or temporary soil deposits within six feet of the area outside the critical root zone as defined herein, or any existing significant tree within a tree save area, transitional buffer zone, stream buffer, or state buffer zone. 
c.  All tree protection devices must remain in functioning condition until completion of the project or until the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
d.  Any tree, designated in the plan to be saved, which is negligently damaged during construction or as a result of negligent construction, as determined by the community development director or his designee, shall be treated according to accepted National Arborists Association standards. If fatally damaged, trees shall be replaced with four-inch caliper trees equal to the unit value of the tree removed. However, any specimen tree negligently damaged as described above shall be replaced with four-inch caliper trees equal to 1.5 times the equivalent inches (DBH) of the tree removed or damaged. 
(10)  Removal of trees from floodplain not permitted. Trees shall not be cut or removed from the floodplain, except as follows: 
a.  Those trees found to be diseased or insect infested by the county extension service, the state forestry commission, a certified arborist, or a certified forester. 
b.  As necessary for construction, repair or maintenance of public roads, utilities or stormwater management facilities. 
c.  As part of an approved wetland mitigation plan. 
d.  Trees in the 100-year floodplain or required stream buffer may not be cut nor shall they be counted, except as otherwise provided in subsection (g) of this section, tree preservation and replacement requirements, for C-1, C-2, M, and M-2 zoned property, to accomplish requirements of the tree protection ordinance. 
(11)  The city arborist shall be responsible for distribution of appropriate public educational materials concerning the procedures of the tree protection ordinance, the value of maintaining existing trees, and proper methods of tree planting, preservation, and care. 
(g)  Tree replacement standards. 
(1)  The tree protection plan shall include planting schedules with proposed tree names (botanical and common), quantity, size spacing, and any special planting notes. Trees used for credit on the tree replacement plan must be chosen from the preferred list attached hereto as appendix A to this section. At least 50 percent of replacement trees must be overstory trees; no more than 25 percent may be of any single species, and no more than 25 percent may be of evergreen species. 
(2)  Unless otherwise approved by the city arborist, trees selected for replanting must meet the minimum standards as provided in the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1, 1980) and must be on the tree species selection list found in appendix A to this section. Trees selected must be free of injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be in good vigor to ensure a reasonable expectation of survival. Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture Publication Tree and Shrub Planting Manual or a similar publication. 
(3)  It is desirable that replanted trees be ecologically compatible with the site and neighboring sites. When practical, the replanted trees shall be of the same or similar species as those removed. 
(4)  Replacement trees shall be planted in manner that provides adequate space for nourishment, light, and maturation as recommended by the city arborist. 
(5)  Planting and staking details are addressed in the administrative guidelines and shall be specified in the required tree protection plan. 
(h)  Buffers. 
(1)  Stream buffers. Stream buffers shall be consistent with the requirements of article III of this chapter. 
(2)  Land use transition buffers. Buffers shall be provided between dissimilar districts or uses in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special land use permit or variance approval. 
a.  Buffer planting shall meet the minimum width requirements contained in chapter 46, except as authorized to be reduced by a condition of zoning, special land use permit or variance approval. 
b.  Disturbance or encroachments. 
1.  Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, and any associated easements, shall not encroach into a buffer except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g., stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical. 
2.  Supplemental plantings or replantings of vegetation or authorized non-vegetative screening devices shall be authorized to encroach into a buffer provided there is minimal disturbance of any existing vegetation. 
3.  Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
c.  Protection during land-disturbing activities. 
1.  During authorized land-disturbing activities, transitional buffer zones, stream buffers, and state buffer zones shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
2.  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the arborist. 
(i)  Parking lot landscaping. 
(1)  Off-street parking lots which contain more than 20 off-street parking spaces on any single lot shall contain landscaping and plantings as provided in chapter 46. 
(2)  Variances to reduce required parking spaces may be granted by the zoning board of appeals when necessary to preserve a significant tree that otherwise would be lost if the parking requirements were strictly applied. Such variance may only be granted if the arborist certifies to the zoning board of appeals that such tree will be lost either by necessary removal for construction of the parking lot or as a consequence of construction having an adverse impact on the survivability of the tree by virtue of damage to the root system of the tree. 
(3)  Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall include a condition that should the subject tree die as a consequence, direct or indirect, of construction, despite granting of the variance, the tree or trees shall be replaced at the property owner's or applicant's expense, in accordance with a tree replacement plan approved by the arborist. 
(4)  The maximum variance allowed under this provision shall be four parking spaces, or ten percent of the total number of parking spaces required by the zoning ordinance, whichever is greater. 
(j)  Street trees. Street trees and continuous landscape strips shall be provided, in conformance with the design requirements specified in chapter 46, along newly constructed streets, and along existing streets which are widened or realigned subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, in all office, commercial, and industrial developments and along newly constructed streets of residential developments with a net residential density exceeding three dwelling units per acre or as otherwise directed by conditions of zoning or special land use permits. 
(k)  Maintenance. Trees which are used to meet the density requirements for this section 22-34, except on single-family residential lots, shall be maintained for 18 months after the date of final inspection, and a landscape bond shall be required for 100 percent of the cost of the landscape materials and installation. The property owner shall maintain required tree density. The applicant or builder will be responsible for identifying newly planted trees to the homeowner and to inform the homeowner as to their proper maintenance. 
(l)  Alternative compliance. The city arborist must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance shall 100 percent of the required site density be met through alternative compliance. Where the city arborist has determined that special constraints of a site result in an inability to provide the required tree density, the number of trees will be determined by the city arborist based on site review. Such site review shall require the developer to re-landscape each parcel using a density calculated as the maximum number of trees that can be sustained on the parcel less the impervious area of that parcel. The balance of trees shall be provided in common areas. If common areas are not sufficient, any remaining balance of trees may be provided for plantings on public grounds. Tree bank arrangements can be made through the director. The minimum size of trees replanted through the tree bank shall be two caliper inches and shall be planted in accordance with the species list attached as appendix A hereto and in accordance with the requirements in subsection (h) of this section, tree replacement standards. 
(1)  Common area planting. If trees are to be planted at another location, the following note must appear on the approved tree protection plan: "A tree protection plan addendum for this project shall be submitted to the city arborist at least 30 days prior to requesting a final inspection. This plan shall include the species, size and location of trees to be planted off-site to meet the tree density deficit shown. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy is subject to approval of this plan, as well as verification of the installation of the trees." 
(2)  Tree banking. If trees cannot be planted on-site and there is insufficient common area for replanting, the balance of trees will be accepted by the director for tree banking within the city. Participants in the tree banking program administered by the director, including the signing of an off-site reforestation agreement. 
(m)  Tree harvesting. Selective tree harvesting may be permitted upon authorization by the zoning board of appeals in consultation with the arborist. Permits authorizing tree harvesting shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  A 75-foot undisturbed buffer shall be provided and maintained along the entire perimeter of the property, including road frontages, during the land-disturbing activity, except for authorized access crossings. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, no property owner shall be required to preserve an undisturbed buffer that covers more than 25 percent of the total land area of the property, excluding area inside the ten-year floodplain. In any such case, an alternative buffer width shall be provided, as determined by the zoning board of appeals pursuant to its review of the application for a tree harvesting permit. 
(3)  The property shall be required to meet a tree density standard of 30 units per acre, not including the 75-foot buffer, upon completion of authorized land-disturbing activities. 
(4)  The owner/applicant shall utilize the recommended best management practices as established by the state forestry commission. 
(5)  No tree harvesting shall be allowed within the city except after approval of a special exception by the zoning board of appeals as is provided in chapter 46. Further, subsequent to such approval of a special exception, no such tree harvesting shall be undertaken on any nonresidential parcel of land unless the transitional buffer zones required by the zoning regulations of the district in which located, are preserved in a natural and undisturbed state. 
(6)  Once tree harvesting takes place in conformity with the above regulations, no development of the property shall be permitted that would require the cutting of trees preserved under subsection (m)(3) and (n)(5) of this section for a period of five years following authorization of tree harvesting. 
(n)  Utility company and public works guidelines. 
(1)  All utility companies shall be required to obtain an annual permit issued by the director. All applications for an annual permit shall include a list of subcontractors with names, addresses, and city business license numbers. 
(2)  Periodic work schedules are to be submitted to the arborist showing the proposed location and extent of tree work to be performed. 
a.  All tree trimming and pruning to be performed by public utilities, public agencies, and their subcontractors on trees growing on private or public rights-of-way shall be done according to the National Arborist Association Standards for Pruning of Shade Trees. 
b.  The routing of public and private utility easements shall be subject to review and comment by the city arborist. 
(o)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the director to enforce this section, the tree protection ordinance. The director shall have the authority to, and the city arborist may recommend that, the director revoke, suspend or void any land-disturbance permit, development permit or building permit or suspend all work on a site or portion thereof in order to effect compliance with this section. 
(1)  Violation and penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section, after having been first issued a warning, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction in municipal court shall be punished as is provided in section 1-7. Each tree removed or killed in violation of this section 22-34 shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this section exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(2)  Replacement of trees. Any trees eight inches (DBH) and over which have been removed in violation of this section shall be replaced by the violator with four-inch caliper replacement trees equal to the density unit value of the trees removed. However, any specimen tree removed from a parcel shall be replaced with four-inch caliper trees 1.5 times the equivalent inches (DBH) of replacement trees or existing trees in excess of the requirements of subsection (g) of this section, tree preservation and replacement requirements, using species with potentials for comparable size and quality at maturity. 
(3)  Additional legal remedies. In addition to all other actions and penalties authorized in this section, the city municipal court is hereby authorized to institute injunctive, abatement or any other appropriate judicial or administrative actions or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of this section. 
(4)  Appeals; power and duty of the board to hear appeals of decisions of administrative officials. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any final order, requirement, or decision made by the director based on or made in the enforcement of the tree protection ordinance. All such appeals shall be heard and decided following the notice requirements, criteria and procedural requirements in chapter 46. 
(5)  Administrative variances. Front, side and rear yard setbacks and parking requirements may be reduced by an amount not to exceed 50 percent where it is determined by the city arborist to be necessary in order to preserve existing specimen or significant trees. Appropriate conditions to said administrative variances shall be imposed so as to ensure the continued health of said trees following the granting of such variances, including mandatory replacement requirements. Such administrative variances shall be considered and decided consistent with the procedures and criteria contained in chapter 46. Appeals of final decisions regarding administrative variances may be taken as provided in subsection (o)(4) of this section. 
(6)  Special exception. The community development director or his designee is authorized to consider requests for special exception for the removal of an unauthorized specimen tree. No such special exception for the unauthorized removal of a specimen tree shall be granted by the community development director or his designee unless the applicant has demonstrated and the director has found that the property is not capable of earning a reasonable economic return absent the grant of the special exception. In making this determination the community development director or his designee shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Value of the trees in question, considering their age, size, health, and significance; 
b.  The current level of economic return on the property; 
c.  The marketability of the property; and the unfeasibility of alternate designs or uses. Appeals from final decisions of the community development director or his designee shall be as provided for in chapter 46. 
APPENDIX A 
City overstory trees acceptable for replanting credits: 

 
City understory and other small trees acceptable for replanting credits: 

 
City recommended trees for under powerlines: 

 
Recommended trees for parking lots: 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-39), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-39), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-35. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  The governing authority believes the city's stream systems are a valuable natural resource that requires joint and cooperative action by the city and the development industry to resolve existing stormwater management and flooding problems, prevention of their worsening or recurrence while utilizing this resource for the good of the entire city. The development industry and the city shall cooperate to control water quality and maintain the city's drainage and stream systems from stormwater runoff resulting from development activities. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  The city shall require all land development to comply with the criteria, technical specifications, and standards of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be hereafter amended. The rainfall intensities used in hydrologic and hydraulic computations shall be those published in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(2)  Applicability. A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all development and construction for the entire site which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Increases the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm; 
b.  Involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
c.  Includes the creation, addition or replacement in redevelopment of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
d.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that meets the definition of a stormwater hotspot; or 
e.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(3)  Exemptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following criteria: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project unless they meet one of the criteria listed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures unless it meets one of the criteria listed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities. 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the community development director. 
e.  If the installation of a stormwater management facility would increase downstream flood peaks by less than one percent at a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. 
f.  The requirements, or portions thereof, of subsections (b)(2) and (3) of this section shall not be waived if the director determines that such waiver would increase known flooding problems, or exceed the capacity of the downstream drainage system. 
g.  A waiver of these minimum runoff quantity control requirements may be granted only after a written request is submitted by the applicant containing descriptions, drawings, and any other information that is necessary to evaluate the proposed land-disturbing activity. A separate written waiver request shall be required if there are subsequent additions, extensions, or modifications to the development which would alter the approved stormwater runoff characteristics of a land-disturbing activity receiving a waiver. 
h.  Appeals from said waiver decisions may be taken to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to the provisions of section 22-30(d). 
(4)  If 40 percent of a site is to be redeveloped, all stormwater requirements must be met for the redeveloped area only and the non-disturbed area will be treated as pre-developed prior to the redevelopment. But if more than 40 percent of the site is to be redeveloped, then the entire site must meet all stormwater requirements. 
(5)  A downstream peak flow analysis will include the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(6)  Detention designs may be rejected by the director if they incorporate structures and facilities that will demand considerable maintenance or will be difficult to maintain or will utilize numerous small structures if other alternatives are physically possible. 
(7)  Discharge velocities from detention facilities shall be reduced to provide a non-erosive velocity flow from a structure, channel, or other control measure as set forth in the approved Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(8)  Stormwater management and flood control facilities may include both structural and nonstructural components. Natural or planted vegetation as well as other natural runoff conduits are examples of these nonstructural components and shall be retained where practicable. In addition, these components must provide for or enhance stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater benefits. 
(9)  The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a 100-year storm event. 
(10)  The drainage system from a proposed development must discharge into an outfall that has adequate capacity to accommodate the runoff from the development. If the connecting downstream system is not able to accommodate the allowable design flows from the site, then the design engineer must design drainage facilities with the capacity to over-detain flows so they can be accommodated by the existing downstream conveyance structures whereby allowing the existing downstream system to operate correctly. If downstream easements are needed to extend the drainage system to an adequate outfall, the developer shall obtain these easements. 
(11)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted for all detention and other storage facilities as part of the overall drainage plan. 
(12)  Land uses within the intermediate regional floodplain shall not diminish or restrict the capacity of the channels or floodplains of the stream, its tributaries, drainage ditches or any other stormwater management facilities or systems and shall not increase the IRF elevation or velocity or concentration of flow in downstream areas. The development permit shall be denied if the required hydrologic studies reveal that a request for filling or grading within the intermediate regional floodplain would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the intermediate regional floodplain. Altered sections of the intermediate regional floodplain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt buildup. 
(13)  Excavation within floodplain areas shall not be permitted unless the excavation can be accomplished in such a manner that the existing low level drainage pattern through the floodplain shall be maintained. The area of compensation within the floodplain shall be considered as ineffective flow area for the purpose of calculating floodplain elevations to meet no-rise certification requirements. The amount of compensation shall be limited to 150 cubic yards per acre of floodplain area. 
(14)  The live detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall as published in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The detention system required shall be necessary to handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any and all durations from the post-development, with a release rate that does not exceed the pre-development release rate during the same duration storm. Detention control structures and other drainage improvements shall be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners. 
(15)  When the applicant requests and the director determines that development and construction projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combined detention or other stormwater management facilities more practical, the city may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two or more properties by two or more applicants. This authorization shall be granted by the zoning board of appeals upon application for approval being submitted through the director. Where joint detention facilities serving two or more properties are approved for construction, no use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the detention facility, except upon approval of the zoning board of appeals. 
(16)  The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all stormwater and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater runoff: 
a.  Permanent fencing at least six feet in height shall be required around all facilities having a temporary water storage depth of greater than four feet or those designated by the board of health as constituting a public health hazard. 
b.  This fencing shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment into the facility. Fencing shall be established on the outside edge of a facility. The fence shall include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. The gate shall be placed in a manner such that the gate does not obstruct reasonable access or become obstructive. The director may waive fencing in nonresidential areas where a pond is more than 500 feet from a residential district and in residential districts when detention is provided in natural areas such as stream channels and fencing in the opinion of the director would damage the environment or affect stream flow. 
c.  The access easement to the facility shall not have a profile slope steeper than 33 percent and a cross slope of no more than ten percent. The elevation of the maintenance easement around the facility shall be established at the top of the dam or wall elevation and be constructed with a cross slope of no more than ten percent to the drainage facility. Fencing that complies with the requirement of subsection (b)(16)b of this section shall be constructed on the outside edge of the maintenance easement. Gates that comply with the requirements of subsection (b)(16)b of this section shall be constructed on each maintenance easement. 
d.  Detention and sedimentation control facilities shall not be placed in any of the following: 
1.  Transitional buffer zones as defined by chapter 46. 
2.  Floodplains. 
3.  Wetlands. 
4.  Stream buffer zones. 
5.  State buffer zones. 
e.  Perforated standpipes or a French drain, in accordance with published design standards available from the director, or other methods which will achieve equal performance to prevent standing water and inadequate drainage shall be installed within all the detention and sedimentation control facilities. 
f.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the commercial and/or multifamily residential property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the stormwater management facilities during grading, construction, and following final approval of the completed project. This maintenance and certification obligation shall be binding on all future owners, successors and assigns of the property. 
g.  In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and in accordance with the requirements of article III of this chapter, the city shall assume maintenance responsibility one year after the release of the performance bond for subdivision streets. A special drainage district as authorized by the Georgia Constitution, article IX, section II, ¶ VI is established for property in a single-family residential subdivision at the time the plat is finally recorded, and will be so noted on the plat. Upon completion of developer maintenance, all detention ponds shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
h.  Stormwater management facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed under permits issued prior to the amendment of the city ordinance assigning maintenance responsibility will not be accepted for city maintenance unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the zoning board of appeals and suitable access easements are provided. At the time the director accepts a detention facility for city maintenance, a special drainage district will be established that includes all properties for which the detention facility is designed to compensate for increased peak runoff rates due to development. 
i.  Stormwater facility access requirements. 
1.  In both residential and nonresidential projects, an easement at least 20 feet in width shall be required so as to provide access to all detention facilities from a public or private street. The access easement shall conform to the following requirements: 
(i)  The access easement shall be cleared, grubbed and graded so that it can be utilized by rubber-tired construction vehicles. 
(ii)  The minimum drive surface width shall be 15 feet. 
(iii)  The drive shall be grassed or paved. 
(iv)  The maximum slope shall be 30 percent. 
(v)  Access easements may be combined with drainage easements containing an open channel; however, the combined easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width and shall be wide enough for the drainage channel and the drive. 
(vi)  A drive to the bottom of the pond shall be provided when the facility is over ten feet deep from the bench elevation or the facility is wider than 50 feet as measured from bench to bench. 
(vii)  Where the facility is completely enclosed by walls, an access ramp, ladder or stairs shall be provided into the facility to allow for inspection and maintenance activities. 
2.  Every normally-dry stormwater basin, lake, or parking lot detention facility shall be completely enclosed within a drainage/access easement. The drainage/access easement shall extend at least ten feet beyond the 100-year flooding limits of the stormwater facility and shall encompass any dam, outlet structure and energy dissipation devices. A 20-foot-wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be provided around the exterior of the detention area outside of the access easement or as may be approved by the city arborist. 
(17)  In residential districts, not less than 70 percent of the minimum lot area, as established by applicable zoning district development standards, shall be above the intermediate regional flood elevation contours with the exception that lots in the R-150 district shall conform to requirements of the R-100 district. 
(18)  All buildings located adjacent to the intermediate regional floodplain shall be constructed so that all portions of the structure, including the basement floor or crawl areas, shall be not less than three feet above the intermediate regional flood elevations; however, structural support units may be located within the intermediate regional floodplain, provided they do not conflict with the hydrologic design characteristics of the approved plans and do not conflict with other requirements of this article. Any structure or manufactured home so erected must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, and be constructed with flood-resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Floodproofing of residential construction will be in accordance with subsection (b)(10) of this section. When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the owner of the property shall obtain written certification from a registered professional engineer or architect and shall provide such certification to the director before the director approves such activity. 
(19)  The profile elevation of the centerline of all public streets shall be constructed a minimum of one foot above the intermediate regional flood elevation contours. The director may grant exceptions to this provision in cases where construction of the street elevation is below the intermediate regional flood elevation and elevation contours would improve drainage or reduce the effects of flooding. 
(20)  Special drainage system maintenance requirements are as follows: 
a.  Trash, garbage, construction materials, construction by-products or other debris shall not be deposited in any part of the drainage system. 
b.  No restriction or barriers, including fences, may be placed in the drainage system or intermediate regional floodplain without first obtaining a development permit. When on-site or off-site debris has accumulated within an intermediate regional floodplain in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of water so as to increase the risk of hazardous inundation of upstream properties adjacent to the intermediate regional floodplain, the director shall require the owner of the property where this debris was generated, if its source can be identified, to clear and remove the debris so as to permit the free flow of water. 
c.  No impoundment of water which retains in excess of five-tenths (0.5) acre (in feet) of runoff shall be removed without first obtaining a development permit, which shall only be issued after competent engineering studies provided by the applicant show that this removal will not adversely affect downstream properties. 
d.  No permanent structures or additions shall be constructed within the intermediate regional floodplain other than those non-building facilities required or authorized by the director which will not conflict with the hydrologic design characteristics of the approved development and construction plans. Land within the intermediate regional floodplain may be used to meet setback, yard, open space and buffer requirements in accordance with applicable provisions of chapter 46 and the buffer requirements of this chapter. 
(21)  Any proposal for development in a regulatory floodway as identified on the flood boundary-floodway map must be accompanied by engineering certifications ensuring that no increase in the flood levels of the base flood would be caused by the proposed development. Such proposals include culverts and bridges. 
(22)  New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundations and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls, as follows: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a currently state-registered professional engineer or currently state-registered professional architect and meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.  Electrical, plumbing and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation. 
c.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
d.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-40), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-40), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-40), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-36. - Water quality control. 
The following provisions are included in the land development regulations in order to control the water quality of stormwater runoff from all development and construction activities and all developed sites: 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  New development and redevelopments in the city must use the stormwater quality site development review tool to facilitate the evaluation of the project in accordance with recommendations of this article and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
b.  At a minimum, new projects shall include stormwater quality provisions and the BMPs necessary to accomplish each of the following. 
1.  Water quality BMPs must be installed on all developments to improve the water quality of the stormwater runoff from the development site. Stormwater management systems (which can include both structural stormwater controls and better site design practices) must be designed to remove 80 percent of the average annual post-development total suspended solids load. As a minimum, the runoff from the first 1.2 inches of rainfall must be treated. Acceptable BMPs for treating stormwater runoff are set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
2.  BMPs shall be used to control discharges into the local drainage system of any organic or inorganic matter that cause or tend to cause pollution of such waters. 
(i)  Minimization of impervious areas within developments and minimization of impervious areas directly connected to the local drainage system is encouraged as a nonstructural BMP for water quality and quantity control. 
(ii)  A plan shall be provided to protect all existing wetland/floodplain areas within the development site. 
(2)  Drainage plans. The following performance criteria shall be used by the city in evaluating all drainage plans, unless otherwise provided for in this section. Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from a stormwater hotspot and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(3)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(4)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(5)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(6)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the director before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. 
(7)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required. The applicant may, if approved by the director, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements that identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(8)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include, but are not limited to, culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutters, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-42), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-37. - Groundwater recharge area. 
Development within groundwater recharge areas, as delineated by the state department of natural resources' (DNR) Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 Edition) and the DNR's Pollution Susceptibility Map, shall meet the criteria for the protection of groundwater recharge areas established in chapter 391-3-16-.02 of the DNR's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-43), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-38—22-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 22-49. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Whereas, the mayor and city council finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources. 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater. 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation. 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks. 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff. 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams. 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem. 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat. 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat. 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity. 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.1), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land-disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land-disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by article III of this chapter extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.2), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-51. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 22-40. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land-disturbance activities including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land-disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land-disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (a)(2)a of this section. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land-disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city community development department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city community development department to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land-disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(c)  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 22-43. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.3), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-52. - Land development requirements. 
Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.4), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-53. - Variance procedures. 
Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the zoning board of appeals of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the zoning board of appeals of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the board of appeals. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land-disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.5), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-54. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.6), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-55. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city community development department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.7), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-56. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.8), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-57. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city community development department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city community development department in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article and, to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.9), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-58. - Violations; enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the city community development department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city community development department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(c)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city community development department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city community development department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city community development department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city community development department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city community development department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city community development department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the city community development department shall deem appropriate (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city community development department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city community development department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city community development department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.10), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-59. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city director of community development, may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the construction board of appeals and shall be entitled to a hearing before the construction board of appeals within 60 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city zoning board of appeal, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of order of the city construction board of appeals, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.11), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-44.11), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-60. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.12), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-61. - Validity of previously issued stream buffer variances. 
Any stream buffer variance issued by the county prior to July 11, 2016, is and shall remain valid. Stream buffer variances granted by the county prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be repealed or deemed invalid by the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-44.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-44.13), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-44.12), 10-23-2017) 
Secs. 22-62—22-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-77. - Effective date. 
These subdivision regulations shall become effective on July 11, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-56), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-56), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-56), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-78. - Policies and purposes. 
(a)  Policies. 
(1)  It is declared to be the policy of city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the city's official comprehensive plan in order to promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the city. 
(2)  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(3)  The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the comprehensive plan, official map, and the capital budget and program of the city, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, zoning ordinances, the comprehensive plan, official map and land use plan, and the capital budget and program of the city. 
(b)  These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of city. 
(2)  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  To protect and conserve the value of land and the economic stability of all communities in the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the city through appropriate growth management techniques, including consideration of the timing and sequencing of development, consideration of infill development in existing neighborhoods and nonresidential areas with adequate public facilities. 
(4)  To guide public policy and both public and private actions in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and public services and support facilities. 
(5)  To provide for the safe and efficient circulation of traffic throughout the city, having particular regard to avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and the pedestrians and bicycle traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of lands and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines. 
(6)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments. 
(7)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land. 
(8)  To ensure to the extent legally possible that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision. 
(9)  To protect and restore the highest quality of the city's air and water resources; to ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the city and the value of the land. 
(10)  To preserve the natural beauty, environment, and topography of the city and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-57), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-79. - Public purpose. 
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable regulations to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to this city. A developer of land has the duty of compliance with the regulations set forth herein for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and economic development of the city and to the health, safety, and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-58), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-80. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted. Any conflict between provisions should be resolved in the way that best serves the purposes of the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-59), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-81. - Scope and applicability. 
These regulations shall apply to all subdivision of land, as defined in section 22-1, located within the city as may be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-60), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-60), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-82. - Exemptions. 
This article does not apply to a lot or parcel of land established by deed or plat recorded among the land records of the city prior to the effective date of these subdivision regulations or the division or sale of land by judicial decree. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-61), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-61), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-83. - Plats not to be recorded until accepted; lots not to be sold in unaccepted subdivision. 
No person shall record any subdivision plat until it has been approved and accepted by the mayor, as the governing authority's designee, nor shall any lot be sold by reference to any subdivision plat whether recorded or not, if the plat is made after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, unless it shall have been approved and accepted by the mayor. The recording of a plat shall be based on an approved plat and shall not be recorded solely on the basis of a metes and bounds description. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-62), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-62), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-84. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy; extension of services. 
No development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor shall the city have any obligation to extend services to any parcel created in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-63), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-63), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-85. - Power and duty of director of community development to hear variances; criteria to be used in deciding variances, and appeals. 
(a)  The director of community development, or his designee, has the authority to hear variances. Appeals of the director of community development decision will be heard by the construction board of appeals. The director of community development shall hear and decide applications for variances from the strict application of division 3 of article III of this chapter, known as the subdivision regulations of city, where strict application of any regulation enacted in division 3 of article III of this chapter would result in exceptional and undue hardship to the owner of such property. These regulations provide the minimum necessary requirements for subdivisions in city; thus, variances from the requirements of division 3 of article III of this chapter shall be authorized only upon the planning commission making all of the following findings: 
(1)  By reason of the shape or topographical conditions of a parcel of property which were not created by the owner or applicant, the strict application of division 3 of article III of this chapter would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other similarly situated property owners in the same zoning district; 
(2)  By reason of the shape or topographical conditions of a parcel of property which were not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for development under any design configuration allowed by these subdivision regulations unless a variance is granted; 
(3)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute the grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other property owners in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; 
(4)  The requested variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; and 
(5)  The requested variance will not in any manner vary the provisions in chapter 46, the city comprehensive plan or the zoning map of city. 
(b)  No variance shall be granted by the director of community development to: 
(1)  Allow any variance which conflicts with or changes any requirement enacted as a condition of zoning or of a special land use permit by the mayor and city council; 
(2)  Increase the density allowed on the property; or 
(3)  Vary the requirements set forth in subdivision V, division 3 of this article. 
(c)  Applications for variances must be submitted in writing to the director of community development. Applications shall contain all those materials and documents required by the community development director that are necessary to demonstrate the necessity for the variance and compliance with the requirements of this Code. At a minimum, the variance application must contain a full explanation of the reasons for the variance and must include a plat that shows the proposed subdivision designed without the variance and a plat that shows the proposed subdivision designed with the variance. 
(d)  Applications for variances shall be decided within 60 days after the filing of a complete application for variance. All land development activity associated with a proposed variance shall cease until a final decision on the variance is made by the director of community development. Land development activity that is not related to the proposed variance may continue unabated. 
(e)  All decisions by the director of community development approving or disapproving a variance must be issued in writing and must provide the grounds for the decision of the director of community development. 
(f)  Appeals of variances shall be made to the construction board of appeals. Any person or entity (i.e., an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor or a neighbor whose property line is within 1,500 feet of the nearest property line of the proposed subdivision) aggrieved by a variance decision of the director of community development may appeal such decision by filing a petition to the construction board of appeals. Appeals of the decision of the construction board of appeals made by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-64), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-64), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-64), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-86. - Enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
(a)  General. It shall be the duty of the mayor to enforce this article. 
(b)  Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction in recorder's court shall be punished as is provided in section 1-7. Each violation of these regulations shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any structures, buildings, lots or parcels or parts thereof, where anything in violation of these regulations exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings, including the issuance of stop work orders and actions in a court of law, may be taken by the city in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-65), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-87—22-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE 
Subdivision I. - Minor Subdivision Plat 

Sec. 22-116. - Minor subdivision plat requirements. 
A minor plat may be either a combination plat (combining two lots into one), or a minor subdivision plat (dividing one lot into two). The requirements for a minor plat shall be the same as for a preliminary plat as defined in subdivision II of this division, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-87), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-117—22-145. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Preliminary Plat 

Sec. 22-146. - Application and preliminary plat required. 
The owner of the land where the proposed development is to occur, or his authorized agent, shall file a preliminary plat with the community development department along with an application for approval. The application shall: 
(1)  Be submitted with the plan set for a land-disturbance permit; 
(2)  Be accompanied by minimum of six copies of the plans, which must be prepared by a registered civil engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect, as described in these regulations and complying in all respects with these regulations; 
(3)  Be accompanied by an application fee in the amount set by the mayor and city council; and 
(4)  Include the name, address and telephone number of an agent who is authorized to receive all notices required by these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-88), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-147. - Required information. 
The following existing conditions shall be shown on a preliminary plat: 
(1)  Boundary lines. Perimeter boundary of the overall tract, bearings and distances, referred by the legal point of beginning; 
(2)  Streets on or adjacent to tract. Name, right-of-way width, and location of streets on and adjacent to the tract, and any existing railroad, sidewalk, trail, or bike lane; 
(3)  Contour data. Topographic contour data at no more than two-foot elevation intervals. The source of this data shall be written on the plat. Existing contour data from the city geographic information system department may be used where available; 
(4)  Tree survey. A tree survey in compliance with section 22-34 or tree sample calculations where allowed by the city arborist which may be submitted as a separate plan; 
(5)  Historic resources. Any building, structure, site or district identified as historic by the historic preservation commission, the county historic resources survey, the comprehensive plan, by listing on the state or National Register of Historic Places, or by listing as a National Historic Landmark; 
(6)  Natural features on tract. Other conditions on the tract such as stream buffers, state waters, cemeteries, wetlands, existing structures, intermediate regional floodplain boundary (where available), rock outcroppings, and archeological resources; 
(7)  Soils. Location of soils as shown on soil survey for the city, by the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Geographical data. Numerical and graphic scales, north arrow, land lot and district numbers and lines, city and city names and limit lines; 
(9)  Prior subdivisions. Name and reference of any formerly recorded subdivision crossing any of the land shown on the plat; 
(10)  Zoning district. Show zoning district, case number and conditions of zoning; 
(11)  Permits. Show any special administrative permit number, special land use permit number, or board of appeals case number and conditions; 
(12)  Variances. Show any administrative variance approvals; 
(13)  Septic tanks. Show existing septic tank and drain field location or note absence; 
(14)  Sewers. Show size and location of sanitary sewer mains available; 
(15)  Sewer easements. Show a sanitary sewer easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for all county maintained lines not within county or city right-of-way, unless otherwise required by water and sewer department; 
(16)  Water mains. Show size and location of water mains and fire hydrants; 
(17)  Water main easements. Show a water main easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for all county-maintained lines not within right-of-way; 
(18)  IRF. Show on plan whether FEMA or city benchmark is used to establish IRF also identify location of benchmark; 
(19)  Wetlands. Provide wetlands determination from United States Army Corps of Engineers; 
(20)  Receiving waters. Provide distance to and name of receiving waters; 
(21)  Certificate of conformity. Certification by the applicant that no lots platted are nonconforming or will result in any nonconforming lots; 
(22)  Bury pits. Show location of any existing inert waste bury pits; 
(23)  Seal. All sheets of plats must be sealed by a professional engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect currently registered in the state; 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-89), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-148. - Depiction of proposed physical layout. 
The following proposed features shall be shown on the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Title. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, if known, with the name of the property owner and designers and the date of the plat; 
(2)  Street names. The name of all proposed streets; 
(3)  Rights-of-way. Street rights-of-way and widths indicated, including any necessary right-of-way required for improvements as shown on the thoroughfare plan; 
(4)  Sidewalks. All proposed sidewalk and bike lane locations; 
(5)  Lots. Lot lines, lot numbers, block letters, and the total number of proposed lots within the development; 
(6)  Dedications. Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for common areas, public parks, open space, schools, playgrounds, multi-use trails, or other public uses, together with the purpose and the conditions or limitations of these dedications, if any; 
(7)  Yards. Minimum building setback lines as required under the yard requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
(8)  Zoning conditions. All conditions of zoning and proposed deed restrictions shall be recited on the preliminary plat; 
(9)  Corner lots. Show that corner lots shall have an extra width of not less than 15 feet more than required for interior lots for the zoning district within which they are located; 
(10)  Transitional buffers. Show transitional buffers, if any and any required screening fencing; 
(11)  BMPs. Show conceptual location of stormwater management and water quality BMP facilities on preliminary plat; 
(12)  IRF. Show proposed IRF contour, spot elevation (if available) and source; 
(13)  Covenants. Indicate whether the proposed subdivision will be subject to private covenants and whether a homeowners' association will be established; 
(14)  Sewer easements. Show a sanitary sewer easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for all county-maintained lines not within county or city right-of-way; 
(15)  Water main easements. Show a water main easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for all county-maintained lines not within right-of-way; 
(16)  Fire hydrants. Show new fire hydrants and eight-inch firelines; 
(17)  Fencing. Show any required fencing around detention ponds, if required; and 
(18)  Electrical service. Show whether electrical service will be aboveground or underground. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-90), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-149. - Additional information to be filed with the preliminary plat. 
The following additional information shall be submitted with the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Owner consent. The property owner must consent in writing to the proposed development in a consent affidavit provided by the community development director with the application; 
(2)  Location. A small map of the city depicting the subdivision location within the city; 
(3)  Vicinity map. Vicinity map at a scale of 400 feet to one inch showing the location of the tract with reference to surrounding properties, streets, municipal boundaries, and streams within 500 feet of the tract show zoning districts of adjoining property; 
(4)  Adjacent properties. Names of adjoining property owners and the zoning classification of adjacent properties; and 
(5)  Engineer. Name, address and phone number of the developer and engineer on plat. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-91), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-150. - Scale. 
Preliminary plats shall be prepared at an appropriate scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch. Maximum sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-92), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-151—22-168. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Final Plat 

Sec. 22-169. - Preparation. 
The applicant shall have a registered surveyor prepare the final plat of the subdivision. An application for final plat approval may be made when a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision has been approved and construction of all required infrastructure is complete, or a surety is provided as approved by the director of community development, to ascertain its location as built. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-121), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-170. - Filing; digital submission of final plat; fee. 
The final plat and a fee in the amount established by the mayor and city council shall be filed with the city. The final plat and as-built drawings shall also be submitted in a digital format acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-122), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-171. - Review certification by city departments. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the final plat, the community development director shall forward copies of the final plat to the following city departments, if applicable, for certification that the improvements are complete and in conformity with the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Community development department; 
(2)  Geographic information system department; 
(3)  Police and fire department; 
(4)  Transportation division; 
(5)  Roads and drainage division; and 
(6)  Any other department or entity the community development director deems appropriate. 
(b)  The applicant shall obtain the approval of the county health department and the county department for watershed management; signatures for said approvals shall be provided on the cover sheet. 
(c)  Any department to which the final plat is submitted shall note on the plat whether the development meets or fails to meet the requirements of this Code and of that department, specifically, whether all improvements were properly completed and whether the improvements are in conformity with the preliminary plat. If the improvements are incomplete or if the improvements are not in conformity with the preliminary plat, the department shall note on the plat the manner in which the plat fails to meet these requirements. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the annotated copies from all of the departments which received the final plat for notation, the community development director shall independently review the final plat and determine whether it complies with all city zoning, environmental, and subdivision ordinances and regulations and all applicable state and federal laws. The community development director shall certify in writing on the final plat their finding of whether the final plat complies with all city zoning, environmental, and subdivision ordinances and regulations and all applicable state and federal laws. 
(e)  The final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat on file with the city and shall comply with the city zoning ordinance including conditions of zoning. 
(f)  The final plat shall not be forwarded to the mayor until such time as the community development director certify that the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat and complies with all city zoning, environmental, and subdivision ordinances and regulations and all applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-123), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-172. - Referral to the mayor. 
(a)  No later than 14 calendar days after receiving the annotated copies from all of the departments which received the final plat for notation, the community development director shall transmit the final plat, containing the certification required in section 22-171(d) and any necessary supplemental materials to the mayor for decision. 
(b)  The mayor as the designee for the governing authority of the city shall approve or disapprove the final plat within ten days of receiving the final plat, as indicted by a receipt stamp on the final plat. If the final plat is not approved or denied within ten days of receipt, the final plat shall be approved automatically and the mayor shall acknowledge and certify such approval. If the final plat is denied, the mayor shall provide the reason for denial in writing and such writing shall be given to the applicant with the denied plat. If the final plat is approved, the mayor shall place the following wording on the original as follows: 
This plat has been submitted to and accepted by the mayor of City of Tucker, Georgia, and has been approved as required by state law and city codes as meeting all conditions precedent to recording in the superior court of this circuit. 
Dated this _____ day of _____, 20___. 
By:___________ 
[Mayor or designee of the governing authority] 
(c)  Final plat acknowledgement and approval by the mayor shall constitute that approval, if any, required in order to file subdivision plats with the clerk of the superior court of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-124), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-173. - Appeal of final plat decision. 
The decision of the mayor to approve or disapprove the final plat may be appealed only by a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-125), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-174. - Recording. 
The approved final plat shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county by the applicant and returned to the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-126), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-175. - Dedication offers. 
The filing and recording of the final plat by the community development director shall, upon completion of the improvements by the applicant and compliance with all procedures of this subdivision, be deemed an acceptance of the dedication of the streets and other public land as shown upon said plat on behalf of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-127), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-176. - Material specifications for drawing. 
The final plat shall be composed of Mylar, or other durable, stable, and reproducible drafting medium approved by the community development director and must meet all provisions of the Georgia Plat Act. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-128), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-177. - Scale. 
Final plats shall be prepared at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch and shall have a maximum sheet size of not more than 24 inches in width and 36 inches in length, and a minimum sheet size of not less than 17 inches in width and 21 inches in length. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-129), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-178. - Compliance with zoning ordinance. 
The final plat shall comply with the requirements in chapter 46 and all conditions of zoning for the subject property to be shown in the upper right corner of the final plat with text height at a minimum of 0.18 inches for 24-inch by 36-inch sheet size and 0.09 inches for 17-inch by 21-inch sheet size. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-130), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-179. - Required information. 
The final plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearings and lengths of every right-of-way, street line, lot line, boundary line and building line, whether curved or straight; 
(2)  Tract boundary lines, land lot and district lines, city and county limit lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; 
(3)  All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one hundredth of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest second; 
(4)  Name and right-of-way width of each street including necessary right-of-way required for present or future widening of major, minor, collector, residential or other streets as shown on the thoroughfare plan; 
(5)  Sidewalk and bike path locations and width; 
(6)  House numbers: numbers will be assigned by the geographic information system department and placed on the final plat by the community development department; 
(7)  Title, north arrow, date, scale, land lot numbers and district numbers; 
(8)  Location, dimensions and purpose of easements and areas to be dedicated to public use, common areas or sites for other than residential use with notices stating their purpose and limitations; 
(9)  Intermediate regional floodplain contour line and setback line required by this chapter, state waters/state streams, wetlands, and required stream buffers; 
(10)  Water and sewer utility locations, and the location and type of permanent stormwater management facilities and water quality facilities; 
(11)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; all lot and block numerals shall be kept in a uniform sequence on all plats and units of the subdivision; 
(12)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers; within each subdivision set one monument on two front corners of the property adjacent to existing rights-of-way on interior streets, or as otherwise approved by the development director; each monument shall be a minimum four-inch diameter disk by 24-inch high concrete monument with brass caps set flush with finished grade; and 
(13)  Lots which shall not be built upon until detailed plans for grading and drainage have been approved by the development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-131), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-180. - Space for comments; certifications. 
A blank space of 50 square inches shall be provided on the final plat to allow room for any stamps, notes, approval or denials as required to be placed thereon by county and city agencies and for the certification of the community development director and approval or denial by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-132), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-181. - Surveyor's and owner's acknowledgments. 
The following wording for the engineer's, surveyor's and owner's acknowledgments shall be shown and certified on the final plat: 
(1)  Surveyor's acknowledgment. 
In my opinion, this plat, drawn by me or under my supervision, was made from an actual survey, and is a correct representation of the land platted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law. 
_____R.L.S. No.___ 
(2)  Owner's acknowledgment. 
I, ___________, the owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and for value received the sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, do hereby convey all water mains and sewer lines shown hereon in fee simple to DeKalb County, and further dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets and rights-of-way, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places hereon shown for the purposes and considerations herein expressed. In consideration of the approval of this development plan and other valuable considerations, the owner further releases and holds harmless City of Tucker from any and all claims, damages or demands arising on account of the design, construction and maintenance of the property shown hereon; on account of the roads, fills, embankments, ditches, cross-drains, culverts, water mains, sewer lines, and bridges within the proposed rights-of-way and easements shown; and on account of backwater, the collection and discharge of surface water, or the changing of courses of streams. 
And further the owner warrants that he owns fee simple title to the property shown hereon and agrees that City of Tucker shall not be liable to him, his heirs, successors or assigns for any claims or damages resulting from the construction or maintenance of cross-drain extensions, drives, structures, streets, culverts, curbs or sidewalks, the changing of courses of streams and rivers, flooding from natural creeks and rivers, surface waters and any other matter whatsoever. I further warrant that I have the right to sell and convey the land according to this plat and do hereby bind myself and owners subsequent in title to defend by virtue of these present. 
All single-family residential lots on this plat are included in a special taxing district for funding the maintenance of stormwater detention facilities required because of this development. [Note: This paragraph is only required in single-family residential subdivisions.] 
All roads have been properly designed and dedicated to accommodate any required parking in the right-of-way. 
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand this _____ day of _____, 20___. 
(Seal) 
(Owner) 
Witness: 
Notary Public. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-133), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-182. - Protective covenants to meet minimum zoning requirements. 
The final plat shall not contain protective covenants stipulating lower standards than the minimum restrictions required by the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-134), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-183. - Disclosure statement required for residential subdivisions and multi-phase residential developments. 
(a)  Before any final plat for any residential subdivision and any multi-phase residential development, may be submitted for review by the city, a disclosure statement, sworn to by the applicant under penalty of perjury before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths, must be filed with the community development director. The disclosure statement shall be in a form promulgated by the community development director and approved by the city attorney. 
(b)  Any applicant for the final plat, intending to make written or oral representations to potential purchasers of homes in any residential subdivision and any multi-phase residential development must submit the information specified herein on the disclosure statement which shall be made available to members of the public by the community development director: 
(1)  An estimated date of completion of the entire residential subdivision; 
(2)  A statement of the average size of homes to be constructed in the subdivision, any specified style of architecture, landscaping, the type of construction materials to be used (i.e., brick, stone, stucco, pressboard, etc.), and the average size of lots; 
(3)  A statement of the applicant's commitment to build any community amenities within the subdivision, including, but not limited to, a clubhouse, tennis courts or swimming pool; 
(4)  A statement of the general terms and conditions at which the applicant proposes to dispose of the lots and/or homes in the residential subdivision; 
(5)  Copies of all forms of conveyance to be used in selling lots to potential purchasers; 
(6)  A statement of all deed restrictions, easements and covenants applicable to the residential subdivision; 
(7)  Copies of instruments creating any deed restrictions, easements and covenants applicable to the residential subdivision; 
(8)  A statement regarding whether there will be a mandatory membership in any homeowners' association and if so, a copy of the budget for the association for its first year of operation including the estimated amount of the first year's assessments and the estimated amount of revenue to be subsidized by the developer; and 
(9)  An explanation of the timing and method of transfer of control of the association to the homeowners where there is a mandatory membership in the homeowners' association governing the residential subdivision. 
(c)  With respect to the first phase and subsequent phases of a multi-phase residential development, the applicant must also submit the following information: 
(1)  An estimated date of completion of each phase of a multi-phase residential development and estimated date of completion of all phases of the development; 
(2)  A statement of the average size of homes to be constructed in the future phases of the development, any specified type of architecture, landscaping, the type of construction materials to be used (i.e., brick, stone, stucco, pressboard, etc.), and the average size of lots; 
(3)  A statement of any community amenities to be built within the development currently or in the future, including, but not limited to, a clubhouse, tennis courts or swimming pools the applicant is committed to constructing in future phases; and 
(4)  A statement of the general terms and conditions at which the applicant proposes to dispose of the lots and/or homes in the future phases of the development. 
(d)  If the applicant intends to make no representations or commitments to potential purchasers concerning each of the representations set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the applicant shall note the same in the disclosure statement filed with the community development director which statement shall be made available by the community development director to the public. 
(e)  After the required disclosure statement has been submitted, the community development director shall examine the information provided and determine whether the information submitted is consistent with the final plat and if the information is consistent, the community development director shall approve the disclosure statement in writing within 35 days of submission of the statement. 
(f)  If it appears to the community development director that a disclosure statement is incomplete or fraudulent, the community development director shall disapprove the disclosure statement and notify the applicant for the final plat in writing within 14 days after the initial submission of the statement. Such notification shall serve to suspend the review of the final plat by any city employee or official until the applicant files such additional information, as the community development director shall require. No final plat may be certified by the community development director until such time as the community development director approves the applicant's disclosure statement. 
(g)  If at any time after approval of the disclosure statement the community development director becomes aware that the disclosure statement contains false or misleading information, or that the applicant is developing in a manner inconsistent with the approved disclosure statement, the community development director shall disapprove the disclosure statement and notify the applicant in writing that the disclosure statement has been disapproved. 
(h)  Subsequent to the recording of the final plat for a residential subdivision and for each phase of a multi-phase residential development, the approved disclosure statement on file with the city shall be provided by any seller to potential purchasers at the execution of the purchase and sales contract or, if no such contract is executed, ten days prior to the real estate closing on any property governed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-135), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-184. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell property in a residential subdivision or a multi-phase residential development without providing a potential purchaser with a copy of an approved disclosure statement as required by section 22-183. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide the community development director with false or misleading information in an approved disclosure statement as required by section 22-183. It shall be unlawful for any person to develop in a manner inconsistent with the approved disclosure statement. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating this section shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-136), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-185—22-206. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Revised Final Plat 

Sec. 22-207. - Procedure. 
(a)  The original recorded plat shall be used for all revisions. 
(b)  When it becomes necessary to revise an original recorded final plat due to some error, required adjustment or desired adjustment, the applicant shall confer with the community development director to determine if the revision is a minor or major revision. The applicant's surveyor shall make the necessary corrections on the original final plat or prepare a new tracing of that portion of the subdivision involved. The subdivision name, date and book and page number of the original recording shall be noted on the new plat. If the original final plat is not available, then any proposed revision to the final plat shall be considered a major change. 
(c)  A minor change is one that corrects a drafting or scrivener's error, changes or moves a lot line while not changing the number of lots or site density or is otherwise administrative in nature and does not affect how the subdivision will be developed or built. A major change is any other change, including changes that alter how the subdivision will be developed or built, such as, but not limited to, increasing or decreasing the number of lots, changing the location of any public facilities or utilities, and revising protective covenants applying to the property. 
(d)  If the community development director determines the change is minor, then the community development director will approve and accept the revised final plat; the applicant shall record the revised final plat with the clerk of superior court. 
(e)  If the community development director determines the change is major, the revised plat must proceed through the approval process for final plats described in this Code. 
(f)  The basis for the community development director's characterization of the change as either major or minor shall be recorded in black ink on the revised plat. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-146), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-208. - When new tracing required. 
If the original final plat is not available, the applicant shall prepare a new Mylar or other durable, stable, and reproducible drafting medium approved by the community development department, in accordance with section 22-207(b). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-147), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-209. - Revisions and explanation to be in black ink. 
Revisions and a notation explaining the revisions shall be shown in black ink on the revised plat. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-148), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-210. - Space for certifications. 
A blank space consisting of not less than 50 square inches shall be provided on the revised plat to accommodate required certifications. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-149), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-211. - Scale. 
Revised plats shall be prepared at a scale of not less than 50 feet to one inch. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-150), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-212. - Compliance with zoning ordinance. 
The revised plat shall comply with the regulations of the city zoning ordinance, including all conditions of zoning, which are to be shown in the upper right hand corner of the revised plat. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-151), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-213. - Inclusion of required wording. 
The revised plat shall show the following wording in black ink: 
This revised plat has been submitted to the mayor of City of Tucker, Georgia, and has been approved as required by state law and city codes as meeting all conditions precedent to recording in the superior court of this circuit. This plat is hereby approved subject to any protective covenants shown hereon. 
Dated this _____ day of _____, 20___. 
By: ___________ 
Mayor or designee 
City of Tucker, Georgia 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-152), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-214. - Original protective covenants not to be changed. 
All revisions to original plats shall be bound by the protective covenants on the original final plat and a statement to that effect shall be noted in black ink on the revised plat unless noted otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-153), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-215. - City may require additional data. 
Other data which may be required in support of a revised final plat are a final engineering design report on proposed revisions and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as may be required by city officials in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-154), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-216—22-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 22-239. - Adequate public facilities. 
The applicant shall submit sufficient information and data with the application on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate compliance with the following: 
(1)  Comprehensive plan consistency required. Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the city comprehensive plan and all applicable capital improvement plans. 
(2)  Water. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
(3)  Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
(4)  Stormwater management. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding as required under section 22-35 stormwater management. Stormwater quality management facilities shall be adequate as required by section 22-36. The city may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and or the construction of off-site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
(5)  Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation, shall be properly related to the comprehensive plan, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. 
(6)  Extension policies. All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines, and telecommunications lines shall be constructed through new development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-166), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-240. - Conservation of natural resources. 
(a)  To better implement the policies and purposes of this subdivision, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city and to minimize the negative environmental effects of development, subdivisions shall be designed and developed to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity. The following land areas shall be preserved in their natural state or not subject to any development or land-disturbance activity, and shall not be part of the buildable area: 
(1)  Wetlands; and 
(2)  The intermediate regional floodplain. 
(b)  Subdivisions shall be also laid out to: 
(1)  Avoid adversely affecting watercourses, groundwater, and aquifer recharge; 
(2)  Minimize cut and fill; 
(3)  Minimize impervious cover and the environmental impacts of roads and access points; 
(4)  Minimize flooding; and 
(5)  Minimize adverse effects of noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring properties. 
(c)  The community development director shall not recommend approval for a preliminary plat or parts thereof if the director determines that: 
(1)  The areas listed in subsection (a) of this section have not been set aside and protected from development; 
(2)  The proposed subdivision does not comply with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section; or 
(3)  If the proposed subdivision is not in the best interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-167), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-241—22-258. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Streets 

Sec. 22-259. - Generally. 
(a)  The provisions of this subdivision apply to streets in subdivisions and in other projects requiring a development or land-disturbance permit from the city. 
(b)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all subdivision streets shall conform to the provisions of this subdivision and to the thoroughfare plan. New streets shall be designed and located with consideration of their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-181), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-260. - Arrangement where not shown on thoroughfare plan. 
Where not shown in the thoroughfare plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the mayor and city council to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-182), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-261. - Minor streets/minor arterials. 
(a)  Local residential streets shall be so designed to discourage speeding and encourage a safe environment for pedestrians and bicyclists. They shall be designed to discourage high speed through traffic. 
(b)  Within historic districts, the platting of lots and streets shall be compatible with the historic patterns that exist within the historic district except for numbered state or federal routes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-183), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-183), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-262. - Thoroughfare plan. 
The community development director and public works director shall review changes in the patterns of traffic, land development, and subdivisions, and prepare a report to the mayor and city council with recommendations concerning appropriate revisions to the thoroughfare plan. Such review shall: 
(1)  Ensure safe and efficient access between neighborhoods and local services; 
(2)  Ensure the continuity and adequacy of local streets, collector streets and arterial streets to form a coherent and continuous system of routes; 
(3)  Identify applications of appropriate traffic calming and traffic management strategies to discourage unnecessary traffic and travel speeds in neighborhoods; and 
(4)  Ensure a coherent and continuous system for pedestrian and bicycle travel. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-184), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-184), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-263. - Subdivisions bordering on or containing arterial streets, railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains an arterial street (major thoroughfares, and minor thoroughfares), a railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway right-of-way, the community development director may require the following: 
(1)  Rear service alleys to facilitate traffic flow, safety and public services; 
(2)  Provision of one or a pair of smaller marginal access streets approximately parallel to and on each side of this right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as park or open space and to provide for multipurpose trails. These distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations; or 
(3)  In the case of limited-access highways only, reverse frontage lots may be created with landscape buffers and a non-access reserve strip along the rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-185), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-185), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-264. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips that separate developed or developable land from necessary access to streets shall be prohibited except when such access is controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-186), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-265. - Street intersection spacing. 
Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-187), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-187), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-266. - Intersections—Right angles. 
Street intersections in subdivisions shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. No interior angle shall be less than 75 degrees. Intersections of more than two streets shall be designed according to the specific types illustrated in the city's design and construction standards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-188), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-267. - Intersections—Property line to be mitered. 
At each street intersection in a subdivision the property line at each block corner shall either be mitered or rounded. A mitered property line shall be located on the interior chord of a convex curve or located 15 feet inside the tangent of a concave curve. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-189), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-189), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-268. - Traffic improvements, street improvements, curb cuts, visibility requirements, and private street construction standards. 
(a)  Each building shall be located on a lot or parcel that abuts a public street or private street. Private streets shall only be allowed if the development seeking to have a private street is ten acres or larger in size. The planning commission shall have the authority to waive this minimum acreage requirement if all real property owners that abut the proposed private street agree to such waiver. 
(b)  Where this subdivision measures minimum building setback lines and frontages, or imposes development standards in connection with, or with reference to public streets, such measurements or standards set forth in the district regulations and supplemental regulations of chapter 46, in this subdivision or elsewhere in this Code shall apply similarly for property abutting a private street where such private street has been approved by the planning commission. Nothing in this section is intended to authorize any kind of development on a private street that would not be authorized where there was a public right-of-way. 
(c)  Private streets within any zoning district shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this Code. Private streets within any district shall be assigned names and locations. The names of these streets shall be shown on plans required for the issuance of building and development permits as provided in this subdivision and chapters 8 and 46. The geographical information services department shall approve all private street names and addresses, thereby avoiding conflicting names and addresses. 
(d)  Lots may front on a public street or private street constructed to the standards found in this subdivision. 
(e)  Where sewer lines are constructed underneath a private street, the developer is required to grant an easement to the county for installation, maintenance and repair of such sewer lines. 
(f)  Private streets shall not be eligible for participation in the city's traffic calming program as provided for in chapter 28. 
(g)  Private streets shall not be eligible for participation in the city's residential sidewalk district program. 
(h)  Developers and property owners' associations shall ensure access to all private streets by emergency and law enforcement vehicles and shall ensure that private streets are constructed to allow access by all emergency vehicles and law enforcement vehicles. 
(i)  The use of private streets may not result in an increase in permitted density above that which would otherwise be permitted by the applicable district regulations. Density calculations shall be made based on a public street system and the preliminary plat that provides for a private street shall be density neutral. Additionally, a utility easement is not to be included in any plat as a part of an individual lot and thus such land that comprises the utility easement cannot be used to calculate the required minimum lot size, or minimum front yard size. 
(j)  Private streets shall comply with requirements for public streets found in this subdivision and all other applicable sections of this Code. Private streets shall be surfaced with the same type of materials that are used by the city's department of public works for the surfacing and resurfacing of public streets or with materials that are as protective as those used by the city to surface and resurface streets so long as such alternative materials are approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-189.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-269. - Approval to create a private street. 
(a)  The community development director, or his designee, shall authorize a private street where the community development department has certified that the applicant has submitted all required documentation as set forth herein and where the community development director finds that: 
(1)  The location of the proposed private street will not adversely impact use of any existing surrounding public street; 
(2)  The location of the proposed private street will not adversely impact adjacent existing communities or neighborhoods; 
(3)  The applicant has shown that there is the requisite legal mechanism for the maintenance of the proposed private street; 
(4)  The applicant has provided written evidence that the proposed private street system is acceptable to the city departments or divisions responsible for law enforcement, sanitation, transportation and fire and rescue; and 
(5)  If the private street is to be located in an historic district then the applicant must provide the community development director with a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the private street from the historic preservation commission. If no such certificate of appropriateness is provided to the community development director, then the community development director shall deny the application for a private street. 
(b)  Street rights-of-way shall be owned by the mandatory homeowners' association as required by section 22-270. Street rights-of-way shall comply with all the requirements set forth in this Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in this chapter and in chapter 46. An access easement and a utility easement shall entirely overlay the rights-of-way and shall be dedicated to the city for public use. All applicable setbacks, lot widths and lot areas shall be measured from the homeowners' association right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-189.2), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-189.2), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-189.2), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-270. - Legal mechanism for maintenance of private streets, resurfacing fund. 
(a)  Maintenance of private streets. 
(1)  Each developer that chooses to include private streets within a condominium, as that term is defined by state law, or any other residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or office development shall organize and establish a property owners' association prior to recording of the final plat. Membership in the property owners' association shall be mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot, building or unit within the development. The property owners' association shall be organized so that it has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the private street and required improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses. The declaration of covenants creating the property owners' association shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county and the recorded declaration of covenants and articles of incorporation creating the property owners' association shall provide that all private streets and associated improvements are owned by the property owners' association or are held in common by the property owners within the development. Said streets shall be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the city. The recorded declaration of covenants and articles of association shall specifically require the property owners' association to repair and maintain each private street in the same manner as similar public streets are maintained by the city and such maintenance and repair shall be performed in compliance with all city standards and all applicable provisions of law. 
(2)  Prior to any final plat approval, the developer shall submit articles of incorporation, declaration of covenants and bylaws for the property owners' association to the community development department. Those documents must thereafter be reviewed and approved by the city attorney. 
(b)  Maintenance fund. The declaration of covenants and articles of association shall provide for a street maintenance fund the proceeds of which shall be used solely for the purpose of regular maintenance of the street, whether for resurfacing or a similar purpose. For the purposes of providing further assurance that city funds shall not be used for maintenance of private streets, the developer shall submit proof of deposit of 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development and development director or designee, in an interest-bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. 
(c)  Maintenance bond. At the end of the 12-month maintenance period provided for in section 22-548, a developer must provide a maintenance bond renewable annually to cover the cost of maintenance and repair for any private streets within a subdivision. The bond shall be for an amount equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or designee. The developer may avoid securing the maintenance bond set forth in this subsection if the developer submits proof to the community development department that 100 percent of the then-current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development and development director or designee, has been deposited in an interest-bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. If the developer chooses this alternative, the declarations of covenants and articles of association shall specifically require the property owners' association to continuously maintain 100 percent of the then-current estimate of resurfacing costs of the private streets in this maintenance fund. 
(d)  Assessment and liens. The property owners' association must be empowered to levy assessments against owners within the development for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private streets and other items set forth in subsection (a) of this section. At least 15 percent of all fees or assessments paid shall be set aside in the maintenance fund. Any unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien in favor of the property owners' association on the lot, building or unit of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-189.3), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-189.3), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-271. - Inspection of private streets within nine months of approval of the final plat; failure to correct deficiencies. 
(a)  Within nine months following approval of the final plat, the city's development director or designee shall inspect the private street to ensure compliance with all city standards and all applicable provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in law for public streets, curbs, sidewalks, signage and street lighting. The developer shall be notified of any deficiencies in writing, and such deficiencies shall be corrected within 60 days of the written notice of deficiencies unless the city agrees to an extension of that period in writing. 
(b)  Failure to correct the complete list of deficiencies shall be a violation of this section and shall subject the developer to prosecution for a Code violation in the recorders court of the city. Any person found to have violated this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 for each violation. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue any such violation. 
(c)  The community development director or designee shall deny the issuance of certificates of occupancy until all deficiencies have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-189.4), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-189.4), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-272. - Abandonment of existing public streets. 
(a)  Any abandonment of a public street by the city pursuant to this section must comply with the applicable requirements set forth in state law and this Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 32-7-2(b) and 32-7-4 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
(b)  Property owners may petition the governing authority to abandon an existing public street that abuts the owners' property. The petition must include documents that comply with all of the following requirements set forth in this section. 
(1)  The petition shall contain evidence that each abutting landowner to the public street seeks to have the street abandoned. 
(2)  The petition shall contain evidence that once abandoned pursuant to the requirements of state law, all property owners that abut the street agree that ownership of the street shall be placed in a property owners' association. The petition shall include evidence that 100 percent of all property owners in the property owners' association have agreed that the street at issue may become private and have agreed to maintain and exercise control over the private street as required by this subdivision. 
(3)  The petition shall contain evidence that the property owners' association has the financial ability to maintain the street and associated improvements in perpetuity. 
(4)  The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants and articles of association or other legal instruments creating the property owners' association provide or have been amended to provide that membership in the property owners' association shall be mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot, building or unit on the street. 
(5)  The petition shall include evidence that the property owners' association shall be organized so that it has absolute legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the private street and required improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses. 
(6)  The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants creating the property owners' association shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county and the recorded declaration of covenants and articles of incorporation creating the property owners' association shall provide that all private streets and associated improvements are owned by the property owners' association or are held in common by the property owners within the development. Said streets shall be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the city. 
(7)  The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants and articles of association shall provide for a maintenance fund, the proceeds of which shall be used solely for the purpose of regular maintenance of the street, whether for resurfacing or similar purpose. For the purposes of providing further assurances that city funds shall not be used for maintenance of private streets, the property owners' association shall submit proof of a maintenance fund equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or designee, in an interest-bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. 
(8)  The petition shall include evidence that the property owners have a maintenance bond renewable annually in an amount equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or designee. 
(9)  The petition shall include evidence that the property owners' association is empowered to levy assessments against owners on the street for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private streets and improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses and evidence that any unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien in favor of the property owners' association on the lot, building, or unit of the owner. At least 15 percent of all fees or assessments paid shall be set aside in the maintenance fund. 
(c)  The governing authority shall not consider a petition for abandonment unless it: 
(1)  Contains all of the evidence and documents required by this section and has been reviewed by the planning commission; 
(2)  Is supported by an analysis by the transportation division of the department of public works that shows that the street is no longer used by the public to the extent that it serves no substantial public purpose and that the public at large will benefit from its closure since the public will no longer be responsible for any costs to maintain and repair the street; and 
(3)  Is supported by an analysis by the community development department that shows that the abandonment of the street shall not negatively impact adjacent neighboring communities and the public at large. 
(d)  Deferral of a petition and/or failure to provide a recommendation by the planning commission shall not prevent the governing authority from taking any and all appropriate action with respect to the petition identified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-189.5), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-189.5), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-273. - Street classification and right-of-way width. 
All streets shall be classified according to the table in this section. Street construction standards shall be no less than as follows; minimum right-of-way per street classification: 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-190), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-190), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-274. - Sidewalk required. 
(a)  Sidewalk is required along the frontage of any property abutting a public or private street, in accordance with chapter 46. 
(b)  Where a property or development abuts both sides of an existing or future street, sidewalk will be required on both sides of the street. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Where the director of community development determines the topography of the road frontage is such that a special hardship exists on the property, he may authorize a payment to the city in lieu of the required installation of the sidewalk. Criteria shall be established for all such approved hardships by the director of community development to determine how the amount of payment will be calculated. 
(2)  Subject to the approval of the director of community development, sidewalk may be waived on a single lot development if said lot abuts a local road and the waiver would not adversely affect pedestrian safety or future pedestrian connectivity, including, but not limited to, proximity to a school, park, or public place. Payment to the city in lieu of the required installation of the sidewalk is required. 
(Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-190.1), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-275. - Improvements, right-of-way dedication. 
(a)  All proposed new streets shall be designed and built according to one of the standards listed in section 22-273 and as shown in the city's design and construction standards. 
(b)  Where a proposed subdivision or project requiring a land development permit has frontage on an existing public street, right-of-way shall be dedicated along that frontage so as to meet the standards of that street's classification in the city thoroughfare plan. The right-of-way shall be improved wherever required as further provided in this section. For existing streets on which a proposed subdivision or project requiring a land development permit has frontage, the applicant shall: 
(1)  Dedicate a minimum of 50 percent of the required right-of-way width as measured from the centerline of the existing street right-of-way; 
(2)  Install all required sidewalks, street trees, streetlights, and place utilities according to the standards in section 22-273; and 
(3)  Provide a minimum of 50 percent of the roadway pavement required in section 22-273 and install it to the right-of-way centerline. 
(c)  Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements on the city zoning ordinance where the land is to be dedicated to the public in fee simple or an easement associated with the road is granted to the city. 
(d)  Right-of-way dedication and road widening shall extend for the full length of road frontage of the property under development and shall conform the standards in these regulations. Flares at pavement ends may be required to extend beyond property under development. 
(e)  The director of community development, or his designee, after considering all related factors, may authorize deviations from this section as follows: 
(1)  Right-of-way dedication may be waived or modified if: 
a.  Existing use of property is not to be substantially changed as a result of proposed development or construction; 
b.  Existing government construction plans for the roadway indicate lesser right-of-way would be required for dedication; or 
c.  The adjoining frontage is developed and the predominant existing right-of-way meets city standards. 
(2)  Road improvements may be waived or modified if: 
a.  Existing use of property is not to be substantially changed (i.e., traffic generation and ingress/egress would remain the same); 
b.  Governmental construction plans for the road indicate a pavement width less than city standards (only the planned pavement width shall be required); 
c.  No more than five percent of average daily traffic generation would occur between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., on weekdays; 
d.  The existing road meets current city standards; or 
e.  Widening would create a hazard to traffic, pedestrians, or bicyclists along the thoroughfare. 
(3)  The applicant may, with written concurrence of the development director and the city attorney, provide payment to the city in lieu of road improvements when: 
a.  Road improvements by state or local action are scheduled within 24 months; 
b.  Existing utility companies' improvements are situated so as to require their removal or relocation before road improvements should be accomplished; 
c.  Improvements would be economically unfeasible or would cause unreasonable land development hardships because of topography, soils, bridges, grades, etc., and delay of improvements would not adversely impact the city's road system; and 
d.  Payment for road improvements shall be in accordance with a schedule adopted by the mayor and city council in January of each year and based on current street construction costs for the required section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-191), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-191), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-276. - Half streets. 
Half streets are prohibited. The applicant shall be required to pave the full standard width of any existing unpaved public right-of-way or any proposed public street on which the proposed subdivision has frontage and access. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-192), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-277. - Temporary dead-end streets. 
Temporary dead-end streets may be platted, if recommended by the planning director and development director and approved by the mayor, where the proposed subdivision adjoins property not yet subdivided or property that may be redevelopment. A temporary dead-end street shall end in a temporary turn-around. The right-of-way of any temporary dead-end street shall be carried to the boundary of the properties being subdivided. Street signs shall be posted stating: "No Exit—Temporary dead-end street." 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-193), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-278. - Permanent dead-end streets; cul-de-sac required. 
(a)  Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently shall be provided with a cul-de-sac at the closed end and shall not exceed 1,200 feet. 
(b)  The minimum outside radius of a cul-de-sac on a public street shall be 40 feet, measured to the inside face of the outside curb. Each cul-de-sac shall provide a landscaped island at the center, and the clear width of the paved roadway measured from the outside of the landscaped island to the inside face of the outside curb shall not be less than 24 feet. The radius of the right-of-way for the cul-de-sac shall not be less than 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-194), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-279. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be required wherever topography or the presence of arterial roads or other features makes vehicular access from the front of the lot impractical or unsafe. Where the alley serves as the primary means of vehicular access to the lot, it shall be dedicated as a public right-of-way and built to the standards required in these regulations. 
(b)  Alleys may be permitted as private streets providing secondary or service access and where the principal buildings have adequate access for emergency vehicles from a public street on their frontage. Private alleys may end in a turn-around. All alleys dedicated to the public shall provide a continuous connection between one or more public streets. Alleys shall be paved and constructed to the same standards as the connecting public streets except that: 
(1)  The paved width of an alley shall be not less than 12 feet; 
(2)  Alleys shall be constructed with flush curbs; 
(3)  Buildings shall be set back at least ten feet from the back of curb of an alley. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-195), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-280. - Street grades. 
(a)  Subdivision street grades shall not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 

 
(b)  A 16 percent grade on local residential streets may be approved by the development director where a sight distance in feet of ten times the speed limit is maintained. An as-built street profile may be required. 
(c)  No street grade shall be less than one percent and no one percent grade shall be longer than 300 feet. 
(d)  Up to a 12 percent grade on alleys may be allowed, provided the development director approves any required drainage plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-196), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-281. - Minimum horizontal curve radius. 
Subdivision streets with design speeds of 20 miles per hour may not have a minimum centerline horizontal curve radius less than 90 feet. No other subdivision street shall have a horizontal curve radius less than 150 feet. Radius shall be measured from the centerline of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-197), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-282. - Minimum sight distance. 
All subdivision streets shall have a minimum sight distance according to the table below. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-198), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-198), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-283. - Design of intersections. 

 
Notes: 
(1)  SDL refers to "sight distance to the left" and SDR refers to "sight distance to the right." Minimum intersection sight distance for stopped passenger vehicles turning onto a roadway with no median and grades of three percent or less. Distances shall be adjusted for entering roadways with different design characteristics. 
(2)  If, due to other restrictions, this minimum sight distance cannot be maintained, the applicant shall, at the applicant's expense, provide adequate traffic-control devices or other physical improvements subject to the approval and installation by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-199), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-199), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-284. - Access management. 
The following standards shall apply to all subdivisions and all projects requiring a land development permit where the primary access is from a state or federal highway or an arterial classified as a major, minor or residential arterial or collector street in the city transportation and thoroughfare plan. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the state department of transportation: 
(1)  Commercial or office properties may be required, based on site conditions as determined by the development director, to provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. Cross access is not required between nonresidential uses and single-family uses. 
(2)  Joint driveways, cross access easements and pedestrian access shall be established wherever feasible along a major or minor arterial or collector street. The building site shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation of at least 1,000 feet of linear frontage along the thoroughfare. 
b.  A design speed of ten miles per hour and a two-way travel aisle width of 24 feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles. 
c.  Stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access via a service drive. 
(3)  The development director may reduce the required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided in accordance with this section. 
b.  The site plan incorporates a unified vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation system in accordance with this section. 
c.  The property owner shall enter a written agreement with the city, recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site that do not meet the requirements of this section will be closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the joint use driveway. 
(4)  All developments shall have access to a public right-of-way. The number of access points shall be as follows: 
Minimum Number of Access Points 

 
(5)  The separation of access points on a major or minor arterial or collector street shall be determined by the speed limit of the road with the following minimum spacing requirements: 

 
a.  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or public street to the centerline of the nearest existing adjacent driveway or public street. 
b.  Driveway spacing at intersections and corners shall provide adequate sight distance, response time, and permit adequate queuing space. 
c.  No driveway, except residential access, shall be allowed within 100 feet of the centerline of an intersecting arterial or collector street. 
d.  No nonresidential access except right in/right out channelized access shall be allowed within 100 feet of the centerline of any other major or minor arterial. 
e.  The requirements of this section are not intended to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
(6)  Where major or minor arterials or collector streets include medians, directional median openings shall be separated by a minimum of 330 feet and full median openings shall be separated by a minimum of 660 feet. 
(7)  All street design and other development activities, including landscaping, shall be arranged on-site so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles. 
(8)  Along major or minor arterials, residential arterials, or collector streets, a deceleration lane, a turn lane, larger or reduced turning radius, traffic islands or other devices or designs, including traffic calming devices and designs, may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards which would otherwise be created by the proposed driveway location. 
a.  Deceleration lane. A deceleration lane shall be required at each project driveway or subdivision street entrance, as applicable, that meets either the average daily traffic (ADT) or right turning volumes shown in the following table. 

 

 
Deceleration lanes located within 75 feet of an intersection radius may be extended to the intersection. 
b.  Left turn lanes. Left turn lanes must be constructed at no cost to the city if either the ADT or left turning volumes shown in the following table are met. The director of community development may also require the addition of a left turn lane, even when the conditions in the following table are not met, if roadway geometry or field conditions indicate that the safety of the traveling public would be improved. 
Table 11.4-5 Minimum Volumes Requiring Left Turn Lanes 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-200), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-200), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-200), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-285. - Planting strips. 
The city arborist shall maintain a list of trees that are appropriate for the planting strips, and no trees other than those on the list shall be placed in the planting strips. The city arborist shall also maintain specifications regarding spacing trees, and the appropriate time for planting. The trees may not count toward the fulfillment of the requirement to plant front yard trees but may fulfill any remaining density tree requirements under the tree protection ordinance, provided the requirements for tree type for planting strips are met. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-201), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-286. - Access management areas; purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent in enacting these regulations is as follows: 
(1)  To promote policies for the uniform improvement of safe and efficient movement of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, throughout the city; 
(2)  To maximize the benefit of transportation investments by maintaining a high level of functionality along major roadways; 
(3)  To encourage efficient development plans that enable individuals to fulfill their daily activities through minimal use of single-occupancy vehicles, and through increased use of alternative transportation modes such as public transit, walking, and bicycling; 
(4)  To provide for uniform control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings, interchanges, and street connections to a roadway throughout the city; 
(5)  To support the goals stated in the county comprehensive transportation plan, including improved multimodal transportation, increased accessibility, and improved travel safety and efficiency; and 
(6)  To provide a transportation system that results in less congestion and increased use of alternative modes of travel. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-202), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-287. - Scope and applicability of regulations. 
These regulations apply to each application for the development, use, alteration, parking, open space, building or modification of any structure where the subject property is, in whole or in part, contained within the boundaries of an access management area. The procedures, standards, and criteria herein apply only to that portion of the subject property within the boundaries of the access management area. Access management area regulations are supplemental to the underlying zoning district regulations. No development or building permit shall be issued to any applicant for permits for property or portions of property within an access management area until such time as the application complies with all applicable access management area regulations and underlying zoning district regulations. Where there is a conflict between an access management area regulation and another regulation contained in this Code, the access management area regulation shall govern. Where an access management area regulation is equally restrictive with other regulations in this Code, the access management area regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-202.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-288. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Continuous service drive means a privately-owned and -maintained continuous drive providing for ingress and egress to a public road. 
Lower functional classification means those areas the state department of transportation designates as lower functional classification on the current functional classification map for the city. 
Throat length means the distance between the edge of the street and the end of the driveway within a development. The 50-foot throat length will allow three cars to stack up waiting to leave without interfering with the internal circulation of the parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-202.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-289. - Driveways. 
The following standards for driveway access and spacing shall apply to all properties included in an access management area. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the state department of transportation: 
(1)  Where roadways include medians, median openings shall be separated by a minimum of 660 feet; 
(2)  Right-turn lanes shall be required at all driveways where the right-turning volume exceeds 300 vehicles per day; 
(3)  The following driveway spacing shall be required for all driveways along the corridor between median openings or intersections with public roadways (measured centerline to centerline): 
a.  The minimum distance of an upstream driveway from a median opening or intersection with a public roadway shall be 300 feet in addition to the storage length required for the driveway; 
b.  The minimum distance of a downstream driveway from a median opening or intersection with a public roadway shall be 300 feet. 
(4)  All developments shall have access to a public right-of-way. Access to a public right-of-way may be obtained via an adjacent public roadway with a lower functional classification. The maximum number of driveways per parcel depends upon the length of frontage along the corridor: 
a.  For parcels with less than 600 feet of frontage, there shall be a maximum of one driveway allowed per parcel. 
b.  For parcels with at least 600 feet of frontage, there shall be a maximum of two driveways per parcel. 
c.  For parcels which have frontage along an adjacent public roadway with a lower functional classification, the maximum number of driveways will be unchanged, but the first driveway shall be located on the adjacent public roadway. 
(5)  All driveways serving a single parcel must be at least 100 feet (measured from the centerline) from the property line that is perpendicular to the property frontage, and all deceleration lanes must be contained entirely within the property frontage. For parcels with insufficient frontage to accommodate these requirements, exceptions will be allowed, but driveway locations must be approved by the mayor or his designee. Access to a public right-of-way may be obtained through a shared driveway, which provides access to more than one parcel. Shared driveways are exempt from the requirement regarding distance of the driveway from the property line. 
(6)  There shall be a minimum driveway throat length of 50 feet. Throat length is the distance needed into a site to transition vehicles to the internal circulation system of the site. 
(7)  Driveway width dimensions; nonresidential driveway width. 

 
Notes: 
(1)  Where no other access is provided a minimum width of 20 feet shall be required. 
(2)  Additional width may be approved by the director of community development based on an approved engineering design. 
(8)  Driveway radii. The minimum driveway radii for the intersection of local and nonresidential driveways and local streets is 25 feet. For all other roadway classifications the minimum driveway radii is 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-202.3), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-202.3), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-290. - Interparcel access. 
To the maximum extent possible, sidewalks and parking lots serving adjacent lots shall be interconnected to provide continuous driveway connections and pedestrian connections between adjoining lots and streets, except that this requirement shall not apply to lots zoned for single-family or duplex residential units. Where necessary, the mayor or his designee may require access easements be provided to ensure continuous access and egress routes connecting commercial, office, and multifamily lots. Stub-outs shall be provided to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross-access via a continuous service drive. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-202.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-291. - Pedestrian and bicycle access. 
Connections to available transportation modes, such as driveways, sidewalks, and bike paths shall be constructed along adjacent streets and those entering adjoining properties. Safe, convenient, and handicap-accessible pedestrian ways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-202.5), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-292—22-317. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Easements 

Sec. 22-318. - Scope. 
The provisions of this subdivision apply to easements for or in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-216), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-319. - Permission for dedication required. 
The applicant must obtain permission from the community development director for the dedication of utility easements prior to the submission of the dedication. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-217), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-217), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-320. - Drainage easements; off-site. 
Where drainage system improvements are required on private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured by the applicant and indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-219), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-321. - Pedestrian and bicycle easements and paths. 
Pedestrian and bicycle easements and paths shall be required in subdivisions or projects requiring a land development permit to provide circulation or access to schools, parks, libraries, shopping centers, transportation centers and other community facilities. Such easements shall have a paving width of five feet. Such paths shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth in the city's design and construction standards drawings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-220), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-322—22-347. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Blocks 

Sec. 22-348. - Generally. 
The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks in subdivisions shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated or for the conservation of open space or existing historic features; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access by pedestrians and bicyclists to public transit, nearby schools, or commercial districts, vehicular circulation at safe speeds and adequate access for emergency vehicles; and 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography to minimize land-disturbance and erosion. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-236), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-349. - Desirable maximum and minimum lengths. 
The dimensions of blocks shall be designed to accommodate and promote vehicular circulation at safe speeds. The desirable maximum block length in a subdivision is 1,200 feet and the desirable minimum length is 300 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-237), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-350. - Mid-block easements and pedestrian paths. 
In blocks of 800 feet or more, the community development director may require the reservation of a ten-foot easement and the paving of a five-foot-wide path through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage-facilities, or pedestrian traffic. Such paths shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth in the city standards of construction and design drawings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-238), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-238), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-351—22-373. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Lots 

Sec. 22-374. - Generally. 
The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building, setback, side yard, and rear yard lines in subdivisions shall be in accordance with requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-256), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-375. - Corner lots. 
Corner lots for residential use in a subdivision shall have an extra width of not less than 15 feet more than required for interior lots by the zoning ordinance for the zoning district within which they are located in order to provide appropriate front building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-257), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-376. - Frontage. 
Each subdivision lot shall front upon a publicly maintained street. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-258), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-377. - Through lots and reverse frontage lots prohibited. 
Through lots and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited in subdivisions except along limited access highways, such as interstate highways. Where it is necessary to provide separation of residential development from major arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation, the lots fronting such features may be platted in greater depth so that dwellings may be set back an appropriate distance from the major arterial or other feature. Such lots may obtain vehicular access from a rear alley. Lots having access from a public alley shall not constitute a prohibited through lot. A landscape reservation of at least ten feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, may be required along the lot lines of lots abutting any disadvantageous feature or land use where access should be restricted in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-259), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-378. - Side lot lines. 
Side lot lines in subdivisions shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines as they extend from the front lot line to the front building line. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-260), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-379—22-399. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Reservation of Open Spaces 

Sec. 22-400. - Open space required; purposes. 
(a)  All residential subdivisions under five acres or consisting of 36 or less dwelling units may, and all residential subdivisions greater than five acres or consisting of more than 36 dwelling units shall be required to provide open space, in order to achieve the following public purposes: 
(1)  Conserve open land, including those areas containing historic or cultural resources, or sensitive natural features and wildlife habitats; 
(2)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land-disturbance; and 
(3)  Preserve and develop an adequate tree cover. 
(b)  Open space shall be a minimum of 20 percent of the land in all new subdivision developments. 
(c)  Open space required by this section may be used in a variety of ways, including natural areas for wildlife and ecological functions, parks, gardens, landscaped medians, squares, village greens, courtyards, recreational space, or recreational facilities, provided the use is consistent with the requirements of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-275), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-401. - Restrictions on open space. 
No more than 20 percent of the open space area may be covered with an impervious surface. Impervious surfaces may include paved trails, bike paths or multiuse paths, buildings, plazas, swimming pools, or athletic courts. Impervious surfaces in open space may not include sidewalks along public rights of way or parking lots, streets, or other areas for motorized vehicular use. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-276), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-402. - Dedication of parks, open space, recreation areas and conservation easements. 
Parks, open space, multi-use trails, recreation areas and conservation easements may be offered for dedication to the city by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-277), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-403—22-432. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Sites for Civic Uses 

Sec. 22-433. - Reservation of sites for civic uses. 
A developer may reserve and offer property within a subdivision as a site for a civic use, including, but not limited to, public schools, fire stations, police stations, or recreation centers. The developer shall allow a minimum period of one year from the date of submittal of the preliminary plat, during which time the proper authorities may authorize acquisition of the property for its intended civic purposes. If the reserved site has not been authorized for acquisition by the proper authorities within one year, the reservation shall terminate unless extended by the developer. If not extended, development of the formerly reserved site must follow the standard plat approval process. An amended final plat for the entire subdivision shall then be processed in the required manner when submitted by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-286), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-434—22-464. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 22-465. - Scope. 
This division applies to required improvements for or in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-296), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-466. - Location of required utilities in public rights-of-way. 
All required utilities within county or city rights-of-way shall be located as shown in the city standards of drawings and specifications maintained by the development department and as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-297), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-467—22-485. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Water 

Sec. 22-486. - Certification of final plat. 
There shall be a certification placed upon the final plat from the chief engineer of the county department of watershed management after the applicant has complied with the requirements of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-312), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-312), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-487. - Design, construction and acceptance. 
The design and construction of all water mains and appurtenances shall conform to the specifications and requirements of the county department of watershed management prior to the approval of a development permit by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-313), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-313), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-488. - Pavement replacement. 
Cuts in existing street pavement and driveways will be patched by the applicant/owner. The applicant/owner shall maintain the cuts in good condition until a permanent patch is made. When necessary to abate dust, mud or potholing, the contractor shall furnish and install crushed rock or cold patch asphaltic concrete to the surface of the trench. Appropriate utility permits must be obtained from the public works director prior to work being initiated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-327), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-314), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-489—22-514. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Sewers 

Sec. 22-515. - Certification of final plat. 
There shall be a certification placed upon the final plat from the chief engineer of the county department of watershed management after the applicant has complied with the requirements of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-351), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-516. - Design, construction and acceptance. 
The design and construction of all sewer lines and appurtenances shall conform to the specifications and requirements of the county department of watershed management prior to the approval of a development permit by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-352), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-517. - Pavement replacement. 
Cuts in existing street placement and driveways will be patched by the applicant/owner. The applicant/owner shall maintain the cuts in good condition until a permanent patch is made. When necessary to abate dust, mud or pot-holing, the contractor shall furnish and install crushed rock or cold patch asphaltic concrete to the surface of the trench. Appropriate utility permits must be obtained from the public works director prior to work being initiated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-353), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-518—22-542. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Streets 

Sec. 22-543. - Standards. 
(a)  Generally. Street improvements shall be provided in each subdivision in accordance with the specifications in this subdivision and the standard plans and specifications available from the city. The term "state transportation department specifications" shall refer to the state department of transportation specifications in effect at the time the work is placed under contract. The references made to these specifications shall control the materials and equipment as well as the construction method of every class of work so applicable unless otherwise noted. 
(b)  Grading. The construction limits shall be cleared of all trees, stumps, brush and rubbish before grading operations are begun. No trees, stumps, brush or rubbish shall be placed in fill sections within the construction limits. Such debris shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the development director. Fill sections shall be placed in six-inch layers with each layer thoroughly compacted with a sheep foot roller or by other approved methods before the next layer is placed, compaction to be not less than 95 percent as determined by AASHO, section T-99. Where unsatisfactory material is encountered (namely any material that will not compact properly, including solid rock) an additional 12 inches shall be excavated below the subgrade elevation and backfilled with a select material. Where unstable material is used in fills, the fill shall be left 12 inches below the subgrade elevation. This 12-inch fill section shall be filled with select material. Streets shall be graded to width of not less than 42 feet in the center of the right-of-way to provide eight-foot shoulders in accordance with city's standard plan. 
(c)  Curbing. Header curbing shall be required on all streets and shall be furnished and installed by the applicant unless grassed swales are used for water quality control and approved by the development director. The minimum classes and types of curbing permitted will be as follows: 
(1)  Granite curbing, Class D or better. 
(2)  Other than approved by the community development director, all curbing shall be placed in firm well-compacted subgrade, and curbing displaced prior to acceptance for maintenance by the city shall be reset or replaced. Specifications for the granite curbing are available from the city community development department. 
(3)  The use of rollback curb as approved by the director of community development. 
(d)  Base and paving. All roadways shall be paved according to the table below. 
Minimum Construction Standards 

 
;adv=7;Notes: 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified by the community development department or GDOT. Binder course shall consist of four inches (25 mm) Superpave base and two inches of 19 mm Superpave binder. 
(e)  As-built drawings. As-built drawings for all new streets shall be submitted to the community development department depicting a street profile based on the centerline and 50 foot stations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-376), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-376), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-376), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-544. - Street signs. 
(a)  The city's standard steel post with horizontal reflectorized street nameplates with four-inch letters shall be furnished and set by the city at all subdivision street intersections. 
(b)  Street name signs shall have four-inch black letters on reflectorized silver background with black border. Nameplates shall be mounted parallel or nearly parallel to the street. The names shall be marked and visible from both sides. Signposts shall be ten-foot poles with at least three feet well-embedded in the ground. 
(c)  The applicant shall pay to the city for each street name sign a fee in the amount established by action of the mayor and city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the mayor and city council. 
(d)  To ensure that all street markers are paid for by the applicant and installed at the proper time, the required street markers will be paid for by the applicant at the time of recording. 
(1)  For subdivisions recorded under a performance bond, the street marker will not be installed until the paving has been completed. 
(2)  For subdivisions recorded under a maintenance bond, the public works department will be furnished a plat and a memo requesting that street markers be installed at the time of recording. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-377), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-545. - Road hazards prohibited. 
Subdivision signs, planter boxes, and other similar permanent structures shall not be located on street rights-of-way and shall not be constructed in a manner which, in the opinion of the city, obstructs driveway sight distance or creates a traffic hazard; detailed plans for these structures shall be submitted to the development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-378), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-546. - Surface drainage specifications. 
(a)  The size, length and location of all surface drainage pipe or structures shall be shown on the final subdivision plats and shall be subject to the approval of the public works department. All storm drain pipes or culverts carrying stormwater from the street and adjacent property between or through lots shall be extended to at least 30 feet behind the rear of the house. Stormwater must be released into a channel without causing scouring, erosion or resulting sedimentation to the receiving channel. When necessary, the outlet channel shall include structural and vegetative measures to ensure nonerosion velocities. This requirement for pipe extension shall only apply to the discharge ends of piped systems. 
(1)  An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be made for pipes 54 inches and larger where the house site is proposed to be more than 30 feet from the center of the drainage way. 
(2)  An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be granted by the city when soil conditions prohibit erosion. 
(3)  An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be granted by the city where lots are at least one acre in size, open channels are provided, and neither ponding nor erosion control will result. 
(b)  Installation, backfilling and compaction shall be in accordance with state transportation department standard specification, Construction of Transportation Systems (2013). All pipes shall have a minimum cover of one foot and headwalls or inlet basins constructed at the end of each pipe. 
(c)  The design of drainage structures shall be based on recognized hydrological formulas as outlined in the approved city stormwater management manual. 
(d)  A contour map with an interval of two feet shall be submitted as part of preliminary plats; where available, the city two-foot topographic map shall be used. As determined by the community development director, any lots within the subdivision which are undesirable for building due to bad drainage conditions shall be excluded, and no building shall be permitted thereon until these conditions have been corrected as specified by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-379), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-379), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-547. - Plans, profiles to be approved. 
Four copies of the complete plans and profiles for subdivision street improvements shall be submitted for review and recommendation of approval or denial by the public works department of subdivision streets prior to approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-380), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-548. - Bonds or escrow required. 
(a)  If, at the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the construction of the street improvements has not been accomplished, then the final plat shall be disapproved. No performance bonds shall be allowed or authorized except the mayor shall require a performance bond to be filed with the city to ensure that all final road improvements required by this Code are made by the owner or applicant. The city shall accept no road until such time as all road improvements required by the city are made. 
(b)  After the work has been completed according to the city specifications and duly inspected by the city, then a maintenance bond shall be required equal to ten percent of the estimated construction cost. The proposed maintenance bond shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney prior to acceptance by the city. The maintenance bond shall cover the street improvements, drainage system, water system and sewer system. Funds may be placed in escrow with the city in lieu of maintenance bonds. 
(c)  The applicant shall be required to sign a maintenance agreement with the city, by which the applicant shall agree to maintain the streets, drainage, water quality BMPs, water and sewer systems, and rights-of-way for a period of 12 months. During the applicant maintenance period, the city shall make inspections and instruct the applicant by letter as to what correction must be made. 
(d)  In case of emergency repairs, which must be made immediately, or required corrections, which are not made within 30 days of notice, the city shall have the authority to make these corrections and recover costs from the applicant. In cases where funds are being held in escrow by the city, the cost of making these corrections shall be deducted from these funds, and the applicant charged with any costs above the amount of escrow funds. 
(e)  At the end of the 12-month applicant maintenance period, the city shall make a final inspection and notify the applicant and the bonding company of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable the community development director shall recommend to the city attorney that all remaining escrow funds be released. 
(f)  Provided, however, in the discretion of the mayor based upon: 
(1)  Weather conditions; 
(2)  Labor market; 
(3)  Material market; or 
(4)  Circumstances beyond the control of the applicant or the city unforeseen by either party. 
(g)  The maintenance period may be extended for a definite period of time sufficient to make the necessary corrections by an agreement in writing executed by the city, the applicant and his surety. Provided further, that the applicant shall be responsible for any damages done to work already completed by him at the time of the extension agreement whether or not the city had accepted it. 
(h)  Maintenance bonds and acceptance by the city of any dedicated improvements shall be as one package upon completion of all improvements, even though the final plat may have been approved prior to completion. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-381), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-381), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-549. - Standard plans and specifications available. 
Standard city plans and specifications referred to in this subdivision are on file and may be obtained from the development department. The plans are cross-sections and construction drawings for a graded street, paved street, driveway section for curbed streets, brick catch basin, barricade for dead-end streets, 24-inch concrete curb and gutter section and standard street marker. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-382), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-550. - Sidewalks and bicycle lanes. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be required on all sides of street frontage on all new and improved local residential streets in all subdivisions and along the street frontage of all new and improved nonresidential developments and as set forth in section 22-273, unless determined by the community development director to be infeasible only due to severe cross-slopes, shallow rock, soil or topographic conditions. At a minimum, however, continuous sidewalks shall be required on at least one side of all new and improved local residential streets. Refer to section 22-275 for sidewalk exemptions. 
(b)  The community development director may require that sidewalks required pursuant to subsection (a) of this section be continued to the nearest major or minor arterial or collector street. 
(c)  A grassed, planted or landscaped strip, as set forth in section 22-273, shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs, bridges excepted. The community development director may approve a variable sidewalk location and landscape strip width based on site conditions and future road expansions. Where sidewalks currently exist, new sidewalk construction or reconstruction shall be continuous with existing sidewalks. 
(d)  Sidewalks shall be concrete with the width based on table 5.1 in the zoning ordinance and four inches thick. Concrete shall be Class B, as defined by the state department of transportation, and have a strength of 2,500 psi at 28 days. Disturbed areas along sidewalks shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed. The required width of a sidewalk may be increased, as determined by the community development director, based on site conditions to ensure pedestrian safety. See also section 22-273. 
(e)  Sidewalks shall be installed at the same time as the building construction, unless an alternative method is approved by the community development director. Sidewalks shall be completed prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy for property on which the sidewalk fronts. The sidewalk plan shall be recorded on the final plat and all sidewalks completely installed prior to approval of the final plat. 
(f)  Sidewalks shall not be cut, removed or closed temporarily without a permit from the community development department. Such permit shall not be issued unless safe, adequate, and convenient provision is made for pedestrian travel through the area that is disrupted. Damage to sidewalks caused during construction or development activity shall be repaired at no cost to the city within 30 days or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier. 
(g)  In any "landmark district" or "historic district," as defined by the city, where replacement or reconstruction of the sidewalk is deemed necessary, the sidewalk shall be replaced or reconstructed using materials, widths, and designs that are compatible with the historic materials and designs, if any, that exist within the historic district. Design compatibility shall be determined by the city historic preservation commission. 
(h)  All sidewalk construction and repairs shall provide for wheelchair ramps to and from sidewalks at the intersection of each street corner and crosswalk. Access ramps shall be constructed pursuant to standards approved by the public works department. 
(i)  No person shall construct a sidewalk on any street in the city without first having obtained a permit to do so from the public works department. Any person constructing a sidewalk on a street, without first obtaining a permit, shall be in violation of this Code, and the public works department shall be authorized to condemn the sidewalk and have it removed and replaced at no cost to the city. 
(j)  Bicycle lanes shall be required on new or substantially improved major or minor arterials, parkways, or collector streets where the posted speed limit is 35 miles per hour or greater. Bicycle lanes may also be required by the community development director where necessary to provide connections to bikeways in concert with the city bikeway master plan. Bicycle lanes shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be at least four feet wide and placed in the outside lane of a roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be at least five feet wide and located between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Bicycle pavement widths shall be in addition to the minimum pavement width required for the road. See also section 22-273. 
(2)  Bicycle lanes shall be delineated with signs and striping consistent with the latest edition of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and approved by the development director. 
(3)  Bikeways and bicycle lanes shall be constructed according to the most recent specifications set forth in American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines. 
(4)  The design, striping and sign system for bicycle lanes shall be coordinated with that of the vehicular road system to provide a safe and continuous route for bicycles. Deceleration lanes shall be striped so that bicycles can safely remain in a lane marked between the deceleration lane and the through traffic lane. 
(k)  No wall, fence, sign or other structure shall obstruct passage along a sidewalk or bicycle lane. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-383), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-383), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-383), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-551. - Parking on public right-of-way. 
For residential projects constructed under the provisions of the zoning ordinance as single-family attached residential projects, wherein title to the single-family unit is held by fee simple ownership, the city shall assume maintenance responsibility one year after the release of the subdivision bonds for parking constructed on public rights-of-way, in accordance with minimum city standards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-384), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-10-77, exh. A(14-384), 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-552. - Underground utilities. 
All utilities are required to be placed underground in all new subdivisions of two or more lots except where no utility improvements are required by this chapter, or where the development director determines underground utilities are infeasible due to shallow rock, high water table, or other similar geologic or hydrologic conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-385), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 22-553. - Streetlights. 
Streetlights consistent with Georgia Power specifications, are required in all new subdivisions of two or more lots except where no utility improvements are required by this chapter. Streetlights shall be provided on the same side of the street as sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-13, att. (14-386), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 22-554—22-584. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Private Sewage Disposal 

Sec. 22-585. - Approval; permitting. 
Private sewage disposal, including septic tanks, shall be approved and permitted by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (ch. 14, art. III, div. 4, pt. E), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-586—22-603. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The article pertaining to floodplain management has been renumbered from article IV to article V, at the discretion of the editor, to restore numerical sequence. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 22-604. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(c)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to private property; 
(3)  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(d)  Article IX, section II of the Georgia Constitution and of the O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain this article and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-407), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-605. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect and improve the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-408), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-606. - Lands and structures to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas within the City of Tucker. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-409), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-409), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-607. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard currently identified by the federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) and flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated May 16, 2013 for DeKalb County and incorporated areas with other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  The flood insurance study and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this article and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this article and which are recommended to the governing authority by the floodplain coordinator. The flood insurance study, flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps are on file with the City of Tucker at the city hall annex located at 4228 1 st Avenue, Tucker, GA 30084. 
(c)  For those land areas acquired by city annexation, the flood insurance study and data in effect at the time of approval of the ordinance from which this article derives by the mayor for areas are hereby adopted by reference. 
(d)  The areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a flood insurance study. 
(e)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to city; or 
(2)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by city. 
(f)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to city; or 
(2)  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by city. 
(g)  Floodplain boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city. If floodway data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-410), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-410), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-608. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and provisions that: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers, which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas; 
(6)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-411), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-609. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed as the floodplain coordinator and is authorized to administer, implement, and enforce this article by granting or denying permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-412), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-412), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-610. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain coordinator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain coordinator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Review all development permits for all proposed construction or other development in the city, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas and in order to determine that: 
a.  The permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
b.  Copies for all necessary permits from any governmental agencies from which approval is required are on file; 
c.  All necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
d.  The site or subdivision, including manufactured home parks, is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
e.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. 
(2)  Review, use and develop base flood data: 
a.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this section, the floodplain coordinator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation, future-conditions flood elevation, floodway or future-conditions floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Any such information shall be submitted to the zoning board of appeals for adoption; or 
b.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to the mean sea level, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(3)  Notify other government agencies of an alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of water resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration and FEMA; and 
c.  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(4)  Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available, as needed, the following: 
a.  Certification required by section 22-674 (lowest floor elevations); 
b.  Certification required by section 22-674 (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
c.  Certification required by section 22-701 (wet floodproofing standard); 
d.  Certification required by section 22-697 (floodway encroachments). 
(5)  Make map determinations and interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation of the floodplain coordinator; 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new construction or substantial improvement has been floodproofed; 
(7)  Take action to remedy violations of this article as specified in this section; 
(8)  Respond to requests for listings of properties in the floodplain. The adopted method for disclosure at the time of sale or rental of a property is accomplished by providing to the interested parties, general public, realtor, insurance, mortgage and engineering consulting firms with an electronic database listing all properties in the floodplain, annually updated, and free of charge; 
(9)  Duties for variances. Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-413), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-413), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-611. - Appeals. 
The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when an applicant alleges there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain coordinator within 1,000 feet of the property in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-414), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-612. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-415), adopted June 10, 2019, repealed § 22-612, which pertained to basis for area of special flood hazard, flood area maps and studies and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-415), adopted Sept. 1, 2016. 
Sec. 22-613. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-7. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein shall prevent the mayor and city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-416), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-614. - Repetitive loss structure and cumulative substantial damage. 
A building must be brought into compliance with requirements for new construction if it has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event, or damage of any origin is sustained whereby the cost of restoring the building to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building before the damage occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-417), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-615. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, existing covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-418), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-616. - Mandatory purchase of flood insurance. 
In the event that a property owner chooses not to purchase flood insurance on property at risk, or does not comply with a notice to bring a building into compliance, reducing the community efforts for flood protection, the insurance premium discount for the community's property owners as a community rating system participant, may not apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-419), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-617. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-420), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-618. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-421), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-619—22-641. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 22-642. - Specific definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain means all those areas located lower in elevation than either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area has absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc., with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation. 
Adversely affects means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
Apex means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain coordinator's interpretation of any provision of this division. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. See Special flood hazard area. 
Base flood means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). The term "base flood" used throughout this division. It is equivalent to the term "intermediate regional floodplain" (IRF), previously used in the city. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade i.e., below ground level on all sides. 
Basin means a region or land area drained by a single river system. 
Building. See Structure. 
Code section 1-7 means an infraction subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 or 30 days imprisonment in the county jail or both, per violation, for each day of violation. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Director means the community development director or designee. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing construction means, for flood insurance rating purposes, any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 15, 1980 (the initial flood insurance rate map date). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 11, 2016. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood, flooding, or floodwater means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
(2)  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flooding. 
Floodplain coordinator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents (refer to FEMA technical bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93). 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, also referred to as the "regulatory floodway". 
Floodway fringe is the area of the special flood hazard area on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
Fraud and victimization as related to division 5 of this article, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the mayor and city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purposes unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and do not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications, within a stream or other waterway, such as a bridge or culvert construction, fill and excavation. 
Hardship, as related to division 5 of this article, means the exceptional hardship that could result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The mayor and city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Increased costs of compliance coverage means the National Flood Insurance Program coverage used to mitigate repetitive flood loss properties, where the cumulative flood damage over a ten-year period is such that the cost of repairing the damage is more than half of the building's fair market value. 
Intermediate regional flood (IRF) means a 100-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeding in any given year, also known as the base flood, or 100-year flood. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities that comprise or facilitate a result in land development. 
Land development project means a specific land development undertaking. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such a closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement which includes the following: 
(1)  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The wet floodproofing standard in section 22-701. 
b.  The anchoring standards in section 22-701. 
c.  The construction materials and method standards in section 22-701. 
d.  The standards for utilities in section 22-701. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a mobile home, regardless of the date of manufacture. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) or land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this division, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Minimum necessary means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this division. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, means the vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within a floodplain. 
New construction , for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced after July 11, 2016, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after May 15, 1980 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 11, 2016. 
One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See Base flood. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the director to the applicant that is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Public safety and nuisance , as used in division 5 of this article, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Repetitive loss structure means a building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), streams, brooks, etc. 
Sheet flow area. See Area of shallow flooding. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab for footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
The term "substantial improvement" includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads when the cost of such repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this division which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this division. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this division. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this division is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-423), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-423), 6-10-2019) 
Secs. 22-643—22-672. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-673. - Development permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a partially or entirely within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms promulgated by the director and may include, but not be limited to, floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials drainage facilities; and location of any other development. 
(b)  Unless specifically excluded by this division, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(c)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-424), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-424), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-674. - Development permit requirements. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction of other development begins within any area of special flood hazard or future-conditions floodplain established in section 22-607. Permits shall be required for all proposed construction or other development in the city, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms promulgated by the director and may include, but not be limited to, floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials drainage facilities; and location of the foregoing. Specifically, all of the following information is required before the director will consider the application for a development permit: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprints, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
3.  If available, the base flood elevation from the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate map; 
4.  If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; 
5.  Existing and proposed elevation of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material and storage of materials or equipment; 
6.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
7.  Proposed grading plan; 
8.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
9.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; and 
10.  Certification of the site plan by a registered professional engineer in the state. 
b.  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all structures; 
2.  For a crawl space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 22-701 and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; 
3.  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to 95 percent using the Standard Proctor Test Method); 
4.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 22-702; 
5.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 22-701; and 
6.  Certification that the foundation design detail is by a registered professional engineer in the state. 
c.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in section 22-702, and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; 
d.  All appropriate certifications listed in this chapter; 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
f.  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; and 
g.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits and certifications necessary for proposed development. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(2)  Construction stage submittal requirements. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain coordinator a certified as-built elevation certificate for nonresidential construction, including the lowest floor elevation, immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a currently state-registered land surveyor or currently state-registered professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a currently state-registered professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certifications identified in this chapter shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain coordinator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required herein, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
c.  Copies of permits issued for construction in the floodplain shall be forwarded to the floodplain coordinator. 
(3)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved regions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(4)  A development permit will not be approved for any construction or other development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-425), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-425), 6-10-2019) 
Secs. 22-675—22-691. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 22-692. - Floodplain management planning and public information. 
To comply with requirements of the community rating system, the city adopts the following: 
(1)  A floodplain management plan and progress that will be reported in the annual recertification process. This plan will be updated for each subsequent two-year period. 
(2)  Public information shall include, but it is not limited to, elevation certificate repository, map information, outreach projects, hazard disclosure, flood protection, and flood protection assistance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-426), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-693. - Stream dumping penalties. 
Any natural growth or human-made debris that reduces the carrying and storage capacity of the city drainage system may be a violation of this division. Any person who dumps logs, trash, trees, and similar debris, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment according to chapter 1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-427), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-694. - Plan review and field inspections of structures. 
The building code effectiveness grading is used by the community rating system required from the city to perform plan review and field inspections of one- and two-family dwellings to obtain additional insurance benefits for its citizenry. Plan review and field inspections of one- and two-family dwellings in the floodplain, as they relate to flood prevention and protection, will be effective and start upon approval of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-428), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-695. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 22-612 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-429), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-696. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 22-695; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-430), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-430), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-697. - Floodways. 
(a)  Definition of floodway boundaries. 
(1)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the flood insurance study or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the floodplain coordinator. If floodway data is not available from the floodplain coordinator, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the floodplain coordinator. 
(2)  Following a pre-design conference with the floodplain coordinator, the boundaries or limits of the floodway shall be shown on the development or stormwater site plan containing existing topographic information. 
(b)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as a regulatory "floodway" (see definition). A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-431), 6-10-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-431), adopted June 10, 2019, repealed the former § 22-697, and enacted a new § 22-697 as set out herein. The former § 22-697 pertained to standards of construction within a floodplain and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-431), adopted Sept. 1, 2016. 
Sec. 22-698. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-432), adopted June 10, 2019, repealed § 22-698, which pertained to standards for utilities and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-432), adopted Sept. 1, 2016. 
Sec. 22-699. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)  All lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)  All applications for development permits will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a currently state-registered professional engineer or currently state-registered land surveyor and provided to the floodplain coordinator. 
(d)  All applications for development permits, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and shall be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(e)  All applications for development permits shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(f)  All applications for development permits shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(g)  All subdivision proposals shall provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 22-674. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-433), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-433), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-700. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-434), adopted June 10, 2019, repealed § 22-700, which pertained to standards for manufactured homes and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-434), adopted Sept. 1, 2016. 
Sec. 22-701. - In all areas within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain the following provisions apply. 
(a)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 22-695, 22-696 and 22-697 have been met. 
(b)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures, including manufactured homes, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(c)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(d)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(e)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(1)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(2)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, building access or storage; and 
(3)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(f)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(g)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(h)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(i)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(j)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. 
(k)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this division, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(l)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-435), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-435), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-702. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. New construction and substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 22-695, 22-696, and 22-697 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 22-695, 22-696, and 22-697 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 22-701(e). 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. New construction and substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 22-695, 22-696, and 22-697 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 22-695, 22-696, and 22-697 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 22-701(e). New construction and substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of sections 22-695, 22-696, and 22-697 may be floodproofed in-lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-436), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-436), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-703. - Accessory structures and facilities. 
Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar structures and facilities) that are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 22-701(e) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-437), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-437), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-704. - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(2)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction of residential buildings, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-438), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-438), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-705. - Standards for manufactured homes. 
(a)  All manufactured homes that are substantially improved within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated three feet above the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, if the manufactured home is on a site located: 
(1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood. 
(b)  All new or substantially improved manufactured homes to be substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
(1)  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is three feet above the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(2)  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(c)  Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a currently state-registered professional engineer or currently state-registered land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain coordinator. 
(d)  New or substantially improved manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 22-695, 22-696, and 22-697 have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-439), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-439), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-706. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building, including manufactured homes, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 22-701(e). 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, including manufactured homes, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 22-701(e). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-440), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-440), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-707. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
(a)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the director shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
(b)  If data is not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-441), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-708. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). 
(a)  Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet aboveground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards for elevated buildings set forth in this Code or promulgated by the director or the state. The applicant's or owner's engineer shall certify to the floodplain coordinator that the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified flood insurance rate map flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice. 
(b)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure in Zone AO and Zone AH. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-442), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-442), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-709. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-443), adopted June 10, 2019, repealed § 22-709, which pertained to definition of floodway boundaries and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-443), adopted Sept. 1, 2016. 
Sec. 22-710. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-444), adopted June 10, 2019, repealed § 22-710, which pertained to floodway encroachments and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-444), adopted Sept. 1, 2016. 
Sec. 22-711. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city may direct the property owner at no cost to the city to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-445), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 22-712—22-735. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 22-736. - Nature of variance. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this division. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the city, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated hereinabove. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this division shall be submitted to the city. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city shall have the right to appeal such decision to the zoning board of appeals as established by city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the zoning board of appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the city and zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this division. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this division are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city and zoning board of appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this division, the city and the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this division. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued after the fact. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-446), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-737. - Appeals board. 
(a)  In passing upon requests for variances, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this division, including all of the following: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(b)  Any owner to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice from the zoning board of appeals that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain coordinator in the office of the clerk of superior court of the city in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-447), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-738. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(b)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(c)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated or mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(d)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-448), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-739. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals, as established by the city, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or requests for variances from the requirements of this division. 
(b)  The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain coordinator in the enforcement or administration of this division. No action will be taken under the terms of this division unless such relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of this division. 
(c)  In reviewing such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this division. 
(d)  Applications for variances must be submitted in writing to the director within 30 days of discovery of the condition requiring such a variance. Applications are complete when they contain: 
(1)  All those materials and documents required by the director that are necessary to demonstrate the necessity for the variance; 
(2)  Compliance with all other requirements of this Code; 
(3)  A full explanation of the reasons for the variance; and 
(4)  An explanation of how the variance will satisfy the variance conditions set forth in this section. 
(e)  When the variance application is first considered by the zoning board of appeals, the director shall provide the zoning board of appeals with written findings of fact and a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the variance. 
(f)  Applications for variance shall be heard at a public hearing by the zoning board of appeals at the next meeting of the zoning board of appeals held after the filing of a complete application for variance. 
(1)  Notice of the variance shall be mailed via first class mail by the director to all property owners within 250 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as such property owners are listed on the tax records of the county, at least 15 days before the public hearing before the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  Signs shall be posted by the applicant within the public right-of-way in front of or on the subject property at least 15 days before the hearing before the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  At least one sign shall be posted on each street on which the subject property has frontage. One additional sign shall be posted for each additional 500 feet of frontage or fraction thereof in excess of 500 feet of frontage on each street on which the subject property has frontage. Signs shall be double-faced and posted so that the face of the sign is at a right angle to the street to allow the signs to be read by the traveling public in both directions. All signs shall be provided by the city and will be no smaller than six square feet with lettering on the signs at least two inches in size. The sign shall state the nature of proposed variance and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the zoning board of appeals. 
(4)  The director shall sign an affidavit attesting to the posting of signs in accordance with the requirements herein, and shall photograph each sign as evidence of its proper posting. 
(g)  A variance shall only be issued when all of the following conditions are present: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in undue and exceptional hardship; 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, or cause fraud or victimize the public; 
(4)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute limitations upon other properties; 
(5)  The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements; and 
(6)  The strict application of the requirements of this division would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other property owners. 
(h)  Upon consideration of the factors of section 22-711 and the purposes of this division, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this division. 
(i)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision by writ of certiorari. A person shall be considered aggrieved for the purpose of this subsection only if: 
(1)  Said person or said person's property was the subject of the action appealed from; or 
(2)  Said person has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-449), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 22-740. - Violations; enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this division or the requirements of an approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-450), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-450), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-741. - Notice of violation. 
If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan or the provisions of this division, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this division without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this division and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-451), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2019-05-22, att. (14-451), 6-10-2019) 
Sec. 22-742. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this division, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-20, att. (14-452), 9-1-2016) 
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 26 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Creation of the court. 
In accordance with section 4.01 of the Charter, the city creates the municipal court of the city. The powers and jurisdiction of the court are described in article IV of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-1), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-2. - Judge and judge pro tempore. 
(a)  In accordance with section 4.02 of the Charter, the municipal court judge shall be nominated by the mayor subject to approval by the city council with compensation to be fixed by the council. 
(b)  In accordance with section 4.02 of the Charter, the mayor shall also nominate one or more judges pro tempore subject to approval by the city council to serve as requested. 
(c)  The judges pro tempore shall serve terms of four years but may be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 4.02(d) of the Charter. 
(d)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he shall have attained the age of 28 years and shall have been a member of the state bar for a minimum of seven years. 
(e)  The judges pro tempore shall serve as requested by the judge and shall have the same qualifications as the judge. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-2), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-3. - Additional personnel. 
(a)  Municipal court clerk and court administrators. The city manager shall appoint the municipal court clerk. The court clerk shall appoint the court administrators. 
(b)  Warrants and other writs. Police officers of the city police department, county police department, county sheriff's department or any other law enforcement officer may execute warrants and other writs in furtherance of the court's jurisdiction and orders. 
(c)  Solicitor. In accordance with section 3.08 of the Charter, the city attorney may be the prosecuting officer or solicitor in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-3), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-4. - Additional support. 
(a)  Indigent defense. The city shall provide indigent defendants with counsel as provided by state law. 
(b)  Translator. The city shall provide translation services as required by state law. 
(c)  Intermediary interpreter. The city shall provide interpreter services as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-4), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-5. - Court sessions. 
The court shall be in session as determined necessary by the municipal court judge to keep the court dockets current. The court clerk shall direct staffing of the sessions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-5), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-6. - Court fees. 
The municipal court judge may recommend to the city council for its approval a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-6), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-7. - Summons; failure to appear. 
(a)  Any officer of the police department, code enforcement officer, and the solicitor and assistant solicitor of the municipal court in all cases where a complaint is made or information is obtained of any violation of this Code or other laws or ordinances of the city or of any violation of the state traffic code within municipal court jurisdiction, shall issue a summons, directed to the accused, requiring the accused to appear before the municipal court to answer the charge. The summons shall enumerate the specific charges against the accused and designate the time and place of arraignment or trial and shall be signed by the police officer, code enforcement officer, or the solicitor or assistant solicitor of the municipal court issuing it, and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused personally. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, upon proof of actual service of the summons upon the defendant, for any defendant lawfully summoned to answer charges in the municipal court to either fail, neglect or refuse to appear at the time and place specified in the summons or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence. The trial may be continued to such time as the municipal court may direct, and the court shall issue an order requiring the police chief, or other members of the department of police, to arrest the defendant and bring the defendant before the court to answer both the initial charges and the charge for failing to appear. The chief of corrections shall keep the defendant in custody until the defendant is brought before the court, unless the defendant posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-7), 11-14-2016) 
Secs. 26-8—26-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS 

Sec. 26-33. - Rules. 
The municipal court judge may adopt local rules. No rules shall be inconsistent with the laws of the state or the Constitution of the United States and must be consistent with the Uniform Rules of Municipal Courts of the State of Georgia. Such rules shall be made available on the city website or by other means determined by the municipal clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-35), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-34. - Contempt of court. 
The municipal court may find persons in contempt of court and punish the persons in accordance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-36), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-35. - Subpoenas; issuance. 
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the clerk of the municipal court shall issue a subpoena directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall be served by the police chief or other police officers or as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-37), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-36. - Failing or refusing to obey. 
If any person lawfully summoned as a witness before the municipal court fails to attend the trial for which the person has been summoned or fails to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence, the person may be cited for contempt and be fined in a sum not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law. If the cause is continued because of the absence of this person, the court may issue attachment against the person requiring the person to show cause on the day appointed for trial why the person should not be cited for contempt. The police chief or other police officer shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest the person and keep the person in custody until the person is brought before the court, unless the person posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-38), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-37. - Fines. 
(a)  The city council may set fines for specific violations of city ordinances, and the municipal court shall have the discretion to enter fines consistent with this Code and with state and federal law. For fines due from any defendant, execution may be issued by the court clerk and collected as provided by law. 
(b)  Persons charged with traffic violations or other offenses as specified by the court may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged. Persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and other serious offenses, as determined by the municipal court judge, shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-39), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-38. - Sentences imposed. 
Upon a judgment or plea of guilty or pre-trial diversion, in addition to any applicable fines, the municipal court judge may impose a sentence of confinement, compulsory work, or both; commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work, or both; suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; place the defendant on probation; or defer the execution of the sentence or any portion thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. The court may punish for violations within its jurisdiction a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both, except as otherwise provided by this Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-40), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-39. - Appeals. 
Unless specified elsewhere in the Code or Charter, all appeals from decisions and judgments of the municipal court in criminal and ordinance violation cases shall be appealable, by writ of certiorari, to the superior court of the county under the laws of the state regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-41), 11-14-2016) 
Secs. 26-40—26-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BAIL 

Sec. 26-67. - General provisions. 
Bail and bond considerations shall be consistent with section 4.04(c) of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-71), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-68. - Minor traffic offenses. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11, any person cited for a traffic offense shall be released in lieu of bail upon showing his driver's license. This provision does not apply to any charges of driving under the influence or other serious offenses designated by the municipal court judge. 
(b)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-72), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-69. - Professional bondsmen. 
No professional bondsman shall be accepted as surety on a bail bond unless the person holds a current business license in the city, is approved by the chief of police, and has fully complied with all other city requirements for bonding companies. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-73), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-70. - Failure or refusal to give bond. 
If the accused or a witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required under this article, the person so failing or refusing may be confined or kept under guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-74), 11-14-2016) 
Secs. 26-71—26-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 

Sec. 26-99. - Establishment of office. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is established for the purpose of providing representation of the city in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by state law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-77), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12-42, § 1, 1-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-100. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the city shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-78), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12-42, § 1, 1-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-101. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney for the city shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Tucker." 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-79), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12-42, § 1, 1-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-102. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the city Charter, the prosecuting attorney for the city shall serve a term of office of two years. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-80), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12-42, § 1, 1-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-103. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
The prosecuting attorney for the city shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the city Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-81), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12-42, § 1, 1-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-104. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Law School Public Prosecutor Act of 1970, O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-38, exh. (9-82), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12-42, § 1, 1-4-2017) 
Chapter 28 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  A nuisance is anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man. 
(b)  The governing authority of the city finds that nuisances are such activities and conditions that cause a demonstrable adverse impact on the community. These activities and conditions may be associated with illegal criminal activity that has also been proven to have a demonstrable adverse impact on community residences and results in neighborhood blight. 
(c)  The city finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of the city in enacting this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To state that it is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction of this city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
(2)  To preserve the value of property and prevent neighborhood blight that arises from poorly maintained property; 
(3)  To maintain and promote an attractive residential area and commercial area by requiring that dilapidated or unsafe property be repaired or removed; 
(4)  To maintain for the city's residents, workers and visitors an aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of the city; 
(5)  To protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the city by the removal of both criminal perpetrators and the housing blight on the community; 
(6)  To require owners of real property to keep their property in compliance with building, safety and fire codes to minimize the occurrence of illegal criminal activity therein; 
(7)  To promote the safety of its citizens, to preserve property values, to provide for the convenience and enjoyment of public areas, to attract tourists, settlers and industry, to serve the public health, safety and aesthetics, to advance the general prosperity of the community and to serve the general welfare; and 
(8)  To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-1, 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings set out in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2; and 
(3)  The minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Building official means the officer or other person designated by the city manager with the authority charged with administration or enforcement of this chapter, or the designee of the officer or other person. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any portion of the public way that abuts the parcel of property when it is used in conjunction with the abutting property for the commission of nuisance activity described in this chapter. The term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, and building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Interest holder. See Party-in-interest. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record: 
(1)  Has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as the owner. 
Party-in-interest or interest holder means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.G.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way, whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Public authority means the mayor and city council, the director of the department of public works, the fire chief or his designee, or the chief of police or his designee. 
Public officer means the chief of police or his designee. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-2, 2-25-2019) 
Secs. 28-3—28-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 28-23. - Jurisdiction to abate. 
Any abatement action under this article, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Jurisdiction. The municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the question of the existence of a nuisance. If a nuisance is found to exist, the municipal court of the city has the authority to order its abatement. 
(2)  Service on complaint to abate a nuisance. On the hearing of any complaint before a judge of the municipal court concerning a nuisance and removal and abatement, reasonable notice shall be given to the parties interested, including the owner or occupant of the premises where the alleged nuisance is taking place and the person causing the nuisance, of the time and place of the hearing upon the complaint. 
(3)  Prima-facie evidence. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Persons authorized to perform the removal or abatement of nuisances. After a nuisance has been ordered to be abated or removed, it may be removed or otherwise abated by any employee designated by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(5)  Sport shooting ranges. No sport shooting range or unit of government or person owning, operating, or using a sport shooting range for the sport shooting of firearms shall be subject to any action for civil or criminal liability, damages, abatement, or injunctive relief resulting from or relating to noise generated by the operation of the range if the range remains in compliance with noise control or nuisance abatement rules, regulations, statutes, or ordinances applicable to the range on the date on which it commenced operation. 
(6)  The failure or refusal of a person ordered to abate a nuisance after a hearing, or upon a summary abatement, shall, in addition to subjecting the person to punishment for contempt if the order is issued by the judge of the municipal court, constitute an offense that, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. Each day's failure or refusal to comply with the order, after the expiration of the time allowed to remove or abate the nuisance, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(7)  Remedies. The remedies or enforcement mechanisms provided in this article are in addition to any other remedies or enforcement mechanisms available to the city. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-3, 2-25-2019; Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-3), 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 28-24. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and city council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, Charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-4, 2-25-2019) 
Secs. 28-25—28-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND HAZARDS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 28-52. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the city limits there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state, and that public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city, and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(c)  The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist, rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists, constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(d)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-5, 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-53. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The city director of community development, city fire marshal, city fire chief, city police chief, and city building officials, and their designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  Complaints issued by a public officer under this article shall be served in the following manner. 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(3)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(e)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(f)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(h)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-6, 2-25-2019; Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-6), 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 28-54. - Process for administering, collecting or waiving lien. 
(a)  The lien provided for in section 28-53(h) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under the O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). Pursuant to state law, the clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the appropriate the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of the O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. Pursuant to state law, the county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce the municipal liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose lien is being collected. 
(c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(d)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of the O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(e)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-7, 2-25-2019; Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-7), 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 28-55. - Determination by public officer that dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards, which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-8, 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-56. - Appeal. 
The review of a municipal court order under this article requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-8.5), 5-28-2019) 
Secs. 28-57—28-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLACES USED FOR UNLAWFUL SEXUAL AND DRUG ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 28-84. - Establishment, maintenance, or use of building, structure, or place for unlawful sexual purposes. 
(a)  Whosoever shall knowingly erect, establish, continue, maintain, use, own, or lease any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, prostitution, sodomy, the solicitation of sodomy, or masturbation for hire shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance; and the building, structure, or place, and the ground itself in or upon which such lewdness, prostitution, sodomy, the solicitation of sodomy, or masturbation for hire shall be conducted, permitted, carried on, continued, or shall exist, and the furniture, fixtures, and other contents of such building or structure are also declared to be a nuisance and may be enjoined or otherwise abated as provided in this article. 
(b)  The conviction of the owner or operator of any building, structure, or place for any of the offenses stated in subsection (a) of this section, based on conduct or an act or occurrence in or on the premises of such building, structure, or place, shall be prima facie evidence of the nuisance and the existence thereof. 
(c)  When the nuisance exists within the corporate limits, the municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the question of the existence of the nuisance defined by O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1 and, if found to exist, to order its abatement, which order shall be directed to and executed by the sheriff or marshal of any such court or his deputy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-3-13. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-9, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-85. - Substantial drug related activity upon real property. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
Drug related indictment means an indictment by a grand jury for an offense involving violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30; provided, however, that any such indictments which result directly from cooperation between the property owner and a law enforcement agency shall not be considered a drug related indictment for purposes of this section. 
Substantial drug related activity means activity resulting in six or more separate incidents resulting in drug related indictments involving violations occurring within a 12-month period on the same parcel of real property. 
(b)  Any owner of real property who has actual knowledge that substantial drug related activity is being conducted on such property shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance, and such real property shall be deemed a nuisance and may be enjoined or otherwise abated as provided in this article. 
(c)  The owner of real property shall be deemed to have actual knowledge of substantial drug related activity occurring on a parcel of real property if the district attorney of the county in which the property is located notifies the owner in writing of three or more separate incidents within a 12-month period which result in drug related indictments and, after the receipt of such notice and within 12 months of the first of the incidents resulting in a drug related indictment which are the subject of such notice, three or more separate incidents occur which result in drug related indictments. 
(d)  The provisions of this section are cumulative of any other remedies and shall not be construed to repeal any other existing remedies for drug related nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-10, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-86. - Notice of hearing for temporary restraining order or interlocutory injunction. 
Notice shall be given to the defendant of the hearing of the application for a temporary restraining order or an interlocutory injunction as provided in O.C.G.A. § 9-11-65. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-11, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-87. - Admissibility of evidence of general reputation. 
An action to enjoin a nuisance shall be triable as all other civil cases. In such action, evidence of the general reputation of the building, structure, or place shall be admissible for the purpose of proving the existence of such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-12, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-88. - Order of abatement generally. 
(a)  If the existence of a nuisance shall be established in an action as provided in this article, an order of abatement shall be entered as a part of the judgment in the case, which order shall direct the removal from the building, structure, or place of all fixtures, furniture, and chattels used in conducting the nuisance and shall direct the sale thereof in the manner provided for the sale of chattels under execution; provided, however, that if it shall appear to the judge that the furniture and chattels are owned by others than the occupants of the building, structure, or place, he may order the effectual closing of the building, structure, or place against its use for any purpose for a period of one year, unless sooner released. 
(b)  If any person shall break and enter or use a building, structure, or place directed to be closed, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, he shall be punished as for contempt. 
(c)  For removing and selling the movable property, the sheriff or other duly qualified levying officer of the court shall be entitled to charge and receive the same fees as he would for levying upon and selling like property on execution; and, for closing the premises and keeping them closed, a reasonable sum shall be allowed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-13, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-89. - Disposition of proceeds of personal property. 
The proceeds of the sale of the personal property, as provided in section 28-87, shall be applied in payment of the cost of the action and abatement, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-13, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-90. - Suspension of abatement order and release of property. 
(a)  If the owner of the building, structure, or place ordered abated shall appear and pay all costs of the proceedings and file a bond with sureties to be approved by the clerk in the full value of the property, to be ascertained by the court, conditioned that he will immediately abate the nuisance and prevent the same from being established or kept within a period of one year thereafter, the court may, if satisfied of the good faith of the owner, order the building, structure, or place closed under the order of abatement to be delivered to said owner and the order of abatement suspended so far as it may relate to said property. 
(b)  The release of the property under subsection (a) of this section shall not release it from any judgment lien, penalty, or liability to which it may be subject by law. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-14, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-91. - Insurance of permanent injunction. 
(a)  Whenever a permanent injunction is issued against any person for maintaining a nuisance as described in section 28-84 or against any owner of the building, structure, or place knowingly kept or used for the purposes prohibited by this article, the judge granting the injunction shall, at the same time, enter judgment against the person, firm, or corporation owning said building, structure, or place in the sum of $300.00; and said judgment shall be a special lien upon the premises complained of and the furniture and fixtures therein and shall as against the property rank from date with all other judgments or liens as provided by law. 
(b)  The judgment provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall issue in the name of the state and be enforced as other judgments in this state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-3-10. The lien of the judgment upon the property used for the purpose of maintaining the nuisance shall not relieve the person maintaining the nuisance or the owner of the building, structure, or place from any of the other penalties provided by law. 
(c)  All sums arising from the enforcement of the judgment provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be paid into the treasury of the city in which said judgment is entered and become part of the general funds of said city. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-15, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-92. - Contempt proceedings. 
(a)  In the event of the violation of any injunction granted under this article, the court may summarily try and punish the offender. The proceedings shall be commenced by filing with the clerk of the court an information, under oath, setting out the alleged facts constituting such violation, upon which the court or judge shall cause a warrant to be issued for the arrest of the offender. The trial may be had upon affidavits, or either party may demand the production and oral examination of witnesses. 
(b)  A party found guilty of violating the provisions of an injunction shall be punished as for contempt in the discretion of the judge. 
(Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-16, 3-25-2019) 
Secs. 28-93—28-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COLLECTION BINS 

Sec. 28-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection bin means an attended or unattended enclosed receptacle, trailer, or container made of metal, steel, plastic, wood, or similar material and designed or intended for the collection of unwanted clothing, shoes, textiles, books, or other household items. 
Lawful occupant, collection bin means the occupant, or their respective representative, of real property, other than the site host, via a lease, rental agreement, or other instrument, who has the right to control and manage the maintenance and upkeep of the real property upon which a collection bin within the city is located or maintained. 
Permittee, collection bin means any person, organization, or other entity issued a permit to place and maintain a collection bin in the city. 
Site host, collection bin means all owners of the real property upon which a collection bin within the city is located and maintained. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-9, 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-111. - Permit required; dates of issuance, expiration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to erect, place, maintain, or operate any collection bin in the city without first obtaining a permit. 
(b)  A permit issued under this section shall be valid for one year and renewable for one-year periods thereafter. 
(c)  Collection bins owned and/or operated by one person or entity for the benefit of another person or entity require the contact information for both entities on the permit application. 
(d)  Fees for the initial applications and each renewal application shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-10, 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-112. - Qualifications of permittee and form of application. 
(a)  In order to qualify as a permittee under this section, an applicant must either be: 
(1)  An organization exempt from taxes under 26 USC § 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, and in good standing with the state; 
(2)  A business organization in good standing with the state; or 
(3)  A natural person. 
(b)  The application for a collection bin permit shall include the following information from the applicant: 
(1)  If the applicant claims to be a qualified nonprofit organization: 
a.  A copy of the determination letter issued by the Internal Revenue Service stating that the applicant is an organization exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC § 501(c)(3); and 
b.  A certificate of good standing issued by the office of the secretary of state. If the applicant is a business organization not exempt from taxation, a certificate of good standing issued by the office of the secretary of state. A certificate of good standing must not be older than three months at the time of application for a permit. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of contact person of the applicant who will agree in writing to be available between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. each day of the week to receive and respond to complaints or other inquiries regarding the permitted collection bin. 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of an individual who is authorized by the owner of the collection bin to accept service of process and to accept citations issued by the city on behalf of the applicant for violations of this section. 
(4)  Written and signed consent from the site host and the lawful occupant, if applicable, to place the collection bin on the property, including name, address and telephone number of the site host and the name, address, and telephone number of the person authorized by the site host to accept service of process and to accept citations issued by the city on behalf of the site host. The name, address, and telephone number of the lawful occupant and the name, address, and telephone number of the person authorized by the lawful occupant to accept service of process and to accept citations issued by the city on behalf of the lawful occupant shall also be included. 
(5)  Permittee must provide proof to the city of a certificate of liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 covering the liability of the permittee, site host, and lawful occupant, if applicable, arising out of the placement and maintenance of a collection bin. 
(6)  Permittee must provide a closed boundary survey and a site plan drawn to scale which will indicate the present use of the property, indicate if there are zoning or overlay conditions on the proposed site, and show the location of any and all existing bins on the site; show, label, and dimension the proposed bin; show the footprint of the principal building for the site; show and label the front, rear, and side building setbacks on the site; label concrete or asphalt surfaces; label landscape and planter areas; label and dimension all buffers (if applicable); show and identify adjacent public streets and right-of-way; and dimension the distance between the collection bin and the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-11, 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-113. - Management, maintenance; requirements. 
(a)  Permittee and site host or lawful occupant must maintain the aesthetic presentation of each collection bin including fresh paint, readable signage, and general upkeep. 
(b)  Permittee must provide to the site host or lawful occupant a telephone number for requests to respond to collection bin maintenance complaints. 
(c)  Permittee and site host or lawful occupant must respond to collection bin maintenance complaints within ten days of receiving written notice of a violation of this article. Written notice of the violation shall be provided to the permittee, site host or lawful occupant and any charitable organization identified as being associated with the collection bin. 
(d)  Permittee must remove graffiti within ten days following receipt of notice of its existence. 
(e)  If a collection bin becomes damaged or vandalized, it shall be repaired, replaced or removed within five days of receipt of notice of such condition. 
(f)  Permittee and site host or lawful occupant shall not allow for any of the collected materials, trash, or other debris to be placed outside the collection bin. 
(g)  Collections bins shall have a receiving door that can be closed so that only an authorized representative of the owner may access the items deposited in the collection bin. 
(h)  The city shall provide the permittee with one permit sticker for each approved collection bin. The permit sticker must be placed in a conspicuous place on the front of the collection bin that is installed on the permitted property. 
(i)  Every collection bin shall display the following information in boldface letters at least two inches high located on the front of the collection bin and directly underneath the deposit door: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and the internet web address of the permittee, site host, and lawful occupant; 
(2)  Each bin shall meet the requirements set forth by the state as found in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 17, as amended from time to time, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-12, 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-114. - Location and placement of collection bins. 
(a)  There shall be no more than two collection bins per parcel of land. 
(b)  Collection bins shall only be permitted on developed nonresidential property. 
(c)  Collection bins shall be placed on the site in a manner that does not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow. 
(d)  Collection bins shall not be placed in the right-of-way and shall adhere to the principal use setback standards for the site where they are placed. 
(e)  Collection bins shall not be placed in designated parking spaces or reduce the number of parking spaces below the minimum number required by zoning codes. 
(f)  Collection bins shall be placed on a concrete or asphalt surface. 
(g)  Collection bins shall not be placed within any landscape strip, landscaped parking lot island or any type of buffer. 
(h)  Collection bins shall not be placed on sidewalks. 
(i)  Collection bins shall not be placed within the sight triangle, as defined in The Complete Illustrated Book of Development Definitions, Fourth Edition, of any intersection and shall not interfere with on-site traffic circulation. 
(j)  Collection bins shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of five feet by five feet, nor be more than six feet in total height. 
(k)  Collection bins shall be surrounded by an opaque enclosure not less than six feet in height. Collection bin enclosures shall have a finish consistent with the finish materials of the building facade of the structure on the property. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-13, 2-25-2019; Ord. No. 02019-03-04, § 18-135A, 3-25-2019) 
Sec. 28-115. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties or remedies prescribed for ordinance violations pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia, any permittee, site host, or lawful occupant that violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a penalty of $250.00 for each violation, including the following violations: 
(1)  Unpermitted placement of a collection bin; 
(2)  Failure to adequately respond to maintenance request; 
(3)  Failure to maintain collection bins; 
(4)  Failure to adhere to collection bin placement and removal provisions; or 
(5)  Failure to adhere to all permit requirements. 
(b)  If a permittee, site host, or lawful occupant is found to have violated the provisions of this section on more than three occasions in a calendar year, the permittee, site host, or lawful occupant shall, in addition to all penalties set forth in this section along with those allowed by the Official Code of Georgia, be deemed ineligible for additional collection bin permits or renewals for a period of three years. Further, where the permittee, site host or lawful occupant fails to comply with three written notices of violation within one calendar year, the city may petition the superior court for removal of the collection bin pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-17-8.2(b). 
(c)  The above penalties shall only apply to a site host or lawful occupant that has consented, in writing, to the placement of a collection bin on its property. 
(Ord. No. O2019-02-2, § 18-14, 2-25-2019) 
Secs. 28-116—28-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT OF APPLICABLE CODES 

Sec. 28-120. - Applicable codes means. 
(a)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(b)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2; and 
(c)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-30), 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 28-121. - Duties of owners. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-31), 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 28-122. - Appointment of public officer; procedures premises to be violation. 
(a)  City building officials, city code enforcement officials, city fire chief, city fire marshal, city police chief, and their designees are designated as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(b)  The building official shall make an investigation or inspection of a dwelling, building, structure or property whenever a charge is made that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or not in compliance with applicable codes. If the building official's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or not in compliance with applicable codes, the building official may either: 
(1)  Issue a citation for violation of any applicable state minimum standard codes, building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance; and 
(2)  Issue a notice of violation in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause a copy of the notice to be given to the persons responsible for the violation as specified in the applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-32), 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 28-123. - Liens. 
(a)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or abate the dwelling, building, structure, or property, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, structure, or property to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or otherwise abated. 
(b)  A copy of the order requiring the abatement filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in DeKalb county shall act as a lis pendens to any such property involved. The filed abatement order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(c)  The amount of the cost of abatement, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(d)  A lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of an order approving the cost of the repair, closure, or abatement in the office of the clerk of superior court in DeKalb County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of DeKalb County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(e)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-33), 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 28-124. - Appeal. 
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or an order issued under this article shall have the right to appeal using the procedure specified in the applicable code. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-34), 5-28-2019) 
Sec. 28-125. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (18-35), 5-28-2019) 
Secs. 28-126—28-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NOISE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2019-05-17, att. (Art. VI, §§ 18-30—18-35), adopted May 28, 2019, enacted a new Art. VI. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the former Art. VI, pertaining to noise, has been renumbered, at the discretion of the editor, as Art. VII. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-137. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city seeks to prevent plainly audible sound from disturbing the city's residents in their homes during typical sleeping hours, as such sound jeopardizes the public health, welfare, and safety of the city's residents and degrades the quality of life in the city. 
(b)  This article applies to any sound projected, emitted or transmitted between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that the sound is plainly audible anywhere within the interior of a single-family detached sealed dwelling in a residential area. This article further applies to any sound projected, emitted or transmitted between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that the sound is plainly audible in a common area of a multifamily dwelling in a residential area. 
(c)  Most sound within a commercial area, industrial area, or a mixed-use development shall be regulated in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-301), 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 28-138. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, certain phrases and words are defined below. Words or phrases not defined in this article, but defined in applicable state law or this Code, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"A" weighted sound level means the sound level reported in units of dB(A) approximating the response of human hearing when measuring sounds of low to moderate intensity as measured using the "A" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
"C" weighted sound level means the sound level reported in units of dB(C) as measured using the "C" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
Commercial area means any parcel of land which is zoned for any commercial use, including regional commercial centers, neighborhood and community-oriented stores, shopping centers and other developed centers where commercial land uses predominate. Such area includes property zoned O-I, O-I-T, C-2, O-D, NS, C-1 and any property zoned OCR, excluding property used for residential use. 
Common area means any portion of residential property that is either commonly used or owned by its residents, is intended for the common enjoyment of its residents, or is accessible to residents of more than one dwelling located on the property and includes, but is not limited to, closed and open hallways, stairwells, stairways, elevators, lobbies, parking lots, parking garages, indoor and outdoor recreational areas within the development, laundry rooms, mailbox areas, yards, and open space that is the central organizing feature of a development. 
Decibel (dB) means the unit for the measurement of sound pressure based upon a reference pressure of 20 micropascals (zero decibels), i.e., the average threshold of hearing for a person with very good hearing. 
Dwelling means one or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for humans. 
Industrial area means any parcel of land which is zoned for industrial use, including property used for light and heavy distribution, warehouses, assembly, manufacturing, quarrying, truck terminals and landfills. Such area includes property zoned M-1 and M-2 and includes any commercial land uses allowed in M-2. 
Mixed-use development means a development which incorporates a variety of two or more different land uses, buildings or structures that include both primary residential uses and primary nonresidential uses as part of the same development. Such uses may include, but not be limited to, residential, office, commercial, institutional, recreational, or public open space in a compact urban setting that encourages pedestrian-oriented development that can result in measurable reductions in traffic impacts. Such a development would have interconnecting pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation. 
Multifamily dwelling means a building designed for and containing more than one dwelling, and shall include single-family attached dwellings, multifamily dwelling units, apartments, duplexes, triplexes, condominiums and attached townhomes. 
Plainly audible means any sound which can be heard or detected by the unaided and unimpaired human ear. Words and phrases need not be discernable in order for them to be considered plainly audible. 
Residential area means any parcel of land which is zoned for any residential use, including single-family detached or attached dwellings, multifamily dwellings, or mobile home parks. Such area includes any property zoned O-I or OCR which is used for multifamily dwellings, and any property zoned C-1 which is used for multifamily dwellings. 
Sealed dwelling means any dwelling that has all of its windows and doors closed. 
Single-family detached dwelling means a dwelling on an individual lot unattached to another dwelling. 
Sound means any oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. Bass reverberations constitute sound. The term "sound" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Mechanical sound-making devices such as radios, stereos, boom boxes, televisions, musical instruments, horns, whistles, bells, chimes or carillons, phonographs, sound amplifiers or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound; 
(2)  Human-produced sounds such as yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, speaking or arguing; 
(3)  Commercial advertising sounds; 
(4)  Party noise; 
(5)  Sound coming from motorized landscape maintenance devices such as lawn mowers, weed-whackers, leaf blowers, and chain saws; 
(6)  Animal vocalizations from pets or nondomesticated animals; 
(7)  Testing of burglar, fire or car alarms; and 
(8)  Sound coming from construction and demolition activities such as hammering, nailing, drilling, sawing, and paving. 
Sound level meter means an instrument that conforms to ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-302), 10-10-2016) 
Secs. 28-139—28-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL AREAS 

Sec. 28-160. - Sound between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings. It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., to make, cause, or allow any sound from a source within his ownership or control that projects, emits or transmits into any single-family detached dwelling in a residential area owned or occupied by another, such that the sound is plainly audible anywhere within the interior of a sealed dwelling. 
(b)  Multifamily dwellings. It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., to make, cause, or allow any plainly audible sound from a source within his ownership or control that projects, emits or transmits within the common area of a multifamily dwelling in a residential area. 
(c)  Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following sounds: 
(1)  Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
(2)  Sound from an exterior burglar or fire alarm of any building, provided such burglar or fire alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted, or ten minutes, if intermittent, but the testing of burglar and fire alarms shall not be allowed between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(3)  Sound from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted, or ten minutes, if the sound is intermittent; 
(4)  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the federal occupational safety and health administration; 
(5)  National Warning System (NAWAS) sounds used to warn the community of attack or imminent public danger such as flooding, explosion or hurricane; 
(6)  Sound of aircraft operations, where federal regulations preempt the local regulation of such specific operations; 
(7)  Protests, marches, parades, or an event sanctioned by the federal, state, county or city governments; 
(8)  Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad; 
(9)  Any other activity solely controlled and within the jurisdiction of federal or state law; 
(10)  Sound projected, emitted or transmitted from motor vehicles, as such sound is regulated by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14(a); 
(11)  An emergency which is a serious urgent situation or occurrence that happens unexpectedly and requires immediate attention; 
(12)  Sound from agricultural activities; 
(13)  Sound from the travel of properly muffled motor vehicles on a public right-of-way; 
(14)  Sound from residential air conditioner units; 
(15)  Sound from swimming pool filtering systems; and 
(16)  Sound resulting from activities for which a special administrative permit has been issued pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-303), 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 28-161. - Animal vocalizations, construction and landscaping activities, and the testing of burglar and fire alarms. 
(a)  Residential areas. Instead of the limitations set forth in section 28-160, the sound limitations set forth in this section apply to the following activities in all residential areas. 
(b)  Animal vocalizations. Animal vocalizations in a residential area during the hours from 7:01 a.m. until 10:59 p.m. shall be regulated as follows. Pets and nondomesticated animals may not make any vocalizations for more than 15 minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. The limitations in section 28-160(a) and (b) apply to animal vocalizations between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The limitations in this subsection and in section 28-160 do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
(c)  Landscaping. Power tools used for landscaping or yard maintenance shall only be operated between the hours of 7:01 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:01 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends. Power tools used for landscaping or yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler. 
(d)  Construction and demolition activity. Construction and demolition activity or deliveries shall only be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. There shall be no construction or demolition activity or deliveries on Sundays or New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, Memorial Day, July 4, or Labor Day unless such activity arises from an emergency which puts the site or neighboring property owners and their property at risk of harm or loss. 
(e)  Testing burglar and fire alarms. The testing of burglar or fire alarms shall not exceed five minutes in duration, and shall not occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Fire drills may be conducted outside of these hours no more than once a month, and with prior notification to all properties within 250 feet of the property line where the testing will take place. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-304), 10-10-2016) 
Secs. 28-162—28-182. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL AREAS AND MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 28-183. - Maximum permissible sound levels and sound during certain hours. 
(a)  This division applies to all sound emitting from property in all commercial and industrial areas and all mixed-use developments within the city. 
(b)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any source of sound on any property within commercial areas, industrial areas, mixed-use developments that exceeds 70 dB(A) in commercial areas; 80 dB(A) in industrial areas; and 70 dB(A) or 73 dB(C) in mixed-use developments from the hours of 7:01 a.m. until 10:59 p.m. or 60 dB(A) or 63 dB(C) from the hours of 11:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. Sound shall be measured at any location at or within the property line of the affected property, and sound levels in excess of those established in this section shall constitute prima facie evidence that such sound is in violation of this division. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. to make, cause or allow any sound from a source within his ownership or control that projects, emits or transmits from a commercial area, industrial area, or a mixed-use development if such sound is plainly audible within the interior of a single-family detached sealed dwelling in a residential area or in a common area of a multifamily dwelling in a residential area. 
(d)  The exclusions listed in section 28-160(b) and (c) apply as exclusions in all commercial and industrial areas and all mixed-use developments as if fully set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-305), 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 28-184. - Animal vocalizations, construction and landscaping activities, and the testing of burglar and fire alarms. 
(a)  Time limitations. Instead of the limitations set forth in section 28-183, the time limitations set forth in this section apply as specified in this section. 
(b)  Animal vocalizations in commercial and industrial areas and mixed-use developments. Animal vocalizations in commercial and industrial areas and in mixed-use developments during the hours from 7:01 a.m. until 10:59 p.m. shall be regulated as follows. Pets and nondomesticated animals may not make any vocalizations for more than 15 minutes without interruption, or more than 30 minutes, if intermittent. The limitations in section 28-160(a) and (b) apply to animal vocalizations between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The limitations in this section and in section 28-160(b) do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
(c)  Landscaping in mixed-use developments. Power tools used for landscaping or yard maintenance shall only be operated between the hours of 7:01 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:01 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends in a mixed-use development. Power tools used for landscaping or yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler. 
(d)  Construction and demolition activity in mixed-use developments. Construction and demolition activity or deliveries shall only be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays in mixed-use developments. There shall be no construction or demolition activity or deliveries on Sundays, New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, Memorial Day, July 4, or Labor Day in mixed-use developments unless such activity arises from an emergency which puts the site or neighboring property owners and their property at risk of harm or loss. 
(e)  Testing burglar and fire alarms in a mixed-use development. The testing of burglar or fire alarms in a mixed-use development shall not exceed five minutes in duration, and shall not occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Fire drills may be conducted outside of these hours no more than once a month, and with prior notification to all properties within 250 feet of the property line where the testing will take place. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-306), 10-10-2016) 
Secs. 28-185—28-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 28-206. - Sound control officers. 
Where the provisions of this division require the measurement of sound with the use of a sound level meter, sound control officers shall make such measurement. A person shall be qualified to be a sound control officer if the person meets the criteria set forth by the sound control administrator and completes, at a frequency specified by the sound control administrator, a sound certification and recertification course which has been approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-307), 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 28-207. - Procedures for the determination of sound levels. 
(a)  Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including, but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All sound measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the affected property, unless otherwise directed in this division. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this division, sound measurements are measured on the "A"- or "C"-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI. 
(b)  The sound level meter and calibrator must be recertified annually at a laboratory approved by the sound control administrator. A field check of meter calibration and batteries must be conducted before and after every set of measurements, and at least every hour as necessary. 
(c)  Total and neighborhood residual sound level measurements shall be taken in accordance with procedures established and approved by the sound control administrator. Calculation of sound levels shall conform with accepted practice established by ANSI. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-308), 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 28-208. - Sound control administrator, special administrative permits. 
(a)  Sound control administrator. The community development director or his designee shall be designated as the sound control administrator and he shall have the power to: 
(1)  Coordinate the sound control activities of all departments in the city and cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies, including city law enforcement officers, to the extent practicable; 
(2)  Review, consider, grant, deny and revoke special administrative permits, pursuant to the procedures and standards contained in this division; 
(3)  Determine if the exclusions listed in this division apply to a particular set of circumstances; 
(4)  Promulgate application forms in conformity with the requirements of this division and recommend application fees to be set by official action of the city council; 
(5)  Provide testimony, evidence, and documents in the prosecution of violations of this division; 
(6)  Issue warnings to alleged violators of this division prior to or in lieu of citations; 
(7)  Promulgate rules and procedures to enforce this division and to govern the issuance and revocation of special administrative permits; and 
(8)  Provide clarification, interpretation, and implementation of the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Initiation of applications; special administrative permits. Any person requesting temporary relief or a stay from the enforcement of this division shall apply for a special administrative permit for a period of time not to exceed a total of 15 days within any one year. The sound control administrator has discretion to consider and then grant or deny the special administrative permit, pursuant to the procedures and standards contained in this division, if strict enforcement of this division will result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant. 
(c)  Application forms; filing of applications; application fees. Applications for special administrative permits shall be filed on forms promulgated by the sound control administrator and shall not be considered authorized or accepted unless complete in all respects. By official action, the city council shall establish application fees for special administrative permits and the fee schedule shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(d)  Application forms; criteria. Applications for special administrative permits shall be considered complete when the applications include all of the following information: 
(1)  The nature and location of the sound source for which such application is made; 
(2)  The reason for which the permit is requested, including the unnecessary hardship that will result to the applicant, his client, or the public, if the permit is not granted; 
(3)  An explanation of how the permit, if granted, will not exceed the minimum necessary to afford relief to the applicant, and does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with sound or time limitations imposed on other similarly situated persons; 
(4)  The times, nature and intensity of sound that will occur during the period of the permit; 
(5)  A description of the sound control measures to be taken by the applicant to minimize the sound and the impact therefrom; and 
(6)  The name, address, and means of contacting a responsible party during the hours of operation for which the permit is issued. 
(e)  Issuance of special administrative permits; required enumerated conditions. The sound control administrator shall grant or deny the special administrative permit within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. If the sound control administrator does not grant or deny the permit within 30 days, the permit shall stand denied. Upon issuance of a special administrative permit, the sound control administrator shall enumerate the conditions of the permit, including, but not limited to, specific dates and times for which the permit is valid, not to exceed a total of 15 days within any one year. 
(f)  Revocation. A special administrative permit may be revoked by the sound control administrator, and the issuance of future special administrative permits withheld, if there is a: 
(1)  Violation of one or more conditions of the permit; 
(2)  Material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; or 
(3)  Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the sound control administrator in granting the permit. 
(g)  Appeals. Appeals of any special administrative permit decision made by the sound control administrator or his designee shall be to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-309), 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 28-209. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The provisions of this division may be enforced by police officers, code enforcement officers, or the sound control administrator. 
(b)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this division, upon citation by a police officer, a code enforcement officer, or the sound control administrator and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fine or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10, with the following minimum penalties. 
(1)  Upon a first conviction of any violation of this division, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $200.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(2)  Upon a second conviction of a violation of this division within 12 months measured from the date of the first conviction, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(3)  Upon a third conviction of a violation of this division within 24 months measured from the date of the first conviction, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $1,000.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-32, exh. (17-310), 10-10-2016) 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Operation of motorized vehicles on school property. 
The operation of motorized vehicles of any nature in or on any yard, campus, playing field or open area of any public school, college or institution in the city, except on those areas designated by school authorities for use of motorized vehicles, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-1), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-2. - Selling, soliciting on public rights-of-way; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or solicit for sale any food or beverage for human consumption from any pushcart, bicycle cart, motorized cart or other type of motor vehicle on the public streets, sidewalks or in the public rights-of-way of in the city unless specifically allowed as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Pushcarts, bicycle carts, motorized carts or other type of motor vehicles are permitted to sell their products on the public streets, sidewalks or in the public rights-of-way of city between the hours of noon and 8:00 p.m. only if they limit their inventory to the following categories: ice cream, popsicles, frozen desserts, candies, confections, chips, crackers, cookies, popcorn, pastries, or canned/bottled drinks for the purpose of retail sale. All items must be pre-packaged for sale. None of these vehicles may operate on the rights-of-way, streets, or sidewalks adjacent to any properties where "No solicitation" or similar signs are posted. 
(c)  A license from the state department of agriculture must be prominently displayed for view on each vehicle and available for inspection upon request by a city employee. Each vehicle shall contain a copy of the current valid business occupation tax certificate issued for the business (not for the vehicle itself) by city, another jurisdiction in the state, or another state, and such business occupation tax certificate must also be prominently displayed for view on the vehicle and available for inspection upon request by a city employee. 
(d)  All vehicles operating under this section shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and federal and state law, rules and regulations. Each vehicle must exhibit exterior signage showing it as a slow-moving vehicle. The placement, size and wording of such signage shall be determined by the police chief. No vehicle shall be allowed to remain stationary on any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way for longer than 15 minutes at a time. After the expiration of that time, the vehicle must move to a different location. Vehicles must be operated in a way that allows for unobstructed pedestrian and vehicular access to public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way. No vehicle shall be operated within ten feet of any fire hydrant, driveway, bus stop, subway entrance or exit, crosswalk, or intersection. 
(Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-3), 11-26-2018) 
Secs. 30-3—30-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 30-23. - Transporting building materials at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport any building materials by means of any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the driver of the vehicle has in his possession documents establishing the ownership of the building materials or the vehicle is owned by a governmental entity or public utility and is operated by an authorized employee of such governmental entity or utility, or the vehicle is subject to regulations of the state public service commission or the interstate commerce commission. In this section, the term "building materials" includes any new materials customarily used in building or construction work and which have a reasonable fair market value in excess of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-26), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-26), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-24. - Evasion of MARTA fares. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder, interfere with or otherwise disrupt or disturb the operation of a public transit bus or rapid rail car by evasion of or attempted evasion of payment of the fare. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-120(b). As used in this section, the term "evasion of payment of the fare" includes the following acts, activities or conduct: 
(1)  Entry into or upon a rapid rail car or public transit bus without payment of the fare charged for transportation service. 
(2)  Misuse of a transfer, TransCard, pass, ticket or other evidence of payment of or prepayment of a fare issued by the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) with the intent to avoid or to assist another in avoiding payment of the fare charged for transportation service. 
(3)  Use or attempted use of an unsigned MARTA TransCard for the payment of the fare charged for transportation service or refusal to sign such card upon request of an authorized agent or employee of MARTA. 
(4)  Use or attempted use of a signed MARTA TransCard by a person who is not the person whose name is signed or whose signature appears on the surface of the TransCard for the payment of the fare charged for transportation service, or refusal or failure to provide proof, upon request, that the person so using the TransCard is the person whose name is signed or whose signature appears upon the TransCard. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-27), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-27), 11-26-2018) 
State Law reference— Conduct in public transit buses, rapid rail cars and rapid rail or intermodal bus stations, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-120. 
Sec. 30-25. - Residential picketing prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing upon, before, or about the private residence or home of any individual. 
(b)  Picketing shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of activity: 
(1)  Staging a public or private protest of any kind. 
(2)  Obstructing passage to or from a residence. 
(3)  Promoting a strike or a boycott at a residence. 
(4)  To intimidate or otherwise harass the resident. 
(c)  It is the purpose of this section to protect and preserve the home, inasmuch as the public health and welfare and the good order of the city require that citizens of the city enjoy a feeling of peace, well-being, and privacy in their homes at all times. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-28), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-28), 11-26-2018) 
Secs. 30-26—30-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-54. - Crowding, pushing other persons. 
No person shall jostle or roughly crowd or push any person in any public place. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-41), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-41), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-55. - Public intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear on the streets or roads of the city or in any public place or place of business patronized by the public in a state of intoxication or incapacitation caused by illicit drugs, alcohol, concentrated vapors, or inhalants. The condition of intoxication or incapacitation shall be manifested by boisterousness, public indecency as defined by section 30-67, indecent acts, vulgar, profane, or loud language, unconsciousness, disorientation or the inability to care for his own needs or recognize obvious dangers. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-42), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-42), 11-26-2018) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 30-56. - Smoking on public transportation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for occupants on Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) buses and railcars to smoke tobacco while the buses and railcars are transporting passengers within the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "occupants" means any driver or passenger riding in and upon a bus or railcar operated by the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA). 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-47), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-47), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-57. - Unauthorized ambulances at scenes of emergency. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, representative or employee of any ambulance to go to any place where an emergency has occurred unless called there by a victim of the emergency, the victim's authorized representative, the police department or an observer of the emergency capable of being identified. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, representative or employee of any ambulance to go to the place of an emergency by reason of information received from police department radio. 
(c)  Any unauthorized or uncalled person appearing at the scene of an emergency to offer ambulance service shall be deemed a violator of this section. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-48), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-48), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-58. - Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings or processions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-49), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-49), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-59. - Throwing objects. 
No person shall recklessly or knowingly throw or propel any stone, brick, piece of wood or other object at any person, vehicle, house, building or other structure or object, or across or upon any private or public property. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-50), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-50), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-60. - Defecating or urinating on public property or in certain areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on or adjacent to any street or sidewalk, or in the halls, elevators, stairways, or any other area designated for public passage within any public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-51), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-51), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-61. - False police alarms. 
No person shall knowingly and willfully harass or attempt to harass or mislead any police officer by false alarms or unauthorized use of any device of whatever nature to summon police aid without reasonable cause. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-52), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-52), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-62. - Criminal impersonation. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "intent to defraud" means the use of deception with the intention to injure another's interest which has economic or monetary value. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of criminal impersonation if the individual: 
(1)  Assumes a false identity and commits any act in their assumed character with the intent to defraud another; or 
(2)  Pretends to be a representative of some person or organization and commits any act in their pretended capacity with the intent to defraud another. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-53), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-53), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-63. - False representation of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent his age in any manner whatever for the purpose of gaining entrance to events or establishments that require a minimum age including, but not limited to, bars, nightclubs, movies, video stores, bookstores or bingo parlors. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-54), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-54), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-64. - Unauthorized persons in school buildings. 
(a)  Prohibited generally. No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session (or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions), who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and identified themselves to the principal or the principal's agent and receives permission to remain on the premises. 
(b)  Remaining after request to leave. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private, or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or by someone with lawful authority. 
(c)  Creating a disturbance. It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any public, private or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds lawfully used for school activities while such recreational areas are in use or other activities are in progress thereon. The term "disturbance," for purposes of this section, means any act which may be reasonably expected to interfere with the activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-55)—(20-57), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-55)—(20-57), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-65. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a loud and boisterous, reckless, unruly or violent manner for the purpose of insulting, degrading, or inciting another or a group of individuals in a public place. 
(b)  It is not the intent of this section to restrict any individual's right to free speech. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-58), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-58), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-66. - Unauthorized persons entering vacant buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or to remain in a vacant or unoccupied building or on any portion of vacant land upon which such vacant building is located unless with permission of an authorized agent of said property, provided such building or vacant property is prominently marked by a posted notice which is easily seen from a distance of at least 50 feet that informs the public such property is vacant or unoccupied and unauthorized persons are prohibited from entering. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-59), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-59), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-67. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitalia, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates male or female genitalia, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the appearance of nipples and/or areola. 
Public place includes, but is not limited to, buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including stores, shopping malls, modes of transportation whether moving or stationary, including cars, buses, trains, where nudity might reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public, and places of entertainment, including bars, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls whether limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, or otherwise and whether or not an admission charge is levied and all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  An exposure of the sexual organs; or 
(2)  An appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity. 
(c)  Exemptions. The prohibition set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any child under ten years of age; or 
(2)  Any female person exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an infant under two years old. 
(d)  Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of subsection (b) of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-60)—(20-63), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-60)—(20-63), 11-26-2018) 
Secs. 30-68—30-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOITERING 

Sec. 30-93. - Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person after having been directed by an officer or member of the police department to move away therefrom, to remain or loiter in front of any church or other place of public worship during services therein, or in front of any theater, concert hall, ballroom, coffeehouse, tavern or other public place, or to loiter or idle away time around the hotels or on the sidewalks or public streets or roads of the city. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of loitering when the person is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(c)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-43), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-43), 11-26-2018) 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 30-94. - For purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in public for the purpose of soliciting or procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-45.1), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-45.1), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-95. - For purposes of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(a)  Legislative findings and intent. 
(1)  The governing authority of the city finds that the increase throughout the city of loitering in public places for the purposes of unlawful drug-related activity, or in effect, "open air" drug dealing, has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses. This activity has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear and intimidation and disorder. 
(2)  Loitering for purposes of unlawful drug-related activity usually includes a dominate presence of those persons engaging in such activity by approaching pedestrians, encouraging the presence of vehicle and pedestrian traffic for the purpose of unlawful drug-related activity in and out of residential areas, to or from motor vehicles or in parking lots. Such presence carries with it an implicit threat to visitors and residents to avoid the use of these public places. The avoidance of such places by law-abiding citizens leads to an increased opportunity for the unlawful criminal activity and furthers the decay of the neighborhood. 
(3)  The city has a strong interest in ensuring that citizens feel safe in their neighborhoods, in safeguarding the economic vitality of its business districts, and in preserving public places for their intended purposes. 
(4)  This section is not intended to limit any person from exercising their right to assemble or engage in any other constitutionally protected activity. This section applies to all persons with the requisite intent to induce another to engage in unlawful drug-related activity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as defined in section 30-93, in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or any public or private place in order to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to engage in unlawful drug-related activity. 
(1)  The term "unlawful drug-related activity" means conduct which constitutes an offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13, as amended; conduct which constitutes complicity to commit such an offense by, for example, acting as a lookout; or conduct which constitutes conspiracy to commit such an offense. 
(2)  The term "public place" means an area open to the public or exposed to public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles, whether moving or not, and buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(c)  A police officer who observes a person loitering under circumstances that provide the officer with a reasonable basis to believe unlawful drug-related activity is occurring or has occurred may detain the individual for the purpose of investigating whether the person is in violation of this section. 
(d)  A police officer may not detain an individual under this section unless both of the following elements are satisfied: 
(1)  The person engages in one or more of the following behaviors: 
a.  The person passes or receives from a passer-by, bystander or person in a motor vehicle money, objects having characteristics consistent with controlled substances, and/or an envelope, bag or other container that could reasonably contain such objects or money; 
b.  The person conceals or attempts to conceal an object having characteristics consistent with controlled substances and/or an envelope, bag, clear plastic baggie or other container that could reasonably contain such objects; 
c.  The person flees or obscures himself upon seeing law enforcement officers; 
d.  The person communicates the fact that law enforcement officers are in the vicinity to another person in a manner that suggests that the communication is a warning; or 
e.  The officer observes the person in possession of any instrument or object that is designed or marketed as useful primarily for one or more of the following purposes: 
1.  To inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce marijuana or a controlled substance into the human body; 
2.  To enhance the effect of marijuana or a controlled substance on the human body; 
3.  To test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of marijuana or a controlled substance; 
4.  To process or prepare marijuana or a controlled substance for introduction into the human body; 
5.  To conceal any quantity of marijuana or a controlled substance; or 
6.  To contain or hold marijuana or a controlled substance while it is being introduced into the human body. 
(2)  One of the following factors applies: 
a.  The officer is aware that, within the preceding three years, the person has been convicted of an offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13, or of complicity to commit such an offense, or of conspiracy to commit such an offense with in the preceding three years; 
b.  The officer has knowledge of a specific reliable tip concerning unlawful drug-related activity at a specific location, and the person who is found loitering is doing so at a time, in a place or in a manner that is otherwise consistent with the details provided in the tip; 
c.  The person is loitering in an area that has been designated a notorious drug-related activity area as defined in subsection (g) of this section; 
d.  The person is in an area where he is prohibited by court order from being, and the officer is aware of the court order; 
e.  The officer knows that the person has been previously convicted of loitering with the intention of engaging in unlawful drug-related activity under this section; or 
f.  Any vehicle the person has approached or communicated through is registered to an individual who has been convicted of an unlawful drug-related activity in the previous three years, and the officer is aware of that fact. 
(e)  No arrest may be made for a violation of this section unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain the person's presence and conduct, unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable to afford such an opportunity, and no one shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given at the scene was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(f)  If a police officer who detains a person pursuant to this section develops probable cause to believe that the person is in violation of this section, the officer may order the person to immediately leave the location and to remain at least 500 feet away from the location for at least five hours. In the event that person refuses to comply with such an order, the police officer may arrest the person and charge him with a violation of this section. 
(g)  The governing authority may, by written directive and after consultation with the chief of police, clearly and publicly designate areas of the city that are frequently associated with excessive incidents of drug-related offenses, including offenses involving controlled substances, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13, or marijuana. The chief of police shall file such designations with the city manager and with the clerk of the superior court. Prior to recommending such a determination under this subsection, the chief of police shall consult, as he deems appropriate, with persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of drug-related activity in areas in which this section may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the department of police with special training or experience related to drug-related activity; other personnel of that department with particular knowledge of drug-related activities in the proposed designated area; appointed and elected officials of the area; and community-based organizations. The chief of police shall develop and implement procedures for the bi-annual review and update of any designations made under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-45.2), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-45.2), 11-26-2018) 
Secs. 30-96—30-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 30-119. - Reckless operation of motor vehicle upon parking facility or walkway. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle-access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning so as to endanger the person or property of another. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-67), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-67), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-120. - Creating hazardous or offensive condition. 
No person shall create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by an act which serves no legitimate purpose. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-68), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-68), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-121. - Aiding, encouraging minor to commit unlawful act. 
No person shall aid, abet or encourage a minor to do any act which constitutes disorderly conduct or a breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-70), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-70), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-122. - Interfering with operation of school bus. 
No person shall obstruct, hinder, interfere with or otherwise disrupt or disturb the operation or operator of a public school bus. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-71), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-71), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-123. - Halting or impeding flow of traffic. 
No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public right-of-way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public right-of-way or place by a police officer or any other authorized law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-74), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-74), 11-26-2018) 
Secs. 30-124—30-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS 

Sec. 30-145. - Soliciting, begging on city property. 
Without the express written consent of the city manager, it shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit, or sell goods, wares or other objects or services within any building, or on any grounds, sidewalks or other ways owned by or under control of the city, its agencies, authorities, commissions, boards, bureaus or other city entities. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-91), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-91), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-146. - Public meetings. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as prohibiting use of city property for meeting purposes by citizens of the city, provided such meetings are to be held at a time which will not interfere with regular and/or official city administrative business, and that no unusual maintenance and security costs will be placed upon the city; provided, further, that written consent shall have been first obtained from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-92), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-92), 11-26-2018) 
Secs. 30-147—30-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 30-176—30-203. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 

Sec. 30-204. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city council does hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purposes of this division are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and public and private places of employment; 
(2)  To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-101), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-101), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-205. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases not defined in this division, but defined in applicable state law or the Code of the city shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Childcare facility means any institution, society, agency, or facility, which either primarily or incidentally provides full-time care for children under 17 years of age outside of their own homes, subject to such exceptions as may be provided in rules and regulations of the state board of human resources, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3, as amended. 
Common area means only those outdoor areas of apartments, condominiums, townhomes, residential subdivisions, roominghouses, retirement facilities, nursing homes, personal care homes, and other multi-unit residential property that are either commonly used or owned by its residents and intended for the common enjoyment of its residents, or accessible to residents of more than one dwelling located on the property. Common areas include, but are not limited to, outdoor recreational areas within a development, and common open space that is the central organizing feature of a development. 
Dining area means an interior or exterior (such as porch, patio or courtyard) area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
E-cigarette means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, that creates a vapor of nicotine and simulates smoking. The term "e-cigarette" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptive name. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means any person who employs the services of an individual person. 
Enclosed means closed in by a roof and at least three sides with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. It includes areas commonly described as public lobbies or lobbies when they are in an area that is enclosed as defined herein. 
Establishment means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term "establishment" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; 
(2)  Grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods or merchandise; 
(3)  Service stations, stores or shops for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items or products; 
(4)  Barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; 
(5)  Video arcade, pool hall, and other amusement centers; 
(6)  Offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, and architectural services; 
(7)  Banks, savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; 
(8)  Hotels and motels and other places that provide accommodations to the public; and 
(9)  Restaurants and cafeterias. 
Freestanding bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Health care facility means any licensed general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center, or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1(2), as amended. 
Intermediate care (nursing) home means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged. 
Outdoor recreational public place means any outdoor area of a place to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted that is used, or intended for use, as a recreational area, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "outdoor recreational public place" includes, but is not limited to, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, athletic or sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, horseback riding trails, swimming pool facilities, aquatic areas, water parks, skateboard parks, amusement parks, stadiums, amphitheaters, beaches, lakes, and outdoor areas of roller- and ice-skating rinks, concert venues, sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, bingo facilities, video arcades, pool halls, bowling facilities, amusement centers, and theaters. 
Personal care home means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, non-related persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. Personal care homes include those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication, and provision of transient medical care. The term "personal care home" does not include old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. The term "personal care home" also means residential care facilities for the elderly. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult day care facility, or a health care facility. The dining area of a restaurant shall be treated as a place of employment under this division. 
Playground means any outdoor area that is used or designed to be used by children for recreation, including areas containing play or sports equipment or designated or landscaped for play or sports activities if such outdoor area is located in a common area, or on public or private elementary or secondary school grounds, or on property owned, leased, or operated by the city. A playground in the outdoor area of a private residence is not a playground regulated by this division. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, waiting rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, concession areas, public transit, restrooms, shopping malls, elevators, service lines, service stations, offices providing professional services, banks and other financial institutions, educational, recreational and health care facilities, childcare facilities, auditoriums, enclosed facilities in outdoor recreational public places, theaters, arenas, meeting rooms, repair shops, automobile dealerships, convention halls, and polling places. Porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall be considered a public place. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult day care facility or a health care facility. 
Restaurant means any establishment or area which is primarily devoted to the serving of food to the public or guests and which contains a dining area. The term "restaurant" shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or tavern is a freestanding bar area as previously defined. The term "restaurant" shall include any dining area located within a health care, educational, or childcare facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as restaurants under this division. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Service line means any indoor or outdoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including, but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette, oral smoking device, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-102), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-102), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-206. - Prohibited smoking. 
Except as allowed in this division, smoking is prohibited in all public places, outdoor recreational public places, common areas, and places of employment. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-103), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-103), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-207. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to city property. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all common areas, public places, places of employment, outdoor recreational public places, parking lots, and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-104), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-104), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-208. - Reasonable distance. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited within: 
(1)  20 feet of any outside entrance, operable window, or ventilation system of a common area, public place, place of employment, or outdoor recreational public place; 
(2)  20 feet of outdoor seating or serving areas of restaurants; or 
(3)  20 feet of any service line. 
(b)  Smoking shall be allowed in the parking lot of a common area, public place, place of employment, or outdoor recreational public place owned, leased or operated by anyone other than city, except in the following situations: 
(1)  Smoking in such parking lot is prohibited if it occurs in an area of the parking lot that is within 20 feet of any outside entrance, operable window or ventilation system of a common area, public place, place of employment, or outdoor recreational public place. 
(2)  Smoking is prohibited in the parking lot of a common area, public place, place of employment, or outdoor recreational public place if the owner, operator, manager, employer, or other person who controls the common area, public place, place of employment or outdoor recreational public place has posted in the parking lot "No Smoking" signs that comply with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-105), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-105), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-209. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  "Freestanding bar" areas; 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishments, as defined by this Code; 
(4)  Private residences, including private residences which may serve as an office workplace, except if used as a childcare, an adult day care or a health care facility; 
(5)  Any property owned or leased by municipalities, the state, or the federal government; 
(6)  Designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels rented by guests provided that such designated smoking rooms shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the total number of rooms available for rent; and 
(7)  Outdoor areas of places of employment, except where an owner or employer declares that the outdoor area is a smoke-free environment, as provided in this division. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this division may declare that the entire establishment is a non-smoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-106), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-106), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-210. - Employers' responsibility. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees of public places, and places of employment but employers are not required to make expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke-free work area. 
(b)  Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within city is encouraged to adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy that incorporates the smoking prohibitions of this division. 
(c)  The written smoking policy should be provided to all employees. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-107), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-107), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-211. - Posting of signs and notification. 
(a)  At every entrance to every place where smoking is prohibited by this division, "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, employer or other person having control of such building or area. 
(b)  In every area where smoking is prohibited by this division, all ashtrays shall be removed by the owner, operator, manager, employer or other person having control of the area. 
(c)  The city clean indoor air regulations shall be acknowledged by all applicants for a city business license. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-108), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-108), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-212. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any police officer, as defined by state law, may issue a citation for any violation of this division. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this division may initiate enforcement with the chief of police or designee. 
(c)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this division shall inform persons whom they witness violate this division of the appropriate provisions, and request compliance. In the event persons violating this division refuse to comply with this division after being informed by such owner, operator, or manager, the person smoking, and not the owner, operator, or manager, shall be subject to an action for violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-109), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-109), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-213. - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment as afforded by this division. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-110), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-110), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-214. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $75.00 for a second violation of this division within one year; and 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for each additional violation of this division within one year. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-111), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-111), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-215. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This division shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the city, its officers nor its employees are liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this division caused injury. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-112), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-112), 11-26-2018) 
Secs. 30-216—30-298. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES RELATED TO MINORS 

Sec. 30-299. - Juvenile curfew. 
(a)  Definitions. Words or terms not defined in this section but defined in applicable state law or this Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult means a person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the lawful care and custody of a minor, or an emancipated minor. 
Curfew hours means the hours from 12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m. each day. 
Emancipated minor means any person under the age of 18 who has had the disabilities of minority removed and been declared an emancipated minor by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a serious or life threatening medical problem/condition, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately-owned place of business which is open for business and to which the public is invited during curfew hours including, but not limited to, any teen club open during curfew hours, places of amusement or entertainment, malls, restaurants, and shops that are open during curfew hours. 
Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court or other adult. 
Minor means any person under the age of 17 years. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation owning, operating, managing, conducting or having control or custody of any establishment or public place. The term "operator" includes, but is not limited to, elected and appointed officials, managers, members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, an adopted parent or step-parent of a minor. 
Public place means any place owned or operated by a governmental entity to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access during curfew hours and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, highways, alleys, and public schools, and school stadiums or athletic fields. 
Remain means to linger or stay, or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer, code enforcement officer, authorized city employee, the operator or other person in control of an establishment or a public place. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that causes death or creates a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of any part of the human body. 
(b)  Curfew for minors. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any minor to remain in or at a public place or an establishment in the city unsupervised by a parent or guardian during curfew hours except as allowed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  It is unlawful for the parent or guardian of any minor to knowingly allow such minor to remain in or at any public place or establishment in the city during curfew hours except as allowed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(3)  It is unlawful for an operator of an establishment or public place to knowingly allow a minor to remain in or at an establishment or public place in the city during curfew hours except as allowed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(4)  It is a full defense to prosecution under this section that the operator of an establishment or public place promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises during curfew hours and the minor refused to leave. 
(c)  Exceptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply during curfew hours in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian; 
(2)  When the minor is involved in an emergency or if such minor is seeking medical treatment; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is engaged in lawful employment or is going to or returning directly home from lawful employment; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with the consent of a parent or guardian. All minors engaged in interstate travel through the city are exempt from the requirements of this section; 
(7)  When the minor is traveling with the consent of a parent or guardian and is in an airport, bus station or other waiting or business area of a facility that provides transportation from one place to another; 
(8)  When the minor is an emancipated minor; or 
(9)  When applicable law or regulation authorizes the minor to be in a public place or establishment. 
(d)  Violations and jurisdiction. 
(1)  Any person who does anything prohibited by this article or who fails to do anything required by this article, upon citation or summons by a police or code enforcement officer or other authorized city employee, and judgment or conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the juvenile court of the county, shall be subject to appropriate penalties as imposed by the court. A minor, parent, guardian or operator of an establishment or public place who violates this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. 
(2)  Adjudication of violations of this section by minors shall be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-1-1 et seq. 
(3)  Before taking any enforcement action, the authorized officer or employee shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place or establishment. The authorized officer or employee shall not issue a citation or make an arrest unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstance, that no exception listed in subsection (c) of this section is present. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-44), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-44), 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 30-300. - Responsibility of operators of establishments. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of operators of establishments to post curfew hours. A sign containing the following language shall be conspicuously posted at all public entrances and exits of every establishment: 
"This establishment complies with the curfew hours set by the City of Tucker. With few exceptions, minors, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, are not allowed in this establishment from 12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m. each day. Violations of the curfew hours will be reported the City of Tucker." 
All signs shall be no smaller than two square feet and the lettering on the sign shall be no smaller than one inch in size. 
(b)  The posting of signs required by this section does not relieve operators of any establishment from compliance with section 30-299. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-45), 4-27-2018; Ord. No. O2018-11-36, exh. (20-45), 11-26-2018) 
Chapter 32 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-19. - Hours. 
Parks shall open at 7:00 a.m., and shall close at sunset, except that parks containing lighting for night use shall close at 11:00 p.m. Only those areas of park and recreation facilities which are illuminated and in use at night shall be interpreted as being open. All other portions of the facilities if not illuminated are considered to be closed. Applicable closing signs shall be conspicuously posted at all park and recreation facilities and any deviation from these times must be approved in writing by the city. The recreation center hours will be set by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-16), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-20. - Personal conduct. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities or engage in any activity that could cause injury to other persons while on or in connection with a recreation facility. No person shall upon or in connection with a recreation facility by act or speech willfully or unreasonably hinder, interrupt with any duly permitted activity or unreasonably or willfully intrude on any areas or into the structures designated for the use of a certain person to the exclusion of others by written permit of director. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-17), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-21. - Using parks for golf practice, putting greens, driving ranges. 
No person shall use any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreation purposes as a field for golf practice, putting green or driving range, except those areas specifically designated as golf clubs. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-18), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-22. - Motor vehicles in parks. 
(a)  A motorized vehicle means a self-propelled, wheeled conveyance that does not run on rails. A motorized vehicle shall not include a wheelchair used by a person with disabilities as an auxiliary aid. The term "wheelchair" means a device designed solely for use by a mobility-impaired person for locomotion that is suitable for use in an indoor pedestrian area. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motorized vehicle of any kind or nature in or on any city park, bicycle path, or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as an auxiliary aid in or on any city park, bicycle path, or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit the use of motorized vehicles for maintenance purposes, golf carts operated on prescribed paths, or motorized vehicles using marked roads, driveways or parking areas. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-19), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-23. - Parking restrictions. 
(a)  It is unlawful to park any motorized electric vehicle in a recreation facility except in those areas designated by the appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas or in marked parking spaces. It is unlawful to leave a vehicle standing or parked in a recreation facility or park during hours when the facility or park is closed, unless otherwise permitted to do so by the director or designee. In such instances, the vehicle may be towed from the recreation facility at the owner's expense. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to park in a recreation area or facility if the owner of the vehicle is not utilizing the recreation facility unless authorized by the director or the director's agent. It is unlawful for persons to congregate within a parking area of a recreation facility so as to disrupt traffic or other persons, or so as to create a safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-20), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-24. - Reservation of picnic shelter areas. 
(a)  Fees. The use of a city park area or picnic shelter is on a first-come, first-served basis. If priority use is required, the facility may be reserved for a reasonable period of time for the purpose of group activities through application to the city and upon payment of a reservation fee in accordance with the schedule established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Application. All persons desiring to reserve a park area or picnic shelter shall make application to the parks and recreation department, on a form prescribed by the city. 
(c)  Fundraisers at picnic shelters. Any person/group wishing to hold a fundraiser at a city picnic shelter must follow procedures for reserving picnic shelters and provide verification of current registration with the secretary of state. 
(d)  Refusal or revocation permit. The parks and recreation department reserves the right to refuse or revoke permits. Such a determination shall be based on health, safety and welfare of the public and protection of city property. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-21), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-25. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Prohibited; exception. No person shall serve, consume or transport in open containers any alcoholic beverage within a city park or recreation facility, except at a group function for which a permit has been issued by the parks and recreation department and adequate security has been arranged in accordance with city policy, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Application for permit. All persons desiring to obtain a permit to serve or consume alcoholic beverages on city park property shall submit an application to city hall on a form prescribed by the parks and recreation department and shall pay a permit fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Locations where permitted. Permits may be issued by the parks and recreation department director for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at all city parks. 
(d)  Refusal and revocation of permits. The parks and recreation department director, or his designee, shall have the right to refuse and revoke permits for cause. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-22), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-26. - Special prohibitions. 
(a)  Paint. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to possess paint, in any form, in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreation purposes. 
(b)  Glass containers. No person shall possess a glass container in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreation purposes. 
(c)  Bicycles on athletic fields. No person shall ride or walk a bicycle or other non-motorized vehicle in or on any athletic field owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as an auxiliary aid on such fields. 
(d)  Bicycles on park trails and paths. 
(1)  No person shall ride, carry, push or otherwise manually transport a one-, two- or three-wheeled cycle on or through any trails owned or operated by the city and designed solely for pedestrian use. 
(2)  This subsection (d) does not prohibit the use of such cycles on trails or paths specifically designated for bicycling or multi-uses that include cycling. No person shall operate a one-, two- or three-wheeled cycle or a trailer attached to a cycle on trails specifically designated for bicycling or multi-uses that include cycling, if the width of the trailer or cycle exceeds 37 inches as measured from the outer rim of the back tires. 
(3)  This subsection (d) does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as an auxiliary aid on city-owned or city-operated trails and paths. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-23), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-27. - Littering. 
(a)  The term "litter" means garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash and all other waste material whether natural or artificial. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to throw, dump, or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, ponds, lakes, swimming pools or other bodies of water in any city park or recreation facility, except within public receptacles. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the recreation facility by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-24), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-28. - Pyrotechnics restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess, display, use, set off or attempt to ignite any firecrackers, fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other pyrotechnics, unless approved by written permit by the director or the director's agent. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-25), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-29. - Closing of ballfields. 
The parks and recreation department may close to the public particular ballfields for maintenance purposes. Such ballfields shall be posted, and it is unlawful for any person to enter a closed field. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-26), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-30. - Public address systems. 
No public address systems, loud speakers or amplifying devices shall be used in city parks unless written authorization for use is given by the parks and recreation department director, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-27), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-31. - Fires. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes except in designated areas clearly marked by signs or defined by the existence of city-approved fire rings. 
(b)  Permanently mounted grills may be used, and personal grills may be used in designated authorized areas. 
(c)  Camp fires may be allowed with written authorization from the director of the parks and recreation department or his designee for organized groups allowed in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes after closing time. The written authorization must be on-site with the event organizer or his designee and available for inspection at the time of the camp fire. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-29), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-32. - Swimming. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to disobey the lawful direction of a lifeguard at a city-owned or -operated pool facility during the hours of operation. 
(b)  Swimming is prohibited in lakes, ponds, or creeks located inside any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(c)  Entering and using any body of water located in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes for bathing or excretory functions is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-30), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-33. - Watercraft. 
Boats, canoes, rubber rafts or other floating watercraft may not be used in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-31), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-34. - Vegetation damage or removal. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to dig up, cut, damage or remove any tree, tree limb, shrubbery, flowers, rock, mulch or other vegetation/natural fixture located in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to personnel employed or engaged by the city to maintain city parks and recreational areas or an authorized group of volunteers involved in a city-approved project for the enhancement of a park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-32), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-35. - Artifact or treasure hunting. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to search any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes for historic artifacts or for the purpose of locating lost or abandoned personal property of another, unless such person specifically is authorized by the owner of that personal property to make such search on the owner's behalf. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to remove any historic artifacts or lost or abandoned personal property of another from any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes unless such person specifically is authorized by the owner of that personal property to recover such personal property on the owner's behalf. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to dig in or otherwise disturb the ground in a park or other area owned by the city for recreational purposes, except under the circumstances permitted in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit a person from visually searching for and reclaiming his own lost property in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes, either by himself or by someone specifically authorized by the owner of the lost personal property to act on his behalf. 
(e)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel engaged in the lawful execution of their duties or to persons employed or engaged by the city when performing their duties in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-33), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-36. - Commercial activity. 
(a)  Unless approved by prior written permit issued by the director of the parks and recreation department or his designee, it is unlawful for any person in any city park to: 
(1)  Sell or offer for sale any merchandise; 
(2)  Operate or attempt to operate a concession; or 
(3)  Engage in any commercial or charitable activity in a city park. 
(b)  The written permit must be on-site with the event organizer or his designee and available for inspection at the time the activity regulated in this section is occurring. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-34), 5-29-2018) 
Sec. 32-37. - Native wildlife. 
(a)  It is unlawful to remove or disturb any living or dead native creatures in city parks, including mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, and reptiles, or the parts or progeny thereof, such as nests, eggs, or antlers. 
(b)  Fishing activities in city park lakes or streams shall be allowed from the shore of a body of water or from watercraft, if the location is designated by a city sign as allowing fishing at that particular location. 
(Ord. No. O2018-5-23, exh. (15-35), 5-29-2018) 
Chapter 34 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2019-04-16, adopted May 13, 2019, amended Ch. 34 in its entirety, in effect repealing and replacing said chapter to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 34, §§ 34-1—34-2, 34-23—34-28, 34-60—34-80, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07-18, exh. (21-1—21-29), adopted Sept. 1, 2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-70, exh. (21-1—21-29), adopted June 28, 2017. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Purpose and findings. 
The mayor and city council finds that signs provide an important medium through which persons may convey a variety of messages. However, left completely unregulated, the number, size, design characteristics, and locations of signs in the city can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and to the city's general public welfare, as well as create an aesthetic nuisance. The city, further, finds that signs have become excessive and that many signs are distracting and dangerous to motorists and pedestrians, are confusing to the public, and substantially detract from the beauty and appearance of the city. The city finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety, and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of the City of Tucker in enacting this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to implement the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing signs in the city; 
(2)  To regulate the erection and placement of signs in order to provide safe operating conditions for pedestrian and vehicular traffic without unnecessary and unsafe distractions to drivers or pedestrians; 
(3)  To preserve the value of the property on which signs are located and from which signs may be viewed; 
(4)  To maintain an aesthetically attractive city in which signs are compatible with the use patterns of established zoning districts and the preservation of the city's historical and culturally significant features and landmarks; 
(5)  To maintain a safe and aesthetically attractive environment for the city's residents, workers, and visitors and to improve aesthetics; 
(6)  To establish comprehensive sign regulations that effectively balance legitimate business and development needs with a safe and aesthetically attractive environment for residents, workers, and visitors to the city; 
(7)  To provide fair and reasonable opportunities for the identification of businesses, and to provide for the identification of the availability of products, goods, or services so as to promote the economic vitality of businesses; 
(8)  To ensure the protection of free speech rights under the Georgia and United States Constitutions; 
(9)  To establish a permit system to allow specific types of signs in zoning districts consistent with the uses, intent, and character of those districts; 
(10)  To allow certain signs that are small, safe, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter but without a requirement for permits; 
(11)  To provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances; 
(12)  To place reasonable controls on nonconforming signs that are by definition contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare while protecting the constitutional rights of the owners of said nonconforming signs; and 
(13)  To prohibit all signs not expressly authorized by this chapter, to provide for the maintenance of signs, and to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-1), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-2. - Use of graphics. 
Illustrations, photos, and graphics are included in this division to illustrate the intent and requirements of the text. In the case of a conflict between the text and any illustrations, photos, or graphics, the text governs. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-2), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-3. - Definitions. 
The following terms have the meanings indicated below as used in this chapter. In addition, words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular, the words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and not directory, the word "person" includes a firm, organization, partnership, trust, corporation or other legal entity. 
Aggregate sign area. The sum total of the sign area of any and all signs for a given lot. Entrance signs and street numbers assigned by the United States Postal Service are excluded from any computation of aggregate sign area. 
Animated sign. A sign that has any visible moving part, flashing or oscillating lights, or varying light intensity, visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by any means that move, change, flash, oscillate, or visibly alters in appearance in a manner that is not permitted by these regulations. 
Awning sign. A sign where graphics or symbols are sewn on, printed on, or otherwise adhered to the awning material as an integrated part of the awning itself. 
Banner. A piece of fabric or similar material which is attached to a pole, enclosed in a frame, or mounted to allow movement caused by the atmosphere. 
Business day. Any day during which city government offices are open for public business. For purposes of this chapter, a "business day" does not include any day during which city government offices are closed after a partial business day due to a holiday, emergency, inclement weather, or the like. 
Canopy sign. A sign placed on a canopy so that the display surface is parallel to the plane of the front building facade. 
City. The City of Tucker, Georgia. 
Construction sign. A temporary sign erected and maintained on premises during permitted construction activity. 
Directional sign. An on-site sign on private property, the sole purpose of which is to direct the flow of traffic, transmit parking information, or convey similar information. 
Director. The director of the city community development department or their designee. 
Double-faced sign. A sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other and the interior angle formed by the display areas is less than 59 degrees, where one sign face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Double-post sign. A type of ground sign where the primary support is supplied by two posts positioned no more than two inches from the outer edge of the sign face. 
DT-districts. The Downtown Tucker Compatible Use Overlay District or the Downtown Tucker Zoning Districts. 
DT-1. The Downtown Tucker Compatible Use Overlay District "Neighborhood Zone" or the Downtown Neighborhood district. 
DT-2. The Downtown Tucker Compatible Use Overlay District "Corridor Zone" or the Downtown Corridor district. 
DT-3. The Downtown Tucker Compatible Use Overlay District "Village Zone" or the Downtown Village district. 
Electronic sign. A sign that requires electrical energy that may be changed at intervals by an electronic process or by remote control, or a sign that requires electrical energy and has any of the following: action, motion, changing colors, or videos. Electronic signs are not allowed in the city. 
Entrance sign. Any ground sign placed at the entrance into a development that either includes two or more lots or exceeds 30 acres in area. 
Feather sign. Any shape of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, attached to a single pole or staff for support and designed to move in the wind. Feather signs are prohibited except where permitted by this chapter as part of a special event. 
Flag. A piece of fabric or other flexible material attached to or designed to be flown from a flagpole. 
Flagpole. A freestanding structure used for the sole purpose of displaying flags. 
Ft. An abbreviation for "foot" and "feet". 
Ground sign. A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Historic sign. A sign deemed by the city to be worthy of preservation by reason of its value to the city for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a sign representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past sign design or style; 
(3)  It is a sign associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the city; or 
(4)  It is a sign of aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city. 
Illegal sign. Any sign that was erected in violation of the laws, as they existed at the time the sign was built or the sign permit issued, or signs that were not built in conformance with the issued permit. 
Illuminated sign. A sign that is lit from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
In. An abbreviation for "inch" and "inches". 
Lot, substandard. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land created after the time of enactment of this chapter or amendment of this chapter which does not meet the lot area, lot width, or public street frontage and access requirements of this chapter. Such a lot is illegal except where created by governmental action in which case such lot will have the status of a nonconforming lot of record as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
Monument sign. A type of ground sign that is attached to the ground for at least 75 percent of the width and depth of the sign face. 
Mtn. Industrial Blvd. Overlay. An abbreviation for "Mountain Industrial Boulevard Overlay district". 
NL-districts. The Northlake Overlay District or the Northlake Zoning Districts. 
NL-1. The Northlake Overlay District "Tier 1" or the Northlake High-Intensity Commercial district. 
NL-2. The Northlake Overlay District "Tier 2" or the Northlake Office Park district. 
NL-3. The Northlake Overlay District "Tier 3" or the Northlake Employment Center district. 
NL-4. The Northlake Overlay District "Tier 2" or the Vista Dale Court district. 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Non-residential zoning district. Any of the following zoning districts: NS, C-1, C-2, O-I-T, O-I, O-D, M, and M-2. 
Portable sign. Any sign, except a sandwich board sign, which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to a "T" frame sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 
Primary facade. The building facade that is most nearly parallel to the front lot line, except that, when two or more facades are equally parallel to the front lot line, the primary facade is whichever is closest to the lot line. 
Projecting sign. A sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than 12 inches horizontally from the plane of the building facade. 
Pump-island sign. A sign located under a canopy over pump islands of a service station or convenience store with gas pumps. 
Residential zoning district. Any of the following zoning districts: RE, R-LG, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, MHP, R-NC, R-SM, MR-1, MR-2, HR-1, HR-2, HR-3, MU-1, MU-2, MU-3, MU-4, and MU-5. 
Road, accessible. Any road or street that provides a means of ingress and egress to the lot. 
Roof sign. A sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building that extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building or a sign that is wholly or partially above the roof line of a building. 
Rotating sign. See animated sign. 
Sandwich board sign. A portable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located having two panels hinged at the top and capable of standing on its own frame without external support or attachment. Synonym: "A" frame sign. 
Sec. An abbreviation for "Section". 
Secondary facade. Any facade that is not the primary facade. 
Sign. A device, structure or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. A devise, structure, or representation for visual and/or verbal communications associated with and located as part of drive-through facilities are considered signs only if visible from off-site. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" includes the structure upon which a sign face is located. Flags and banners are included in this definition only as provided elsewhere herein. Seasonal holiday decorations are not included in the definition of "sign" and are not regulated as such. 
Sq. ft. An abbreviation for "square feet". 
Storefront. The ground floor facade of a store, office, or other business. 
Street frontage. The lot line that is coincident with any road or street that provides a means of direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
Suspended sign. A sign securely suspended above a pedestrian passageway from beneath a canopy or awning and oriented perpendicular to the adjacent building facade. 
Tri-faced sign. A sign structure with more than two sign faces situated so that each sign face is facing a different direction. 
Wall sign. A sign fastened, placed, or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear, or side of the structure. 
Window. An opening in the wall of a building for admission of light and air that includes a frame containing and supporting single pieces of glass, sashes, or multiple lights. 
Window sign. A sign attached to the exterior or interior face of a window or door, or installed in the interior of a building flush with a window or door, or otherwise intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-3), 5-13-2019) 
Secs. 34-4—34-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 34-24. - Sign permit required. 
(a)  Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign without first having obtained a sign permit or any other permit required by this chapter or other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Existing signs that conform to the provisions of this chapter and would be required to obtain a permit under the regulations of this chapter must register with the director and pay a permit fee. Registration and payment of permit fee must be completed within one year of the effective date of this chapter if such signs do not have a valid permit pursuant to a previous ordinance. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 34-26. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs that have a currently valid permit under any previous ordinance regulating signs. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-4), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-25. - Owner's consent required. 
No sign may be permitted or posted on a property without the consent of the property's owner or authorized agent. If it is determined that a sign was erected on a lot pursuant to an alleged agent's incorrect representation that the record owner of the lot, in fact, gave permission for the erection of a sign, the permit for such sign will be revoked as provided in section 34-29. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-5), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-26. - Application information. 
(a)  Applications for sign permits required by this chapter must be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the director. The application must describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the lot upon which sign is to be located, unit number (if applicable), and a plat map of the lot which bears the location of the proposed sign, including distances of the sign from the right-of-way; 
(2)  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the lot upon which the sign is to be placed; 
(3)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement and/or maintenance of the sign; 
(4)  Name, address, phone number and occupational tax certificate number of the sign contractor; 
(5)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, sign materials, electrical plans showing how the sign is to be illuminated (if at all), colors, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected, including necessary structural and construction details (or shop drawings) if appropriate; 
(6)  The size of the lot on which the sign is to be placed; 
(7)  Other materials determined by the director to be necessary to review the application; and 
(8)  The payment in full of the applicable application fee. 
(9)  An application for ground signs must include either: 
a.  A site plan drawn to scale, including a closed boundary survey of the lot gross acreage, the proposed location of subject sign, sign and building setbacks, approximate location of all ground signs on the lot, aggregate area of existing signs per this chapter, entrance driveways from public streets, street rights-of-way, public or private easements, building locations, gross area of buildings and floor area occupied by subject owner or tenants; or 
b.  The director may reduce the area included in paragraph "a" immediately above when a reduced area is satisfactory to establish conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The director will develop the forms necessary to facilitate the permit application process. 
(c)  The applicant must demonstrate that the sign installer holds a valid business license, except when the application is for a sandwich board sign. 
(d)  The applicant must obtain all other permits or licenses required by city ordinance, state law, or other regulation. No sign permit will be valid unless all necessary permits have been obtained by the applicant from the appropriate authorities and submitted to the city. 
(e)  Each application must contain an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city of all damages, demands or expenses in any manner caused by the sign or sign structure. Each applicant must present to the department, on request, a certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-6), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-27. - Fees. 
The cost of a sign permit will be established by the mayor and city council and collected by the director. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-7), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-28. - Time for consideration and issuance. 
The director must process sign permit applications within 45 business days of the director's actual receipt of a completed application and permit fee. Applications not processed within 45 business days will be deemed approved and a permit will be issued. A sticker or other device bearing the sign permit number must be affixed to the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-8), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-29. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The director will deny permit applications, or revoke existing permits issued under this chapter, that are found to be or have been: 
(1)  Not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable city regulations; 
(2)  In violation of state or federal laws; 
(3)  Based upon incomplete application information; or 
(4)  Were based upon and/or contain any false material statements. 
Notice of a denial of an application or revocation of a permit issued in error under this chapter must either be by hand delivery or by U.S. Postal Service certificate of mailing. It must be sent to the address on the permit application on or before the 45th business day after the director's receipt of the completed application. If mailed, notice will be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. Any application denied and later resubmitted will be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission. 
(b)  Appeal. An applicant whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the director to the zoning board of appeals as provided in city zoning regulations. 
(c)  Certiorari. If an applicant or permittee whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the zoning board of appeals, that person may file an appeal to the Superior Court of DeKalb County by writ of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-9), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-30. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit becomes null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued is not completed and fully installed within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If an individual later desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-10), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-31. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city may issue a citation for violation of this chapter by any person, including if applicable, the owner, manager or tenant of the lot upon which a sign is located. Violations may include, but are not limited to, improper installation, improper maintenance, conversion, alteration, or used in violation of this chapter or in violation of any other applicable ordinance, including, but not limited to, building and electrical codes. 
(b)  The director or any designated city employee will have the same duties, authority, and obligations regarding access to private property, inspections, including the procurement of inspection warrants provided in city zoning regulations with regard to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter will be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, will be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-7 of the city Code. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter will be considered a separate violation, and each day of a continued violation for each sign will be considered a separate violation when applying the penalties authorized in section 1-7. 
(d)  The city may seek affirmative equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the removal or repair of any sign in violation of this chapter or other city ordinances. 
(e)  The director or any city employee who operates an authorized city vehicle, or any person contracting with the city for such purpose may, without notice, remove and dispose of any prohibited sign, signal, device, or other structure erected, placed or maintained on the dedicated right-of-way of any public road. Such removal and disposal of a prohibited sign, signal, device, or other structure will not preclude the prosecution of any person for erecting, placing or maintaining such item in the dedicated public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-11), 5-13-2019) 
Secs. 34-32—34-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 34-52. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are not allowed anywhere in the city: 
(1)  Signs on the dedicated right-of-way of any public road other than publicly owned or maintained signs and signs pertaining to railroad crossings; 
(2)  Signs that contain words, pictures, statements, or any other materials which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, as amended; 
(3)  Signs, except flags allowed by section 34-53(2), that simulate an official traffic control device, warning sign, or regulatory sign or which hide from view any traffic control device, signal, or public service sign; 
(4)  Signs that emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road, highway, or adjacent sidewalk by a person with normal hearing abilities; 
(5)  Signs that interfere with road or highway visibility, or that obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic, or that otherwise pose a hazard to traffic due to structural deficiencies in the structure of such signs; 
(6)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, curb, utility pole, natural feature, or other structure except as may be set forth herein; 
(7)  Animated signs, including rotating or revolving signs (except for time and weather informational signs, official warning and other regulatory signs); 
(8)  Electronic signs; 
(9)  Neon signs, except as authorized under section 34-53(3) for window signs; 
(10)  Signs that obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or shall prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof, as well as signs attached to any fire escape; 
(11)  Signs that cover and obscure windows, doors, cornices, or other architectural features; 
(12)  Signs that do not conform to applicable building and electrical codes; 
(13)  Signs for which a permit is required that do not display the sign permit number; 
(14)  Monopole signs and other signs with exposed structural supports that are more than three feet in height and have post supports larger than two inches in diameter or a total of four square inches in cross-section area, except for authorized double-post signs in DT districts; 
(15)  Roof signs; 
(16)  Tri-faced signs; 
(17)  Signs that are in violation of the rules and regulations of any special district or overlay district presently existing or as may later be enacted; 
(18)  Any sign constructed of non-durable material including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, fabric, or flexible plastic. This provision does not apply to flags, awning signs, or banners which are otherwise allowed by this chapter; 
(19)  Portable signs, except authorized sandwich board signs; 
(20)  Signs attached to, painted on, or otherwise positioned in or on any vehicle or truck, whether having a current license or not, that is located in view of the street right-of-way when in a location or for a period of time that indicates that the use of the vehicle is for displaying the sign to passing motorists or pedestrians, except that such signs are allowed on a temporary basis in association with a temporary event permit; 
(21)  Signs located on any substandard lot created after the enactment of this chapter unless the substandard lot is created as the result of governmental action; 
(22)  Abandoned signs in a non-residential zoning district, DT district, and NL district. Signs (including sign structures) will be deemed abandoned if the use, business, service, or commercial transaction to which it relates has been discontinued for six months. The sign owner must provide proof of continued use within the six month period. Such proof may include, but not be limited to, utility bills, tax records, business licenses, advertisements in dated publications, Insurance policies, leases, receipts, and other appropriate evidence as determined by the director. Furthermore, in reviewing said proof, the director must consider any evidence of vacancy or not-use, including, but not limited to, failure to maintain regular business hours, typical or normal for the use; failure to maintain equipment, supplies or stock-in-trade that would be used for the active operation of the use; failure to maintain utilities that would be used for the active operation of the use; failure to pay taxes, including but not limited to sales tax, workers' compensation taxes, corporate taxes that would be required for the active operation of the use; failure to maintain required local, state or federal licenses or other approvals that would be required for the active operation of the use; failure to maintain applicable business license(s); and other appropriate evidence as determined by the director; 
(23)  Any sign that is structurally unsound or is a hazard to traffic or pedestrians; 
(24)  Dilapidated or neglected signs. A sign (including sign structure) will be dilapidated or neglected if it does not present a maintained, neat, and orderly appearance, which may be manifested by the following, including, but not limited to, rust or holes on or in the sign or sign structure; broken, missing, loose, or bent parts; faded or flaking paint; non-operative or partially non-operative illumination (including any light elements within legal non-conforming electronic signs); non-operative mechanical devices; or missing letters in sign copy; 
(25)  Window shades used as signs; and 
(26)  Illegal signs. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-12), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-53. - Signs not requiring a permit. 
The following types of signs do not require a sign permit or temporary sign permit from the city in any zoning district. 
(1)  Public interest signs. Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of their duties, including but not limited to: public notices, safety signs, danger signs, official traffic control devices, memorial plaques, and historical markers are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Flags. 
a.  Flags must be displayed on flagpoles, which may be vertical or mast arm flagpoles. In non-residential districts, DT districts, and NL districts, flagpoles may not exceed the height allowed in the applicable zoning district, or 60 feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles in residential districts may not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
b.  The maximum dimensions of any flag must be proportional to the flagpole height. The hoist side of the flag may not exceed 20 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. In addition, flags are subject to the following limitations: 

 
  
c.  Each lot is allowed a maximum of three flagpoles. 
d.  A maximum of two flags is allowed per flagpole. 
e.  A vertical flagpole must be set back from all lot boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
f.  Flags and flagpoles must be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable must be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards may not be used and flags which are torn or frayed may not be displayed. 
g.  On officially designated city, state, or federal holidays, subsections (1) though (6) immediately above do not apply. 
(3)  Window signs. 
a.  Window signs may not exceed 30 percent of the area of the individual window they are located in; and 
b.  One internally illuminated window sign stating "open" and/or "closed" is allowed per establishment. It may not exceed three square feet in area and is included in the 30 percent window sign area limitation. 
c.  Neon window signs are allowed, provided no individual sign exceeds three square feet in area, the sign is included in the 30 percent sign area limitation, and the number of signs allowed is limited to a minimum separation of eight feet between such neon signs. 
(4)  Residential district signs. The following signs in residential districts are not subject to the ground sign or entrance sign permit requirements of section 34-54 but are subject to indicated limitations: 
a.  Lots used for residential purposes other than a multifamily dwelling, mobile home, or townhouse dwelling developments may not have an aggregate sign area greater than 24 square feet per lot. 
b.  Lots used for multifamily dwelling, mobile home, or townhouse dwelling developments may not have an aggregate sign area exceeding six square feet per unit, not to exceed an aggregate of 100 square feet for the development. 
c.  Signs may exceed a height of four feet above the grade level of the adjacent street (as measured from the top of the sign or support included), or a height of three feet above ground level (measured from the top of the sign or support structure to ground level), whichever is taller. 
d.  Signs may not be illuminated. 
e.  No single sign regulated by subsections (1) through (4) above may exceed six square feet in size. 
(5)  Suspended signs. One suspended sign per tenant or dwelling unit when the area of the sign is less than six square feet per side. 
(6)  Street number signs. Signs for the sole purpose of displaying street numbers as may be required by other ordinances and other signs required by law. 
(7)  Nongovernmental traffic control devices. Nongovernmental traffic control devices in or adjacent to parking areas and driveways and signs located at railroad crossings. 
(8)  Historic signs. Historic signs where: 
A.  The lot, building, or structure where the historic sign is to be located was built before 1950; 
b.  The owner of the property where the historic sign is to be located has obtained a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the sign from the city's historic preservation commission, if such body exists; and 
c.  A previous sign must have been located on the property before 1950. The historic sign's former existence, original design, original size, original color(s), original composition, and other original aesthetic qualities of the historic sign must be documented and shown to the director's satisfaction by photograph(s) or other sufficient evidence as it existed before 1950. The new historic sign must be an exact replica of the pre-1950 sign that was located on the property. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-13), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-54. - Signs requiring a temporary sign permit. 
The following types of signs require a temporary sign permit from the city in all zoning districts. 
(1)  Banners. 
a.  Each temporary sign permit authorizes one banner at a time. 
b.  On lots that do not contain multiple business establishments, banners are allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days and with no more than four such 14-day periods allowed per calendar year per lot. 
c.  On lots that contain multiple business establishments, banners are allowed for each establishment for a period not exceeding 14 days and with no more than four such 14-day periods allowed per calendar year per establishment. 
d.  Individual banner permits may be divided into two non-consecutive weeks, provided the dates are stated on the permit. 
e.  Banner may not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
f.  No banner must be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. 
g.  Banners must be erected with supports or other means so that they do not sag. 
i.  Banners must be maintained in good condition as provided for flags in section 34-53(b). 
(2)  Special event signs. A site holding a valid special administrative permit in any zoning district, or a site containing an authorized use and located in a non-residential zoning district, DT district, or NL district is allowed special event signs, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The signs and devices must be constructed of, or must be described as, banners, metal, wood, pennants, flags, feather signs, balloons, or streamers; 
b.  The maximum size allowance for all the devices and signs may not exceed 150 square feet; 
c.  The signs may be attached to the exterior wall or walls of a building, no higher than the top of the parapet or roof and may not be placed, located or connected nearer than 50 feet from the center of the street or roadway, or 20 feet from the curb or edge of the pavement, whichever is further from the center of the street or roadway and shall be out of the dedicated right-of-way; 
d.  The signs must be removed within 48 hours of the completion of the event; 
e.  Special event signs may not be used for more than 16 consecutive days; and 
f.  Special event signs may not be used more than two times per calendar year on the same site. 
(3)  Other temporary signs. The following applies to temporary signs other than banners or special event signs: 
a.  One sign is permitted per lot, except that corner lots may have one sign located on each adjacent street. 
b.  Signs may not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
c.  Signs may not exceed eight feet in height. 
d.  Signs may not be illuminated. 
e.  Signs must be rigid and may not be made of fabric or similar materials. 
f.  Sign faces must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. Rough-cut plywood and plastic are not allowed. 
g.  Any sign frames must be made of painted or stained wood, anodized aluminum, or metal. Plastic frames are not allowed. 
h.  Signs must be maintained in good condition as provided for flags in section 34-53(b). 
i.  Construction signs must comply with the following time limits: 
1.  Signs may not be erected until the first development permit for the project has been issued. If development is not begun in 60 days or if construction is not continuously and actively pursued to completion, all signs must be removed. 
2.  Signs must be removed when a certificate of occupancy is issued, or when the permanent sign is installed, or when the development permit expires, whichever occurs first. 
j.  Temporary signs other than construction signs may be used for a period not exceeding 60 consecutive days. Additional posting time may be allowed by the director, provided the temporary activity on the site is continuing. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-14), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-55. - Signs requiring a permit. 
Signs are allowed by district as set forth in Table 21.1 Specific requirements for each sign are shown on the following pages. All of the sign types show in Table 21.1 require a sign permit. 

 
Key: 
  ■ = Allowed 
   □  = Allowed for nonresidential, townhouses, and multifamily uses only 
  — = Not Allowed 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-15), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-56. - Sign area allocation. 
(a)  Awning, canopy, and wall signs. 
(1)  Allocation not transferable. Sign area allocation must be used on the building facade that is used to measure the allocation, and may not be transferred to any other building facade. 
(2)  Primary facades. Awning signs, canopy signs, and wall signs are allocated a combined sign area of four square feet of per linear foot of the primary façade. 
(3)  Secondary facades. Awning signs, canopy signs, and wall signs are allocated a combined sign area of four square feet per linear foot of any one secondary facade. 
(4)  Maximum combined sign area. The maximum combined awning sign, canopy sign, and wall sign area along any one façade may not exceed: 
a.  DT-1, DT-3, NL-4: 32 square feet. 
b.  Developments under 30 acres in all other districts: 150 square feet. 
c.  Developments 30 acres or larger in all other districts: 500 square feet. 
(b)  Other signs. The maximum combined area for signs other than awning, canopy, and wall signs is not regulated except by the dimension requirements for each sign and the number of signs allowed. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-16), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-57. - Awning signs. 

(a)  Definition. 
A sign where graphics or symbols are sewn on, printed on, or otherwise adhered to the awning material as an integrated part of the awning itself. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Signs may not extend outside the awning. 
(2)  Only awnings over ground story doors or windows may contain signs. 
(3)  The awning that the sign is attached to must be opaque. 
(4)  Signs may be on the front valance, the side valance, or on the sloping face of the awning. 
(5)  Signs may not be internally illuminated. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: 
a.  DT-1, DT-3, NL-4: maximum 32 square feet. 
b.  Developments under 30 acres in all other districts: maximum 150 square feet. 
c.  Developments 30 acres or larger in all other districts: maximum 500 square feet. 
Ⓐ Sign width (percent of awning width): maximum 80 percent. 
Projection from façade: maximum six feet. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
(1)  One awning sign, or one building canopy sign, or one wall sign is allowed along per establishment along its primary facade. 
(2)  One awning sign, or one building canopy, or one wall sign is allowed per establishment along its secondary facade. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-17), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-58. - Canopy signs. 

(a)  Definition. 
A sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any roof or roof-like structure which is extended over a sidewalk, walkway, or vehicle access area. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Signs cannot extend outside the overall length or width of the canopy. However, a canopy sign may extend above or below the canopy. 
(2)  Raceways are permitted for signs extending below or above the canopy. Otherwise, raceways are not permitted and the sign must be flush with the canopy face. 
(3)  Signs may not extend above the height of the building, including any parapet wall. 
(4)  Signs may not be located on a roof. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: 
a.  DT-1, DT-3, NL-4: maximum 32 square feet. 
b.  Developments under 30 acres in all other districts: maximum 150 square feet. 
c.  Developments 30 acres or larger in all other districts: maximum 500 square feet. 
Ⓐ Sign width (percent of canopy width): maximum 80 percent. 
Ⓑ Clear height above sidewalks or other non-vehicular areas: minimum eight feet. 
Ⓑ Clear height above parking, driveways, or other vehicle access: minimum 14 feet. 
Projection from building façade: maximum six feet. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
(1)  One awning sign, or one building canopy sign, or one wall sign is allowed along per establishment along its primary facade. 
(2)  One awning sign, or one building canopy, or one wall sign is allowed per establishment along its secondary facade. 
(3)  One canopy sign is allowed per street frontage on canopies covering vehicle fueling areas. Signs must be within the limits of the canopy covering the pump and may not exceed six square feet. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-18), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-59. - Wall signs. 

(a)  Definition. 
A sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Signs must be securely fastened to the building surface. 
(2)  Signs may not extend above the height of the building, including any parapet wall. 
(3)  Signs may not be located on a roof. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: 
a.  DT-1, DT-3, NL-4: maximum 32 square feet. 
b.  Developments under 30 acres in all other districts: maximum 150 square feet. 
c.  Developments 30 acres or larger in all other districts: maximum 500 square feet. 
Ⓐ Sign width (percent of wall width): maximum 80 percent. 
Projection from façade: maximum two feet. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
(1)  One awning sign, or one building canopy sign, or one wall sign is allowed along per establishment along its primary facade. 
(2)  One awning sign, or one building canopy, or one wall sign is allowed per establishment along its secondary facade. 
(3)  One wall sign is allowed per facade of an on-site accessory drive-through car wash building. However, no more than two total signs may be provided and the combined area of both signs may not exceed five square feet. This area is not included in the sign area allocation above. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-19), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-60. - Projecting signs. 

(a)  Definition. 
A sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than 12 inches horizontally from the plane of the building facade. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Signs must be securely fastened to the building surface. 
(2)  Signs may not extend above the height of the building, including any parapet wall. 
(3)  Signs may not be located on a roof. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: maximum nine square feet. 
Ⓐ Projection from façade: maximum two feet. 
Ⓑ Clear height above sidewalks or other non-vehicular areas: minimum ten feet. 
Ⓑ Clear height above parking, driveways, or other vehicle access: minimum 14 feet. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
(1)  One projecting sign is allowed along per establishment along its primary facade. 
(2)  One projecting sign is allowed per establishment along its secondary facade. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-20), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-61. - Monument sign. 

(a)  Definition. 
A type of ground sign that is attached to the ground for at least 75 percent of the width and depth of the sign face. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Signs must have a base made of brick or stone. Any framework must also be made of brick or stone. 
(2)  Signs must display the address of the property. Where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest address numbers must be identified. This does not apply to any ground sign where the sign is located on property which has more than one street frontage and the property address is assigned from a street other than the street frontage where the ground sign is erected. Numbers must be a minimum of eight inches in height and be visible from both directions of travel. 
(3)  Sign must be set at least ten feet from electrical transmission lines. 
(4)  Signs allowed for primary facades must be placed between the primary frontage and the street the primary facade faces. 
(5)  Signs allowed for secondary facades must be placed between the secondary facade and the street the secondary facade faces. 
(6)  No lot may have more than a combined total of one monument sign or double-post sign that is oriented towards travelers along the same street. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: 
a.  DT districts: maximum 90 feet. 
b.  Developments under 30 acres in all other districts: maximum 150 square feet. 
c.  Developments 30 acres or larger in all other districts: maximum 270 square feet. 
Ⓐ Sign width: maximum 15 feet. 
Ⓑ Sign height: 
a.  DT districts: maximum eight feet. 
b.  Developments under 30 acres in all other districts: maximum 12 feet. 
c.  Developments 30 acres or larger in all other districts: maximum 20 feet. 
Ⓒ Sign must incorporate a base between two and four feet in height. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
One ground sign is allowed per street that the lot has frontage on. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-21), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-62. - Double-post sign. 

(a)  Definition. 
A type of ground sign where the primary support is supplied by two posts positioned no more than two inches from the outer edge of the sign face. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Post supports must be between four and six inches in width or diameter. When square posts are used, a nominal four × four-inch post may be used. 
(2)  Sign faces must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. Rough-cut plywood and plastic are not allowed. 
(3)  Sign frames must be painted or stained wood, anodized aluminum, or metal. Plastic frames are not allowed. 
(4)  Signs must display the address of the property. Where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest address numbers must be identified. This does not apply to any ground sign where the sign is located on property which has more than one street frontage and the property address is assigned from a street other than the street frontage where the ground sign is erected. Numbers must be a minimum of eight inches in height and be visible from both directions of travel. 
(5)  Signs must be set at least ten feet from electrical transmission lines. 
(6)  Signs allowed for primary facade must be placed between the primary facade and the street the primary facade faces. 
(7)  Signs allowed for secondary facade must be placed between the secondary facade and the street the secondary facade faces. 
(8)  No lot may have more than a combined total of one monument sign or double-post sign that is oriented towards travelers along the same street. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: 
a.  DT districts: maximum 90 feet. 
b.  Other districts: maximum 150 square feet. 
Ⓐ Sign width: maximum 15 feet. 
Ⓑ Sign height: 
c.  DT districts: maximum eight feet. 
d.  Other districts: maximum 12 feet. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
One ground sign is allowed per street that the lot has frontage on. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-22), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-63. - Sandwich board signs. 

(a)  Definition. 
A portable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located having two panels hinged at the top and capable of standing on its own frame without external support or attachment. Synonym: "A" frame sign. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Signs may not be located in a public right-of-way. 
(2)  Signs may not exceed three and one-half feet in height and seven square feet in area (per side). 
(3)  Signs must be removed and placed indoors at the end of each business day. 
(4)  Signs may not obstruct vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic and must comply with ADA clearance and accessibility. 
(5)  Sign faces must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. Rough-cut plywood and plastic are not allowed. 
(6)  Sign frames must be painted or stained wood, anodized aluminum, or metal. Plastic frames are not allowed. 
(7)  Signs may not be illuminated. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: maximum seven square feet per side. 
Ⓐ Sign height: maximum 42 inches. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
One sandwich board sign is allowed per establishment. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-23), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-64. - Entrance signs. 

(a)  Definition. 
Any ground sign placed at the entrance into a development that either includes two or more lots or exceeds 30 acres in area. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Signs must conform to the general provisions for ground signs. 
(2)  Signs must conform to the illumination requirements for ground signs in the applicable zoning district. 
(3)  Signs in new detached single-family dwelling developments must be placed on land owned by a homeowners association. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: 
a.  Developments under 30 acres: maximum 32 square feet. 
b.  Developments 30 acres or larger: maximum 300 square feet. 
Ⓐ Sign width: maximum 15 feet. 
Ⓑ Sign height: 
c.  Developments under 30 acres: maximum eight feet. 
d.  Developments 30 acres or larger: maximum 20 feet. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
One entrance sign is allowed at each street entrance or driveway into the sign, but no two entrance signs for the same development may be placed less than 500 feet apart along the same external street. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-24), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-65. - Directional sign. 

(a)  Definition. 
An on-site sign on private property, the sole purpose of which is to direct the flow of traffic, transmit parking information, or convey similar information. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Signs must be set at least ten feet from electrical transmission lines. 
(c)  Sign area allocation. 
See section 34-56. 
(d)  Dimensions. 
Area of individual sign: maximum six square feet. 
Ⓐ Sign width: maximum three feet. 
Ⓑ Sign height: maximum three feet. 
(e)  Number of signs. 
Two directional signs are allowed for every curb but may exceed a total of eight per lot. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-25), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-66. - DT districts. 
The following additional standards and restrictions apply in DT districts. 
(1)  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in addition to those prohibited by section 34-52: 
a.  In DT-1 and DT-3, internally illuminated signs, including internally illuminated cabinet signs, except as allowed for window signs stating "open" and/or "closed" and neon window signs. 
b.  In all DT districts, back-lit channel signs. 
(2)  Ground signs. When the building is less than five feet from a public right-of-way, no ground sign may be placed between the building and said right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-26), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-67. - NL districts. 
The following additional standards and restrictions apply in NL districts. 
(1)  Wall signs. 
a.  Wall signs must be channel cut letters applied directly to the facade. 
b.  Wall signs may not exceed eight inches in depth. 
(2)  Ground signs. Ground signs must be externally illuminated using ground-mounted floodlighting. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-27), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-68. - Mountain Industrial Boulevard Overlay. 
The following additional standards and restrictions apply in the Mountain Industrial Boulevard Overlay. 
(1)  Sandwich board signs must be placed with five feet of a building entrance. 
(2)  Wood and flexible plastic are prohibited for use in permanent signs in non-residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-28), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-69. - Signs setbacks. 
(a)  No sign may be in required interior side yards, required rear yards, or required buffers. 
(b)  Signs must conform to the sight visibility triangle requirements of city zoning regulations. 
(c)  Signs must be located to provide enough vertical clearance for safe, convenient and unobstructed passage for pedestrians and vehicles. 
(d)  Signs must be set back at least five feet from any right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-29), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-70. - Measurements. 
(a)  Computation of sign area. 
(1)  For wall signs, awning signs, and canopy signs and consisting of freestanding letters or logos, sign area is calculated as the total area of the smallest single rectangle, circle, or square that fully encloses all the letters and images. 
(2)  For signs on a background, the entire area of the background is calculated as sign area, including any material or color forming the sign face and the background used to differentiate the sign from the structure on which it is mounted. For ground signs, entrance signs, projecting signs, and sandwich board signs, sign area includes the face of the structure that the message is affixed to, not including any street number, supports, base, apron, bracing, or other structural members. 
(3)  The sign area for double-faced signs is computed as the side of the sign with the largest sign face. 
(b)  Measurement of ground sign height. 
(1)  When the ground level at the ground sign's base is higher than the level of the adjoining street pavement, the height of a sign is measured from the ground level at the base to the highest point of the sign or supporting structure. 
(2)  When the ground level at the ground sign's base is lower than the level of the adjoining street pavement, the height of a sign is measured from the level of the closest adjoining street pavement to the highest point of the sign or supporting structure. 
(3)  The level of the ground may not be altered in such a way to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-30), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-71. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  The city finds that nonconforming signs may adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare. Such signs may adversely affect the aesthetic character of the city and may adversely affect public safety due to the visual impact of said signs on motorist and the structural characteristics of said signs. 
(b)  Any nonconforming sign that is not used or leased for a continuous period of six months may not be reused for sign purposes unless and until it fully conforms with the terms and requirement of this chapter. 
(c)  Illegal signs must be removed within 30 days of notice from the city. 
(d)  Except as provided for in "E" immediately below, no structural repairs or changes in shape, size, or technology on any nonconforming sign is permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this chapter. Routine maintenance and changing of copy is permitted as long as such maintenance or changing of copy does not result in or change the shape, size, or technology. Signs which are structurally unsound or present a hazard to persons or property must be removed within five days upon notification by the city. 
(e)  A nonconforming sign structure may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign structure, except that a non-conforming sign may be rebuilt where the original sign structure has been damaged or destroyed by nature or an act of God. No such replacement structure may have a sign area or height greater than the original structure. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-31), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-72. - Illumination. 
Illumination of signs must be in accordance with the following requirements. 
(1)  Location restriction. No internally illuminated sign may be constructed or maintained within 75 feet of any single-family lot property line. 
(2)  Prohibited light sources. The following light sources are not allowed: 
(1)  Blinking, flashing, and chasing. 
(2)  Bare bulb illumination. 
(3)  Colored lights used in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(4)  Direct reflected light that creates a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
(3)  Brightness. The light from any illuminated sign must not be of an intensity or brightness that will interfere with the peace, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent properties. 
(4)  Internal illumination. 
(1)  Channel letters may be internally lit or white backlit. 
(2)  For internally illuminated signs on a background, the background must be opaque and a contrasting color. 
(3)  Light emitting diodes (LED)s are allowed as a light source in a manner that the LED is behind acrylic, aluminum or similar sign face and returns in such a manner that the LED module light sources are not visible from the exterior of the sign. 
(5)  External illumination. 
(1)  Lighting directed toward a sign must be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly onto public right-of-way, the sky, or adjacent properties. 
(2)  Projecting light fixtures used for externally illuminated signs must be simple and unobtrusive in appearance, and not obscure the sign. 
(6)  Raceways and transformers. 
(1)  If a raceway is necessary, it must not extend in width or height beyond the area of the sign. 
(2)  A raceway must be finished to match the background wall or canopy, or integrated into the overall design of the sign. 
(3)  Visible transformers are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-32), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-73. - Building code. 
To the extent that it is not inconsistent with this chapter, the most current published edition of the Standard UCC Building Code and other building and construction codes as adopted and modified by the city and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs are incorporated as a part of this chapter as if fully restated herein for the same purposes stated in section 34-1 and for the same purposes for which the Standard UCC Building Code was promulgated and enacted, which purposes are expressly incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-33), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-74. - Zoning ordinance. 
Except as provided elsewhere in this section, to the extent that it is not inconsistent with this chapter, the zoning ordinance, as amended including, but not limited to definitions of terms contained therein is incorporated as a part of this chapter as if fully restated herein for the same purposes stated in section 34-1 and for the same purposes for which the zoning ordinance and any amendments thereto, were adopted, which purposes are expressly incorporated herein. However, to the extent that any regulations governing any zoning overlay district now existing or later enacted conflict with this article, the rules of the zoning overlay district will control. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-34), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-75. - Variances. 
(a)  Where a literal application of this article, due to special circumstances, would result in an unusual hardship in an individual case, a variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals after receiving evidence that the applicant meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Exceptional conditions regarding the lot size, shape or topography of the lot where the sign is to be located, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
(2)  Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to others similarly situated; 
(3)  The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant; 
(4)  The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated; 
(5)  Granting of the variance would not violate more than one standard of this chapter; and 
(6)  Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(b)  No variance may be granted to increase the aggregate area of signs permitted on a lot. 
(c)  No variance may be granted to allow a prohibited sign. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-35), 5-13-2019) 
Sec. 34-76. - Alternative compliance. 
(a)  On developments 30 acres or larger, the community development director may approve alternative sign materials when said materials are part the development's overall design program. 
(b)  Applicants shall submit evidence of the development's overall design program, which may include, but is not limited to, a master sign plan, architectural pattern book, renderings, or other items conveying the development's character and design to the director's satisfaction. 
(c)  Alternative compliance may not be used to: 
(1)  Permit a materials that is specifically prohibited by this chapter, or 
(2)  Permit a sign that is prohibited by section 34-52. 
(Ord. No. O2019-04-16, Exh. A(21-36), 5-13-2019) 
Chapter 36 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved receptacle for residential solid waste means a receptacle allowed pursuant to the regulations of the county for residential solid waste. All containers shall be waterproof. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. 
Approved receptacle for yard debris trimmings means a biodegradable paper bag, empty cardboard box, clean galvanized metal container or durable plastic container with a capacity of not less than 20 gallons and no more than 40 gallons. Containers shall have two durable handles on the sides thereof or a bail by which it may be lifted. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not constitute an approved receptacle for yard debris trimmings. 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions or similar locations or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting or transporting waste from the individual's own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. The following general standards are prescribed for commercial containers: 
(1)  All containers must be steel, continuous welded and properly reinforced. 
(2)  All lids will be flanged and reinforced for strength. 
(3)  Pickup side of container shall be reinforced inside or outside at point of torque tub contact. 
(4)  Inside reinforcement shall be pressed steel angel. 
(5)  Bottoms shall be reinforced with 1½-inch drain plug installed flush to bottom. 
(6)  All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel and epoxy paint. 
(7)  Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths will be 70 inches. Minimum gauges of steel shall be as follows: 

 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, roominghouse, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single dwelling unit/residential unit and condominiums. 
Commercial front loader container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. 
Commercial/industrial solid waste means solid waste from commercial establishments that includes, but is not limited to, material from industrial processes, manufacturing canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants, poultry processing plants or similar industries, and food waste. 
Compactor container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with a self-contained compacting mechanism or an external compactor which is designed to be used in conjunction with the individual home appliance. 
Compactor front loader container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with an external mechanical compacting system that detaches in order to be serviced by driving forward to the container using a commercial front loader vehicle. 
Compactor roll-off container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with an internal or external mechanical compacting system that either detaches or is fully self-contained and is serviced by backing up to the container and hoisting it onto a commercial roll-off container vehicle. 
Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure with a front and back entrance to each unit on the ground level. 
Construction and demolition solid waste means solid waste from construction and demolition projects that include, but are not limited to, remodeling, repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwellings and other structures such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, earth, lumber, roofing materials, gutters, shavings and sawdust. 
Conveyance means any automobile, plane, train, bus, bicycle, motorcycle or other method of transporting persons from one place to another. 
Department means the public works department or its contractors. 
Director means the director of the public works department or his designee. 
Discard means to throw, abandon, place, deposit, discharge, dump, bury, burn or dispose of a substance. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Finance director means the director of the department of finance. 
Garbage means waste, including, but not limited to, food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste that does not meet the toxic characteristic leachate procedure requirements and includes, but is not limited to, highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; industrial sludge; and other waste material that the director determines to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials. 
Incinerator means the high temperature waste combustion unit designed to dispose of pathological matter. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Litter means, but is not limited to, any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, yard debris, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description but the term "litter" does not include the term "waste" as is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Multiple dwelling means a building designed for and containing two or more dwelling units. 
Municipal solid waste means, but is not limited to, any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard debris not separated for recycling and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Noncombustible trash means, but is not limited to, materials which are unburnable in the incinerator or at incinerator temperature of 800 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit such as mineral water, metal furniture, large metal scraps and wires, auto bodies or parts, and other similar materials. 
Owner means any person or entity that generates solid waste on real property in the city or who is designated by the records of the office of tax commissioner as the owner of such real property within the city. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least 1½ mils and not exceeding a 32-gallon capacity. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and land used for business, residential, commercial, industrial, or farm purposes. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Recycle means any process by which materials that would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial refuse. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of putrescible waste on land for final disposition or management. 
Sanitation or sanitary district means designated service areas established by this Code or by a contract with a municipality. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded materials including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matters in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33). 
Special industrial waste container means any container such as a metal box, bucket, an open bed container or special container used for transporting chemicals, paint, metals, glass, oil products, plastics or any type of material that requires special handling and cannot be incinerated. 
Stationary compactor means an object of refuse container system which compacts refuse at the site of generation into a pull-on detachable container. 
Tax commissioner means the constitutional officer charged with collecting both state, county and special taxes. 
Yard debris means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-1), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to the preparation and storage, collection, transportation and disposal of all refuse in the incorporated area of the city. This chapter prescribes rules and regulations therefor, regulates the collection of garbage and refuse, provides for the licensing and regulation of private garbage and refuse collection, prescribes rules and regulations for hauling garbage, refuse and other waste material within the city, and prohibits the unlawful deposit of litter within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-2), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-3. - Private transportation of refuse. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person including refuse collectors and sanitary contractors to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets and roadways within the city except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person not licensed by the city to collect and haul any refuse other than that arising from such person's own accumulation within any areas of the city in which refuse collection service is maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-3), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-4. - Disposal of refuse and garbage generally. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to dump or to cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, junk, appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, paper, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts thereof anywhere in the city except as may be permitted by city regulations. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the dumping on private property with the owner's permission of sand, dirt, broken dirt, blocks, broken pavement or other suitable material for use as a fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided it is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owner or owners of the property on which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment and assess the cost thereof against the real property on which such material was dumped. 
(c)  If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person prior to its being dumped as prohibited therein, this identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that the owner dumped or caused to be dumped such matter and material in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  For information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any state law prohibiting the dumping of garbage, refuse or litter on any public or private property within the city, the city shall pay a reward in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, to the person furnishing such information leading to such arrest and conviction and such monies as may be a necessary cost of the operation and administration of the city. 
(e)  All compactors containing combustible materials emptied at a disposal facility will pay the price per ton established in section 36-36. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-4), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-5. - Operation of private landfills. 
No sanitary landfill or dump shall be operated within the city without written approval of the city and the state. Sanitary landfill and landfill hours of operation shall be limited to 18 hours each day, from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, unless daily cover is applied and utilized in the manner described in the sanitary landfill's or landfill's design and operating plan approved by the state environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-5), 11-27-2017) 
Secs. 36-6—36-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE 

Sec. 36-29. - Notice to owner, occupant of unacceptable container or area. 
The city, upon determining that a can, container or area is becoming or has become unserviceable or unsanitary or likely to cause an unsanitary condition, shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the can, container or condition exists to inform such person of the condition existing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-26), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-30. - Pickup routes and districts established. 
The city shall divide the incorporated areas of the city into pickup routes, which routes shall be plainly outlined on a map of the city and numbered numerically. The city shall prepare a list of the names of all the streets, roads, alleys, drives, highways and other public thoroughfares within each route; shall keep the map and lists for public inspection; and shall furnish a copy of the map showing any particular route along with a list of the names of the public thoroughfares therein to any person who requests them upon the payment of the actual cost for the reproduction of the map and list by either a city or commercial facility, whichever is available. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-27), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-31. - Preparation and storage of residential refuse for collection; placement; unacceptable refuse. 
It is the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)  All garbage shall be free from liquid and initially placed in watertight plastic bags with the tops of such bags securely closed. The owner shall then place the closed plastic bags in an approved receptacle for residential solid waste for collection and removal. 
(2)  Other household refuse will be containerized in disposable containers (box, watertight or plastic bag) except that tree branches and heavy brush which will not fit into containers shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four feet in length and stacked in a compact pile on the parkway in front of the residence adjoining the curb, but these piles shall not extend into the street. Sticks, hedge clippings and small brush shall be gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed four feet in length nor weigh more than 50 pounds. The city will not collect logs and limbs over four inches in diameter or over four feet long. 
(3)  Noncombustible trash and liquids will not be collected by the city and shall be disposed of by other means. 
(4)  All refuse receptacles, except single-use paper or plastic bags, single-use paper or cardboard boxes, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent nuisance. 
(5)  It is the duty of the occupant of any single residential unit, condominium or multiple residential unit not serviced by a commercial container to place refuse receptacles, watertight paper or plastic bags securely tied, rubbish and bundles, on assigned collection days, at a front curbside location in such a manner as not to obstruct passage; except that the residential superintendent may require it to be placed on any side of a property for the reasons of topography or efficiency. It shall also be the duty of the occupant to place the refuse at an appropriate curbside location at or before 8:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the sanitation truck; this placement shall not be made before 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after the departure of the pickup crew shall be at the peril of the owner and the owner shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter should the street become littered from the refuse. 
(6)  It is the duty of the occupant to remove containers from the curbside location to the storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; the removal shall be accomplished not later than 9:00 p.m. on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(7)  Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property such person occupies or the public thoroughfares adjoining the property. 
(8)  It is unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquid or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(9)  Inoperative, privately used or worn out household appliances (refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, discarded furniture) will be collected at the curb on an on-call basis to the department. 
(10)  Commercial waste generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units will not be collected except on a special fee basis. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-28), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-32. - Preparation and storage of commercial and multiple dwelling refuse for collection. 
(a)  Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment, condominium or multiple dwelling, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the city. 
(b)  Commercial containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings shall be placed at locations approved by the city for collection. The city will not collect refuse from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located. Cardboard boxes shall be flattened and placed in containers. 
(c)  Where the occupants of two or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or commercial container, it is the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(d)  The occupant, or occupants, of commercial establishments and the management of multiple dwellings serviced by commercial containers shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding such commercial containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(e)  All garbage and rubbish shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags with the tops secured prior to placing in commercial containers. 
(f)  Commercial containers containing any of the following items will not be emptied: 
(1)  Large household or industrial appliances. 
(2)  Furniture. 
(3)  Tires. 
(4)  Wooden crates. 
(5)  Logs or limbs over four feet in length or four inches in diameter. 
(6)  Bed springs. 
(7)  Rock, dirt, concrete blocks, etc. 
(8)  Uncontainerized garbage, yard debris and household trash. 
(g)  Normal household appliances will be collected on a special fee basis at multiple dwellings served by commercial containers, when placed adjacent to the commercial container and reported to the department. 
(h)  It is unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-29), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-33. - Collection of refuse generally; conditions for collection. 
(a)  Refuse may be collected for disposal by the city, or by persons or commercial sanitation firms licensed by the city. 
(b)  The city and its licensed scavengers will collect refuse under the following conditions: 
(1)  Refuse will be collected at least once each week from residential units except for exceptionally large piles of limbs which may require an excessive period of time to load. 
(2)  Refuse will be collected as often as six times a week from commercial establishments. 
(3)  Dead animals (other than dogs and house pets) will not be collected, and dead dogs and house pets will be collected only from animal hospitals, curbsides and public rights-of-way. Dead house pets shall be in a plastic bag and placed at the curb. They will be collected on a special fee basis and on an on-call basis by the city. Large dead animals shall be disposed of by burying on the individual's property to whom the animal belongs as the city has no responsibility to supply service for the removal and disposal of large dead animals. 
(4)  Collection service shall be discontinued where garbage or trash cans or commercial containers are inadequate or have been condemned as unfit by an inspector and notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises who has refused to correct the situation then existing. 
(c)  The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock or discarded furniture and appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors except on a special fee basis. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-30), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-34. - Garbage collection for disabled persons. 
(a)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit who is disabled to the extent of being incapable of moving refuse and shall obtain a physician's certificate as to this disability shall not be required to place the refuse at curbside. This section does not apply unless all of the persons in a residential unit are disabled and obtain a physician's certificate. These certificates will be mailed to the director for appropriate notification of pickup crews. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed 90 days (extensions are required). 
(b)  Residential cans shall not be placed more than 150 feet from the curb or road edge, nor will refuse cans be picked up if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Gates are locked. 
(2)  Gates are wired or tied shut. 
(3)  Dogs are loose in yard. 
(4)  Cans are in carports or garages. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-31), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-35. - Billing for sanitary services, sanitary docket. 
(a)  Commercial establishments. 
(1)  It is the duty of the finance director or authorized designee to prepare and mail to each owner or lessee of a commercial establishment in the sanitary districts of the city a monthly billing for sanitary services. These monthly payments shall be paid in advance by the owner or lessee of the commercial establishment property. It is the duty of the finance director to enforce the collection of commercial establishment fees and assessments imposed by this chapter. Failure by the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment to pay any amount due for the collection and disposal of refuse or lawful fee imposed is unlawful and an offense in violation of this Code. Failure by any owner or lessee or a commercial establishment to pay any amount due for the collection and disposal of refuse or lawful fee imposed may be treated by the city as a debt for which an action at law may be brought in the same manner as any other charge, assessment or debt, including a late payment penalty and interest thereon as provided by law. 
(2)  It is the duty of the finance director or authorized designee thereof to prepare, maintain and keep for public inspection a complete record of the name of each commercial establishment owner, the address or by tax map reference if no street address is available, the amount due for the calendar year, the amount of each monthly payment and an entry showing when each payment was made. This record shall be called the commercial establishment sanitary docket and shall be prepared monthly in advance. Each monthly docket shall be cumulative of all unpaid monthly installments. 
(3)  Upon the request of any person interested in examining the title of any parcel of real estate in the sanitary districts of the city, the person in charge of the maintenance of the commercial establishment sanitary docket under the supervision of the finance director or authorized designee thereof shall furnish to such person a form statement showing the information required in this section, which form statement shall be signed by the person maintaining the docket and the finance director or an authorized designee as to the correctness of the information contained therein. 
(4)  On premises being served by the department where there is a delinquent sanitary installment, after the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment thereof has been notified by the inclusion of the amount of the past due installment in a current statement or on a separate bill or other notice and the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment refuses to promptly pay it, the city may refuse sanitary pickup at those premises and sanitary service shall not be restored until these delinquent and current installments are paid in full. 
(b)  Residential units. 
(1)  All fees for sanitary services assessed against residential units shall be assessed upon the tax commissioner's books for each year and shall be collected by the tax commissioner. After collection, the tax commissioner shall transfer the sanitary fees to the city treasury according to the same schedule as city taxes. In collection of these sanitary fees, the tax commissioner shall be allowed to resort to any remedy or right allowed by law for the collection and payment of city taxes. 
(2)  It is the duty of the tax commissioner to prepare and mail to each owner of a residential unit in the sanitary districts of the city an annual billing for sanitary services. This sanitary billing will appear as a separate line item assessment on the owner's annual property tax bill and shall become due and payable at the same time that city taxes are due and payable. If such sanitary billing remains unpaid, the tax commissioner or authorized designee, shall have the authority to issue a fi. fa. or execution against the property served, which fi. fa. or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as fi. fas. or executions issued for city taxes. Each annual installment shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner that a lien attaches for city taxes, and such lien shall cover the property of the owner until such billing for sanitary services is paid. Any sanitary billing amount that remains unpaid shall accrue penalty, interest and fi. fa. charges in the same manner and at the same rate as delinquent city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-32), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-36. - Fee. 
The fees for the collection and disposal of refuse and providing such services and to construct and maintain facilities therefor shall be as established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-33), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-37. - Burning combustible materials in containers owned or used by the city. 
No person shall burn or attempt to burn or cause to be burned in any container belonging to or used by the city for refuse collection purposes any combustible material of any nature. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-34), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-38. - Yard trimmings disposal restrictions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, all yard trimmings shall be subject to the provisions of this subsection. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste. 
(c)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at municipal solid waste disposal facilities having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion. 
(d)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(e)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(f)  It is the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to separate yard trimmings from all other municipal solid waste. 
(g)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in a plastic bag but shall be placed in an approved receptacle for yard trimmings. All other requirements of this chapter regarding containing yard trimmings and refuse shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-35), 11-27-2017) 
Secs. 36-39—36-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE SERVICES 

Sec. 36-65. - Definition. 
In this article, the term "commercial sanitation firm" includes any person engaged in the business of operating a sanitary compactor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-51), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-66. - License. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of operating a commercial sanitation firm without a license issued by the city. A license application in compliance with this section shall be submitted to the department for approval or other disposition. 
(b)  Applications are available and may be submitted at the sanitation building on Camp Road during working hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.) Monday through Friday. 
(c)  Each application shall have attached a list showing the type, size and location of stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers or industrial waste materials to be serviced by the applicant. A commercial sanitation firm applying for a permit to operate stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers or industrial waste containers shall certify at the time of application that the applicant or any corporate officer of the firm is not engaged in any illegal servicing of any commercial containers or refuse collection of any type in the sanitation district. 
(d)  Approved licenses shall become effective on the first day of the calendar year. The fee to be paid to the city for each approved application shall be as established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. The fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the calendar year from the day this license is approved. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-52), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-67. - Performance bond. 
Each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall post a performance bond with the city in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-53), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-68. - Monthly charge for each container in use. 
In addition, each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall pay a monthly charge in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, for each stationary compactor container or industrial waste container in use on the last day of each month. This fee shall be paid on or before the 15th day of each succeeding month for which the service was rendered. A schedule of the location of each stationary compactor shall accompany the payment of the fees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-54), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-69. - Decals on trucks. 
Each truck used by a commercial sanitation firm to collect and transport combustible solid waste shall bear a decal issued by the department. The issuance and placement of the decal must be accomplished at the county sanitation office building by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-55), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-70. - Decals, identification on compactors, containers. 
Each stationary compactor and industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot a decal issued by the city which shows it has been properly permitted to operate in the city. In addition each stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot the name, telephone number and address of the firm permitted to service the stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container. Any arrangement between firms to service another's units must receive written approval from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-56), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-71. - Installation of stationary compactor unit; prior approval of plans. 
Plans and specifications for installing a stationary compactor unit shall be approved prior to the installation. All stationary compactor shredders and stationary compactor containers shall be installed on Class A, 3,000 psi concrete pads of not less than six inches thickness. All installations shall comply with the requirements of the city and county mechanical code, fire code and health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-57), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-72. - Special permit for handling special industrial waste. 
Special permits shall be granted to firms holding stationary compactor permits for the installation of special industrial waste containers to handle refuse requiring special handling or special equipment. No special industrial waste container shall be emptied at the incinerator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-58), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-73. - Establishment contracting services exempt from sanitary assessment. 
A commercial establishment which contracts with a firm licensed to operate a stationary compactor service shall not be required to pay a city sanitary assessment while it uses the stationary compactor service, provided additional service is not supplied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-59), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-74. - Disposal of collected refuse. 
Licensees under this article may dispose of their stationary compactor refuse and all acceptable industrial waste container refuse at an authorized disposal facility at a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-60), 11-27-2017) 
Secs. 36-75—36-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SCRAP TIRE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 36-92. - Intent and purpose. 
The city council finds that protection of the environment is vital to the health, safety, welfare and economic progress of the city and its citizens. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to develop regulations and procedures that govern scrap tires from the point of generation to the point of disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-62), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-93. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value, or in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials. 
Environmental code enforcement officer means a city code enforcement officer or an officer of the county authorized by the county to write official warnings and citations to ensure compliance with the scrap tire and solid waste code. The term "environmental code enforcement officer" includes anyone designated by the city or county as a sanitation inspector. 
Manifest means a document used to identify the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, hereinafter referred to as EPD. 
Mixed tires means a heterogeneous group of tires consisting of used, retreadable casings and scrap tires. 
Recycle means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Retreadable casing means a tire suitable for retreading. 
Reused tire means a tire used for purposes, approved by the EPD, other than intended, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs, and erosion control. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its originally intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires, not otherwise exempted, for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end use, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages and service stations. 
Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, building, and other elements) and includes processing by shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting, recycling or sorting of scrap tires. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the EPD to receive tires from scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers or the general public for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generators, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casing from scrap tires. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matters in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33). 
Tire means a continuous, solid or pneumatic covering designed for encircling the wheel of a vehicle that is not permanently attached to the vehicle or a part of the vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire handling business means any person that derives 15 percent or more of its gross income from the sale, processing, transporting or disposal of tires. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to, individuals, leasing and private companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleets and government agencies. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of two-thirty-seconds foot of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, and the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the city that a market exists, and that the used tires are in fact being marketed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-63), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-94. - General. 
It is unlawful to dump scrap tires or cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the city including the following: 
(1)  Any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; and 
(2)  Any river, canal, stream, creek, or fresh water lake; and 
(3)  Any public property or private property not owned or maintained by the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-64), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-95. - Scrap tire storage, handling, and disposal. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property to store all scrap tires in a manner that will not adversely affect the public health and safety. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property to store all scrap tires in a manner that is consistent with federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-65), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-96. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No person may store more than 100 scrap tires anywhere in the city. Any person storing in excess of 100 scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. The following exceptions shall apply: 
(1)  A solid waste disposal site permitted by the division if the permitted by the EPD if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
(2)  A tire retailer with not more than 3,000 scrap tires in storage; 
(3)  A tire retreader with not more than 1,500 scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type that the retreader is actively retreading; 
(4)  An auto salvage yard with not more than 500 scrap tires in storage; and 
(5)  A scrap tire processor approved by the division so long as the number of scrap tires in storage do no exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to store scrap tires except in a container, located outside of an authorized business, enclosed on all four sides by a solid screen and having a secure top cover to prevent the accumulation of water in the container. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-66), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-97. - Compliance. 
(a)  Scrap tire generator. Any person who generates scrap tires shall obtain a scrap tire generator identification number issued by EPD and shall maintain copies of manifests for any scrap tires that have been shipped or removed from the business location within the past 36 months. Separate identification numbers are required for each generator having multiple generation locations. 
(1)  The manifests shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and identification number of the generator; 
b.  Number and total tonnage (accurate to within ten percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; 
c.  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
d.  Date of transport; 
e.  Destination of scrap tires; and 
f.  Signatures of the scrap tire generator, scrap tire carrier and scrap tire processor. 
(2)  The completed manifests and the scrap tire generator identification number shall be made available to the environmental code enforcement officer upon request. 
(3)  Scrap tire generator identification numbers are not transferable; and each generator shall ensure that the scrap tire section of the EPD approves the carrier being used to transport scrap tires. 
(b)  Scrap tire carrier. It is the responsibility of the carrier to return a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generator within 30 days from the date on which the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires. The date the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires shall be indicated on the manifest. 
(c)  Tire handling businesses. All tire handling businesses shall maintain an accurate inventory of all new and used tires received at the place of business, sold to a consumer, sent to another tire handling businesses, or shipped to an approved processor. Inventory and quarterly transport reports shall be kept on-site and made available for inspection by environmental code enforcement officers. Quarterly reports shall be sent to the county director of public works and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of company that transported tires; 
(2)  Name of owner of company and driver of transport vehicle; 
(3)  Telephone number of transport company; 
(4)  Valid environmental protection division scrap tire program transportation identification number; 
(5)  Type of vehicle used to transport tires; and 
(6)  Quarterly tire transport report shall be mailed to the county director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-67), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-98. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article is the responsibility of the county public works director or his designee and city code enforcement officers. 
(b)  The environmental code enforcement officers are authorized to enforce this article on behalf of the city, and shall be empowered to enter private property, with the owner's consent, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violation of this article. If the owner does not consent to such entry on private property for inspection, such officer shall obtain a warrant to enter upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-68), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-99. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in section 1-7. For a first offense, the penalty shall be a fine not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00 or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. Upon conviction, the court may also order the convicted person to remove any scrap tires that have been accumulated in violation of this article from the property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-69), 11-27-2017) 
Secs. 36-100—36-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 36-127. - Purpose and objectives. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To provide for uniform prohibition of littering on public or private property throughout the city; 
(2)  To prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter; and 
(3)  To preserve the value of the many unique natural resources and enhance the beauty and quality of life enjoyed by the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-71), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-128. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-72), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-129. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence and shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-73), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-130. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It is unlawful for any operator of a conveyance or any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or in any waters within the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to leave or deposit litter on such property; or 
(2)  The litter is placed into an approved receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-74), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-131. - Litter control responsibilities. 
Owners must place all of their residential solid waste within durable plastic bags and securely tie the plastic bag prior to placing it in an approved receptacle for residential solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-75), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-132. - Vehicle loads causing litter; commercial front loader containers. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(b)  All commercial front loader containers must meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Containers must be steel, continuously welded and properly reinforced according to manufacturer's specifications; 
(2)  Lids must be constructed of durable plastic and reinforced for strength; 
(3)  The pickup side of the container shall be reinforced inside or outside at the point of torque tub contact; 
(4)  The inside reinforcement of the container shall be pressed steel angle; 
(5)  The bottoms of the containers shall be reinforced with a 1½-inch drain plug installed flush to the bottom; 
(6)  All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel and epoxy paint; 
(7)  Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths shall be 70 inches; and 
(8)  Minimum gauges of steel for such containers shall be as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-77), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-133. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-78), 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 36-134. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this article, upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fine or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-7. Where any offense or violation continues from day-to-day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon conviction of any violation of this article, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $100.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)  Upon conviction, the court may order the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the convicted person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the sentence. 
(d)  Upon conviction, the court may order the convicted person to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the sentence. 
(e)  Upon conviction, the court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article in the legal organ of the city. 
(f)  All city and county law enforcement agencies and officers are authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. Primary enforcement responsibilities for litter control are shared by the code enforcement officers of the city, county police department and officers/employees of the sanitation division of the county public works department. The officers and employees of the sanitation division are primarily responsible for enforcement on public property and along public rights-of-way and easements while the officers and employees of the code enforcement division are responsible for enforcement of this article on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-78, exh. (22-79), 11-27-2017) 
Chapter 38 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Obstructions to right-of-way. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the right-of-way of any public road, street or other easement in the incorporated area of the city by placing or maintaining thereon any obstruction, whether it is in the nature of shrubbery, signs, fences or whatever, which interferes with the clear view of motorists or the free passage of pedestrians thereon. 
(b)  Notice to remove. Wherever any obstruction prohibited by subsection (a) of this section has been placed and is being maintained, the police department or code enforcement department shall notify in writing the owner of the obstruction and the owner of the land abutting the right-of-way where the obstruction is found and also the person in possession of the property. Such notice shall state the nature of the obstruction and the fact that the obstruction is an interference with the clear view of motorists or the free passage of pedestrians and that it shall be removed within ten days from the date of the notice. 
(c)  Issuance of summons upon failure to remove. Whenever the person so notified as provided by subsection (b) of this section fails or refuses to remove the obstruction within the time allowed in the written notice, the police department or code enforcement department shall issue a summons to this person to appear in municipal court on a day certain to stand trial for the violation. 
(d)  Continued violations; issuance of summons without notice. If upon conviction for the first offense the person continues to refuse to remove the obstruction, each day that it remains intact shall constitute a new violation of subsection (a) of this section for which a summons may be issued without first issuing the written notice. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-6), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 38-2. - Selling, soliciting on public rights-of-way; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or solicit for sale any food or beverage for human consumption from any pushcart, bicycle cart, motorized cart or other type of motor vehicle on the public streets, sidewalks or in the public rights-of-way of in the city unless specifically allowed as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Pushcarts, bicycle carts, motorized carts or other types of motor vehicles are permitted to sell their products on the public streets, sidewalks or in the public rights-of-way of the city between the hours of 12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m. only if they limit their inventory to the following categories: ice cream, popsicles, frozen desserts, candies, confections, chips, crackers, cookies, popcorn, pastries, or canned/bottled drinks for the purpose of retail sale. All items must be pre-packaged for sale. None of these vehicles may operate on the rights-of-way, streets, or sidewalks adjacent to any properties where "no solicitation" or similar signs are posted. 
(c)  A license from the state department of agriculture must be prominently displayed for view on each vehicle and available for inspection upon request by a city employee. Each vehicle shall contain a copy of the current valid business occupation tax certificate issued for the business (not for the vehicle itself) by the city, another jurisdiction in the state, or another state, and such business occupation tax certificate must also be prominently displayed for view on the vehicle and available for inspection upon request by a city employee. 
(d)  All vehicles operating under this section shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and federal and state law, rules and regulations. Each vehicle must exhibit exterior signage showing it as a slow-moving vehicle. The placement, size and wording of such signage shall be determined by the police chief. No vehicle shall be allowed to remain stationary on any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way for longer than 15 minutes at a time. After the expiration of that time, the vehicle must move to a different location. Vehicles must be operated in a way that allows for unobstructed pedestrian and vehicular access to public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way. No vehicle shall be operated within ten feet of any fire hydrant, driveway, bus stop, subway entrance or exit, crosswalk, or intersection. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-3), 4-27-2018) 
Secs. 38-3—38-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 

Sec. 38-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means an assemblage of persons, groups of persons, vehicles, bands, floats or devices gathered together in public with some circumstance of show or for a race and shall not include a funeral procession or an assemblage of public officials gathered for any purpose in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-344), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 38-24. - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold or participate in a parade in the city without first securing a parade permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-362), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 38-25. - Application; contents. 
To obtain a parade permit the person or group of persons desiring to hold a parade shall file with the police department an application form which shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number, both business and residential, of the applicant. 
(2)  The date and hours when the parade is to be held. 
(3)  The location and time of the point of assembly. 
(4)  The location and time of the dispersal. 
(5)  The parade route. 
(6)  The anticipated number of marching persons. 
(7)  The anticipated number and types of motorized and other vehicles and devices. 
(8)  The number of bands and floats in the parade. 
(9)  A statement by the applicant agreeing to assume all responsibility for the mechanical condition of each vehicle in the parade, and all damages caused by mechanical failure of any vehicle, float or other device in the parade. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-363), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 38-26. - Application to be made in advance; notice to city departments. 
The application for a parade permit shall be made at least ten business days before the date of the scheduled parade, during which time the police department shall notify public utility companies and all affected persons in city government of the time, place, route and other circumstances of the parade. If any city department is in the process of utility improvements or contemplated improvements along the parade route during the time of the parade which cannot be interrupted, the chief of police shall deny the application for a parade permit or shall reroute it. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-364), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 38-27. - Bond. 
The chief of police may require the applicant for a parade permit to furnish to the city a bond in an amount not to exceed $250,000.00 secured by a surety company licensed to do business in the state, payable to the city or to any person in the city who may suffer any injury or damage from any vehicle, float, device or person participating in the parade. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-365), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 38-28. - Issuance. 
The chief of police shall determine whether or not the parade permit application is properly made and, after analyzing the information contained therein, the information from the departments consulted and any other information gathered, shall determine whether or not the parade permit should be granted. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-366), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 38-29. - Appeals from denial. 
Any applicant who has been denied a parade permit by the chief of police has the right to file an appeal to the city council within five days from the date the application is denied. It shall be incumbent upon the council to hear the appeal at any regular or special meeting of the council, to be held at any time not less than ten nor more than 30 calendar days from the date the appeal is received by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-367), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 38-30. - Hours restricted. 
No parade permit shall be issued for any parade to be held between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-368), 4-23-2018) 
Chapter 40 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1—40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX 

Sec. 40-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, all foreign, alien, and domestic insurance companies doing business in the state shall pay a tax of 2.25 percent upon the gross direct premiums received by them on and after July 1, 1955. The tax shall be levied upon persons, property, or risks in the state, from January 1 to December 31, both inclusive, of each year without regard to business ceded to or assumed from other companies. The tax shall be imposed upon gross premiums received from direct writings without any deductions allowed for premium abatements of any kind or character or for reinsurance or for cash surrender values paid, or for losses or expenses of any kind; provided, however, deductions shall be allowed for premiums returned on the change of rate or canceled policies; provided, further, that deductions may be permitted for return premiums or assessments, including all policy dividends, refunds, or other similar returns paid or credited to policyholders and not reapplied as premium for additional or extended life insurance. The term "gross direct premiums" does not mean and include annuity considerations. Annuity considerations received by nonprofit corporations licensed to do business in the state issuing annuities to fund retirement benefits for teachers and staff personnel of private secondary schools and colleges and universities shall not be considered gross direct premiums. 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-19), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-20. - License fees. 
There is hereby levied for an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount as provided in the city fee schedule. For each separate business location within the city, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-20), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-21. - Additional license fees. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee in the amount as provided in the city fee schedule per location. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-20), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-22. - Gross premiums tax—Life, accident and sickness insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 40-20. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-22), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-23. - Gross premiums tax—All other insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premium received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 40-20. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-23), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-24. - Fees due on January 1. 
License fees imposed by sections 40-20 and 40-21 shall be effective immediately upon passage of the city fee schedule as required by the city fee schedule and be due and payable on January 1 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-24), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-25. - Positions not yet established. 
During the period of transition and start-up of the city, any duties required by this article to be fulfilled by an employee or officer of the city who has not been appointed or such position or agency not yet established shall be fulfilled by the city manager or the mayor's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-25), 3-24-2016) 
Secs. 40-26—40-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 40-54. - Levy; applicability. 
An annual business license tax is hereby levied upon all depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of one-quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The term "depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-26), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-55. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-27), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-56. - Filing of return; payment. 
Each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the finance department not later than March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid at the time of filing the return. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-28), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-57. - Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax; executions. 
(a)  Any portion of the tax levied by this article not paid before it comes delinquent shall be assessed a late penalty and shall bear interest from the date the tax is due until the tax is paid. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. The finance department shall issue executions against such taxpayer owing taxes, penalties or interest as provided in this section when the same become delinquent. The execution shall be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-29), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-58. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of finance department. The finance department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The finance director shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the state constitution or the United States Constitution for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or any person authorized in writing by the director may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Disclosure of business of operators, etc.; limitations on rule. The finance director or his designee shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this article, except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, and assignees, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax, interest and penalties, or amounts of tax, interest and penalties required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-30), 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 40-59. - Positions not yet established. 
During the period of transition and start-up of the city, any duties required by this article to be fulfilled by an employee or officer of the city who has not been appointed or such position or agency not yet established shall be fulfilled by the city manager or the mayor's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-03, exh. (24-31), 3-24-2016) 
Secs. 40-60—40-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 

Sec. 40-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. The term "hotel" does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar month in which the tax imposed by this article was collected from the occupants. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of the premises, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating the hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding that date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-32), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-78. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article does not apply to any person as to whom, or to any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax. This article does not apply to any person not licensed by or required to be licensed by the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon any of the following: 
(1)  Rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. 
(2)  Rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-33), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-79. - Imposition; rate. 
There shall be a tax of eight percent of the rent for occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-34), 6-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-05-66, exh. (24-34), 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 40-80. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in the city is liable for the tax. The person's liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city, except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in the city or from an operator who is authorized by the finance department, under such rules and regulations as the finance department may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in the city, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 40-81, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-35), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-81. - Collection by operator; receipt, rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city as provided in section 40-80, and renting guestrooms in the city, not exempted under section 40-78 shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant and on demand, give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The finance department shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of tax. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-36), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-82. - False advertising. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-37), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-83. - Registration of operator; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the finance department on a form provided by the finance department. This registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the person's place of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the finance department may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; and in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The finance department shall, within ten days after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of the registrant. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. This certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be rendered immediately to the finance department upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. 
(b)  If the finance department deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration hereunder of persons engaged in business or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth in this article, the finance department may prescribe provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Those provisions shall be made to effect the purposes of this article. For these purposes, those provisions shall be in lieu of those provided herein. The registration and the certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-38), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-84. - Determinations, returns, payments. 
(a)  Due date. The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in the city. All amounts of taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the finance department on or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period. 
(b)  Filing of returns. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance department, in such form as the finance department may prescribe, by every operator and by every person liable to payment of tax hereunder during that monthly period who has not paid the tax, and made return in regard to the related occupation which is the subject of the tax. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as required by the finance department. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the finance department. 
(e)  Collection fee. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(f)  Extension of time for filing return, paying tax. For a good cause the finance department may extend, but not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension, shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at an annual rate of 12 percent per annum. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, for the period of the extension to the time of return and payment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-39), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-85. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the finance department is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax imposed by this article or the amount of such tax required to be paid to the city by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at an annual rate set by the finance department. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month, following each monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayments for a period against underpayments for another period, against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth by the finance department. 
(d)  Penalty for negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty set forth by the finance department shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of determination; service. The finance department representative shall give to the operator written notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 9-11-5 and shall be addressed to the operator at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the finance department. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the last day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-40), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-86. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return under this article, the finance department shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in its possession or may come into its possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the finance department shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayments for a period or penalties, and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate specified by the finance department. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following each monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, penalties shall be added as set forth by the finance department. 
(e)  Notice; manner of service. Promptly after making a determination, the finance department shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-41), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-87. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax; license suspension or revocation. 
Any person who fails to pay any tax to the city or any portion of the taxes specified by this article within the time required shall pay a late payment penalty, in addition to the taxes, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as specified by the finance department; failure to pay said taxes, penalty and interest shall subject the person to business license suspension or revocation in accordance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-42), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-88. - Collection of tax; security bond; refunds. 
(a)  The finance department, whenever necessary to ensure compliance with this article, may require any person subject hereto to deposit such security as the finance department may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the finance department, but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which the person files returns, determined in such a manner as the finance department deems proper, or $10,000.00, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased by the finance department subject to the limitations herein provided. The finance department may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the city council, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice of a deficiency determination, and shall be addressed to the person at the person's address as it appears in the records of the finance department. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid, or if a determination has been made against a person which remains unpaid, the finance department may, not later than three years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the city having in their possession or under their control any credit or other personal property belonging to the delinquent person, or owing any debts to the delinquent person. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the finance department consents to a transfer or disposition or until 20 days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall, within five days after receipt of the notice, advise the finance department of all these credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance department may bring an action in the courts of the state, of any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out the business or quits the business, successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover this amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the finance department showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the finance department shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the department of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the finance department to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold purchase price as provided in subsection (d) of this section. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(f)  Whenever the amount of the tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be refunded provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the finance department within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the finance department. If the claim is approved by the finance department and the board, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amount then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-43), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-89. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of finance department. The finance department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the imposition. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The finance department shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance department may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audit. The finance department may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any person renting guestrooms and any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the tax, the finance department may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having possession or custody of information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance department as required and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy and such other information as the finance department may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business of operator; limitation on rule. The finance department shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-44), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-90. - Fraudulent returns, reports. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance department, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, is guilty of and punishable under the general penalties of this Code. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made, is guilty of and punishable under the general penalties of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-46), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 40-91. - Disposition of proceeds. 
All proceeds generated from the assessment of a hotel/motel occupancy tax shall be spent only for those purposes which benefit the citizens of the city. The finance department shall maintain a separate accounting of the proceeds generated under this article. The proceeds shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). 
(Ord. No. 2016-05-01, exh. (24-46), 6-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-05-66, exh. (24-46), 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 40-92—40-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 40-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director of finance means the head or director of the city finance department or his designee. 
Month or monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease, including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the state. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity that owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value in the city. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-150), 1-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-112. - Authority; effective date; rules and regulations; records required. 
(a)  Authority. The finance department shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax as authorized by, and in accordance with, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93 et seq. 
(b)  Effective date. The tax levied by this article shall be effective on February 1, 2017, pursuant to applicable laws. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. The director of finance shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable administrative rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other ordinances of the city or laws of the state or the constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax under this article. 
(d)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers reflecting the number of rental motor vehicles rented or leased and the gross rental charges received by each rental motor vehicle concern for each month, in such form as the director of finance may require. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-151), 1-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-113. - Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, but only if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-155), 1-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-114. - Monthly statement required showing rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of each month following the month of February 2017, the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the director of finance a statement showing the rental charges and taxes collected by authority of this article for the immediately preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the director of finance the taxes due pursuant to this article for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the taxes then due and in addition to such penalty, interest on the unpaid taxes then due computed at the rate of one percent per month. Interest shall not be assessed on interest or penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-156), 1-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-115. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of the number of rental motor vehicles rented or leased and all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by any duly authorized agent of the city during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-157), 1-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-116. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the director of finance is not satisfied with the statement of the excise tax provided for in section 40-114(a), or the amount of the tax paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern, the director of finance may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is or may come into possession of the director of finance. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the deficiency determination made by the director of finance shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found to be due but not paid. 
(c)  The director of finance shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such deficiency determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the business license or other records of the director of finance as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-158), 1-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-117. - Failure to file a statement. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to file a statement as required by section 40-114(a), the director of finance shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to file a statement and shall be based upon such information that is or may come into the possession of the director of finance. Written notice shall be given in the manner as prescribed above in section 40-116(c). 
(b)  The amount of the delinquency determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been paid until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-159), 1-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-118. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any statement filed pursuant to section 40-114(a), or if no statement is filed by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-160), 1-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-119. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover any amounts required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the director of finance or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price all amounts due as required herein such purchaser will be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld to the extent of such purchase price. 
Sec. 40-120. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article, any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter, upon citation by the finance department and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, will be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with this Code. Where any violation or offense continues from day-to-day, each day's continuance thereof will constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  For a third and each subsequent violation of this chapter, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $250.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-53, exh. (24-160), 1-23-2017) 
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  The following provisions are adopted by reference as if set out at length in this chapter: 
(1)  O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, Definitions. 
(2)  O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), Uniform Rules of the Road. 
(3)  O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 7 (O.C.G.A. § 46-7-1 et seq.), Off-Road Vehicles. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-1), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters, and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable for that violation as well as for other violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-2), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-3. - Applicability to public officers and employees. 
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets and highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, any state or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-3), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-4. - Owners or persons directing drivers of vehicles not to permit violation. 
It is unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly permit the operation of that vehicle upon a street or highway in any manner contrary to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-4), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-5. - Use of vehicle without consent of the owner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, use or operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle upon the public streets and highways of the city without the permission of the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-5), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-6. - Operation of motorized vehicles on school property. 
The operation of motorized vehicles of any nature in or on any yard, campus, playing field or open area of any public school, college or institution in the city, except on those areas designated by school authorities for use of motorized vehicles, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-14, exh. (20-1), 4-27-2018) 
Secs. 42-7—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-31. - Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles. 
Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles shall not be driven upon the streets or highways abreast, but one must follow behind the other and keep as near the right-hand curb as possible. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-133), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-32. - Vehicles propelled by human or animal power prohibited on limited-access highways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to push or drive any vehicle upon the limited-access highways which is propelled by human or animal power, including any bicycle, tricycle, pushcart, animal-drawn vehicle of any kind and any vehicle incapable of a speed of at least 45 miles per hour in the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-134), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-33. - Manner of driving in procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the street or roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-135), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-34. - Leaving street or highway at other than intersection or driveway. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate it in such a manner so as to enter or leave any street or highway except at an intersection or at an alley or private drive. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-136), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-35. - Sanitation vehicles. 
All employees and city or county vehicles, when engaged or used in performance of sanitation or solid waste collection and disposal service, shall have the right-of-way in the use of the streets, and may use any part thereof in cleaning up and washing streets. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-137), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-36. - Identification, right-of-way of vehicles in funeral procession. 
(a)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided that each vehicle shall identify itself by burning regular headlights, shall keep in close formation and shall display a windshield sticker carrying the word "funeral." 
(b)  When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though the signal may change to red. 
(c)  The identifying windshield sticker on vehicles shall be at least 12 inches long and three inches high, with dark letters at least 1.5 inches high on a white background. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-138), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-37. - Driving through processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when these vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in section 42-36. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-139), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-38. - Truck routes. 
(a)  All motor vehicles having a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 36,000 pounds, or having an overall length in excess of 30 feet, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, are prohibited from using any street within the city except those authorized by ordinance and designated as truck routes. When the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not on a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from such places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route. 
(b)  Any person driving or in charge or control of any of the restricted vehicles defined in subsection (a) of this section, when upon streets other than those designated as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers a log book, weight slips, delivery slips and other written evidence of such person's destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(c)  If any designated truck route or portion thereof shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall use such other temporary truck route as may be designated by the city. 
(d)  The official city truck routes shall be those designated by the city council as shown on the city traffic schedules on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 42-39. - Tractors, semitrailers, trailer combinations. 
Tractors, semitrailers and trailer combinations shall not be operated upon any road, thoroughfare, street or alley maintained by the city, except when authorized. With authorization, vehicles may be operated on commercial or industrial roads, thoroughfares or streets for the distance approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-141), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-40. - Towing. 
No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed 16 feet in length. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-423), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-41. - Motor vehicles using bike lanes or paths. 
(a)  No motor vehicle or motorcycle shall be operated on any bicycle lane or path for any purpose, including parking, passing or turning unless otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall at any time drive, stop or park any vehicle except an emergency vehicle within a bike lane or bike path. 
(c)  No person shall drive upon or across a bicycle lane except after giving the right-of-way to all bicycles within the lane. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-424), 4-23-2018) 
Secs. 42-42—42-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED 

Sec. 42-71. - Speed limits on certain streets; violations. 
(a)  Speed limits designated. The maximum speed limits on the public streets or parts of the public streets are set forth in that certain schedule identified as Tucker Traffic Schedules that establishes speed limits for all roadways currently within the territorial boundaries of the city as amended from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  Traffic schedule adopted by reference. The traffic schedule is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this subsection, and copies thereof are available for inspection during city business hours in the office of the city clerk and the police department. The initial schedule hereby adopted is that portion of traffic schedules in effect in the county on April 30, 2018, that encompasses the incorporated area of the city. 
(c)  Driving in excess of speed limit unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon any of the streets in the city at a rate of speed in excess of the speed limit as listed for such street in the speed limit schedule and as posted on each such street. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-140), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-72. - Regulation by traffic signs. 
The public works department may regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-171), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-73. - Maximum speed in parks. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in parks in excess of 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-172), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-74. - Minimum speeds on streets and highways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle within the left-hand lane on any expressway within the city at a speed of less than 45 miles per hour. This section shall not apply to portions of the expressway system known as connectors or bypasses. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-173), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-75. - School crossing zones. 
No person shall drive a vehicle in excess of 25 miles per hour on any street where flashing yellow traffic beacons and 25 miles per hour speed signs are installed and operating or where standard school or school crossing signs and 25 miles per hour speed signs are installed, thereby designating the area as a school speed zone. The reduced speed limit shall be in effect only on days and hours when the school is in operation. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-174), 4-23-2018) 
Secs. 42-76—42-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 42-94. - Signs required for enforcement. 
When by this chapter or any other ordinance or order of the public works department any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the public works department to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no regulations shall be effective unless these signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. At least one sign shall be erected in each block on each side of the street where parking is either prohibited or restricted. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-202), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-95. - Emergency parking restrictions. 
When not inconsistent with this chapter or any other ordinance, the chief of police has authority in an emergency to prohibit the parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street or to close a street to traffic. All these orders shall be temporary only. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-203), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-96. - Authority to prohibit parking on certain streets. 
When not inconsistent with this chapter or any other ordinance, the chief of police may prohibit parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street when traffic and engineering surveys indicate that stopping or parking may impede the free flow of traffic on the street. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-204), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-97. - Loading and unloading at angle to curb; permit. 
The chief of police may issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms or conditions of these permits. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle, and shall grant to that person the privilege as therein stated in this section. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-205), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-98. - Leaving vehicle unattended; setting brakes, stopping motor. 
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of the vehicle and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of the vehicle to the curb or the side of the street or highway. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-206), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-99. - Parking prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic control device, at any place prohibited by ordinance and indicated by official signs or markings. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle, not lawfully under such person's control, either into any prohibited area or move and leave such vehicle away from a curb such distance as is prohibited by this chapter or other ordinance. 
(c)  As indicated by official signs or markings, parking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-207), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-100. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-208), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-101. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying the vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by sudden emergency; in such emergency the vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-209), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-102. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The public works department may erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in such designated place. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-210), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-103. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The public works department may erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, no person shall park a vehicle in violation of such a sign. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-211), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-104. - Parking on one-way streets. 
The public works department may erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When these signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-212), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-105. - Parking on one-way roadways. 
If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The public works department may determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway and erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-213), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-106. - Hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The public works department may determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in such designated place. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-214), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-107. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
The public works department may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating them and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-215), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-108. - Freight curb loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a truck for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to these zones are in effect, nor stop, stand or park any other vehicle for the unloading or loading of materials. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-216), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-109. - Parking of taxicabs, personal vehicles for hire, and buses regulated. 
The driver of a bus, personal vehicle for hire, or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers, and except for making emergency repairs. The provisions of this section shall not apply to common carriers stopping at regular designated passing or layover locations. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-217), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-110. - Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-218), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-111. - Bus stops. 
(a)  A no parking zone of 80 feet shall be created at all bus stops for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. 
(b)  These no parking zones shall be marked by signs and, in addition, these zones in all congested areas shall have the curbs painted yellow. This proper marking of zones shall be maintained by the companies operating buses in and out of these zones. 
(c)  Buses or any vehicles parked in these zones for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers shall pull as close to the curb as possible. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit buses from loading and unloading at platforms at loading zones where they are provided for that purpose in the street. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-219), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-112. - Restrictions on parking heavy or oversize vehicles, campers, boats, etc., on residential streets. 
(a)  No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight feet (or 2.5 m.) wide or ten feet (or 3.1 m.) high on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand any truck camper, camper trailer, motor home, boat, boat trailer or other recreational vehicle on any residential street or public place for more than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(c)  No person shall park or stand any semitrailer or truck with greater than two axels on any residential street for more than one hour at any time during the day or night, except for active loading and unloading. 
(d)  No person shall park or stand any dumpster on any public street or highway unless first issued a dumpster permit by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-220), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-113. - Fire zones. 
The chief of police may designate any area on public property or private property used for public purposes as restricted areas to be known as fire zones. Standing or parking a vehicle in a fire zone shall be a violation of this section and the city may enforce this section by the issuance of a citation and the immediate removal of the vehicle to an impound lot. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-221), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-114. - Use of parking facilities on city property. 
Parking facilities on city property designated for this use by the city manager shall be used only in accordance with regulations for this use established by the city manager. The city manager may designate certain spaces or areas as reserved for all elected officials, designated administrative officials whose position responsibilities require the provision of a reserved parking space for efficiently discharging those responsibilities and for other general purposes such as court and visitor parking. Occupancy of these reserved spaces or areas by other than those individuals assigned to use the spaces or areas shall be deemed a violation of this section. The facilities department shall be responsible for posting of signs to ensure effective notice to parking facility users as to the regulations governing and limitations on the use thereof. It shall be unlawful to park any private vehicle in any city parking facility for a period of more than 12 hours in any one day or to park a commercial or freight-carrying vehicle or trailer in these lots except by written permission of the facilities department. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-222), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-115. - Parking prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)  When prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance or by order of the city, no person shall park a vehicle during the hours prohibited at places so indicated by official signs. 
(b)  When so indicated as provided in subsection (a) of this section, parking is prohibited on the streets or portions thereof so indicated by official signs. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-223), 4-23-2018) 
Secs. 42-116—42-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 42-144. - Operation on roadways and paths. 
(a)  The operator of a bicycle, upon entering a bicycle lane or path, shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles approaching upon the lane or path and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and bicycles in the roadway. 
(b)  Any bicycle being operated on a public roadway shall yield to the right following an audible signal when overtaken by another vehicle. The driver of a vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken bicycle. 
(c)  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent to which or upon which bicycle lanes have been designated, except within this bicycle lane or except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent to which there is a bicycle path which is less than 75 feet from the roadway and which is in a safe condition for bicycle riding. 
(d)  When a roadway is determined to be unsafe for bicycling by the city, bicycle users may be restricted from the roadway by the erection of a sign prohibiting bicycle use and directing bicycle users to a suitable alternative route. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-318), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-145. - Turning movements. 
(a)  When completing a left turn on two-way roadways, bicyclists shall merge to the portion of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and shall negotiate the left turn so as to enter the intersecting roadway near the right side of the centerline, giving right-of-way to all vehicles proceeding through the intersection in the opposite direction. 
(b)  When completing a right turn, motor vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to bicycles crossing the intersecting roadway or completing a right turn. 
(c)  All vehicles or bicycles making turns at intersections shall not proceed into the intersection nor make this turn without first yielding the right-of-way to all bicycles or other vehicles within or approaching the intersection and shall proceed only when it is safe to do so. 
(d)  A bicyclist may also negotiate a left turn by dismounting the bicycle and crossing as a pedestrian, leading the bicycle to the other side of the intersecting roadway, and hence to the other side of the traffic roadway. When the person dismounts from a bicycle, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-319), 4-23-2018) 
Secs. 42-146—42-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WRECKERS 

Sec. 42-174. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the police department or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce this article. 
Director means the chief of police or the designee thereof. When a department other than the police department is designated to enforce this article, the term "director" means the director of such department or the designee thereof. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or vehicles. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-395), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-175. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any of the streets of the city any wrecker or towing car without complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-396), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-176. - Issuance of citation for violation. 
Upon conviction in municipal court, a person found violating this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-397), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-177. - Information printed on side of wrecker. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to operate or cause to be operated within the city any wrecker unless such vehicle shall have lettered in permanent paint on each side in plain view the following information: the name of the person owning and causing the wrecker to operate on the streets of city, the city from which the wrecker is operating and the telephone number. This lettering shall be in a contrasting color to the color of the wrecker and shall be at least 2.5 inches in height. Temporary or removable magnetic signs shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-398), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-178. - Responsibility for cleaning accident debris from street and right-of-way. 
All wrecker operators shall clean all the debris and parts belonging to the damaged vehicle from the street and right-of-way before they leave. If two or more wreckers are called to the same accident scene, they shall be equally responsible for cleaning. If the parts are small or consist of broken glass, the wrecker operator shall clear the streets of said small parts or glass, unless the wrecker operator is ordered not to do so by the investigating police officer due to the circumstances at the scene of the accident. Any debris removed shall be properly contained in a sealed container or bag. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-399), 4-23-2018) 
Secs. 42-179—42-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-210. - Authority of chief of police to delegate powers. 
The chief of police may delegate to any other officer in the department the duties and responsibilities conveyed to the chief of police by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-33), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-211. - Authority of police and fire officers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of police officers or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce this chapter and all other traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(b)  Police officers or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police may direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformity with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Fire officers, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-34), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-212. - Public works department. 
All functions performed by the public works department under this chapter may be performed on behalf of the city by the county's public works department or its authorized contractor pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-35), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-213. - Issuance of special permits for operation otherwise prohibited. 
The city may issue special permits authorizing the operation upon a street or highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of these movable tracks, the operation of which would otherwise be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-36), 4-23-2018) 
Secs. 42-214—42-234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS 

Sec. 42-235. - Removal of signs from public rights-of-way. 
The public works department or the code enforcement department may remove any signs located in public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-59), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-236. - Installation. 
The public works department shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and those ordinances. The public works department may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as deemed necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-60), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-237. - Designation of crosswalks; establishment of safety zones; marking of traffic lanes. 
The public works department may: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as deemed necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at places consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-61), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-238. - Specifications for traffic control devices. 
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-62), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-239. - One-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the public works department shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless these signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-63), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-240. - Intersection instructional signs. 
The public works department may determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right- or left- or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at these intersections. The making of these turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event, the hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when these turns are permitted. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-64), 4-23-2018) 
Secs. 42-241—42-258. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 42-259. - Establishment of vehicle pounds. 
The chief of police may create a vehicle pound to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed by police officers. The pound may be located at such place as may be designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-95), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-260. - Reasons for impoundment. 
Whenever any vehicle is found parked in any place within the city where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by the police department to a vehicle pound. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-96), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-261. - Report of impoundment. 
It shall be the duty of the person impounding a vehicle pursuant to this division immediately to report the fact of this impounding, together with any other information which will definitely identify the vehicle, to the police department, which shall cause a permanent record to be made thereof. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-97), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-262. - Pound records; disposition of fees collected. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to keep a permanent record of all vehicles committed to the pound, the names and addresses of the owners of the vehicles, the number of the state license tags and the nature and circumstances of each violation, as well as the disposition of each case, and to account for all fees collected under this division and pay them to the finance director or clerk of the municipal court, taking a receipt therefor. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-98), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-263. - Fees. 
A fee to cover the cost of removal, plus a storage fee for each day or fraction of a day the impounded vehicle is stored in excess of the first 24 hours the vehicle is impounded under this division, shall be assessed against the owner or other person having the right to the possession of the impounded vehicle. The specific amounts of such fees shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-99), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-264. - Release of impounded vehicle—Generally. 
Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this division shall produce evidence of identity and ownership or right of possession to the person in charge of the pound in order for the pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver it to the person. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle may be surrendered by the person in charge thereof, except where the impounded vehicle is retained as evidence or incidental to a search for evidence. Impounded vehicles retained as evidence or incidental to a search for evidence cannot be released without prior permission of the law enforcement agency. A receipt shall be obtained for all impounded vehicles upon their surrender. Such receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle and shall become a permanent record of the city. These fees shall be paid to the person in charge of the pound and a receipt shall be written. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-100), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-265. - Release of impounded vehicle—Protest and bond. 
In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fees, the police department may authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to discharge it upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such person shall be charged with violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinance and required to make bond for appearance and trial. 
(2)  Thereupon, the police department shall authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to deliver it to such person. 
(3)  If such person is convicted of violating this chapter or any other traffic ordinance, in addition to other costs, the court shall assess as cost the fees for removal and storage which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-101), 4-23-2018) 
Sec. 42-266. - Impoundment does not preclude other prosecution. 
The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violations of the penal provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic. 
(Ord. No. O2018-04-13, exh. (19-102), 4-23-2018) 
Chapter 44 - UTILITIES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 46 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-1. - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
This chapter is enacted by the city mayor and city council in order to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the city, and to implement the city comprehensive plan. To these ends, this chapter is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
(1)  To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development, redevelopment and preservation of the city in accordance with a well-considered comprehensive plan and with long-term objectives, principles and standards deemed beneficial to the interest and welfare of the people; 
(2)  To protect the established character of both private and public property; 
(3)  To promote, in the public interest, the wise utilization of land; 
(4)  To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood and other dangers; 
(5)  To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets; 
(6)  To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community; 
(7)  To encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, both built and natural, and to provide for regulations that protect and enhance these aesthetic considerations; 
(8)  To expedite the provision of adequate police and fire protection, safety from crime, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports and other public requirements; 
(9)  To protect against destruction of, or encroachment upon, historic areas; 
(10)  To protect against overcrowding of land, overcrowding of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, and loss of life or health or property from fire, flood, or other danger; 
(11)  To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base; 
(12)  To promote the preservation of the unique natural and physical resources of the city including forested areas, riverbeds, stream beds, and archaeological sites; 
(13)  To achieve compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations; 
(14)  To provide for and promote housing for all income groups and all citizens within the city; 
(15)  To implement the authority, powers and duties of the planning commission and the zoning board of appeals pursuant to state and local law, including, but not limited to, Ga. Const. art. IX, section II, ¶ IV; 
(16)  To reduce or eliminate the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments and other establishments that create such secondary effects while protecting legitimate constitutional rights of said establishments; and 
(17)  To provide for protection of the constitutional rights and obligations of all citizens within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-2. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
The city council has adopted the Tucker Tomorrow Comprehensive Plan to be used in making land use decisions for the city. It may be referred to herein as the "comprehensive plan". 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-3. - Minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, as set forth in section 46-4 hereof establishing the intent and purpose of this chapter. Within each zoning district, the regulations set forth shall be minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land, except as may be altered through conditions of zoning applied to specific properties or variances or waivers, as provided for in article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-4. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning granted by the Ga. Const. art. IX, section II, ¶ IV; the city's authority to enact regulations and exercise powers granted by the Ga. Const. art. IX, section II, ¶¶ II and III; authority granted by the state, including, but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2(b); and other powers and authority provided by federal, state and local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-5. - General applicability. 
All buildings and structures erected hereafter, all uses of land, water, buildings or structures established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in and relocations of existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning district or districts in which such buildings, structures, uses or land are located. Existing buildings, structures and uses which comply with the regulations of this chapter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter. Existing buildings, structures and uses which do not comply with the regulations of this chapter shall be authorized to continue subject to the provisions of article VIII of this chapter relating to nonconformities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-6. - Applicability to all property. 
The regulations in this chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures, land and uses within the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-7. - General prohibition. 
No building or structure, and no use of any building, structure, land, or property, and no lot of record, now or hereafter existing, shall hereafter be established, constructed, expanded, altered, moved, diminished, divided, eliminated or maintained in any manner except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No use of any land, building, structure or property shall be permitted unless expressly and specifically authorized in the district or districts within which said use is located or by the supplemental regulations contained in article IV of this chapter. When a use is not directly mentioned, the community development director may determine that the proposed use is functionally similar to an allowed land use, as listed in table 4.1, use regulations. The mayor and city council may subsequently amend the applicable definitions in article IX of this chapter, pursuant to the amendment procedures in article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-8. - Interpretation and authority to administer. 
(a)  The community development director is designated to administer, interpret and enforce the provisions of this chapter for all proposed zoning, variances, comprehensive planning, and applications requiring zoning compliance, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, site plans, permits and zoning compliance certifications for licenses and occupational taxes. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified, where this zoning ordinance refers to "the director" or "the planning director," it shall mean the community development director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-9. - Components of zoning ordinance. 
This chapter and the official zoning map and official overlay district maps of the city on file and maintained by the community development department shall together constitute the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-10. - Transitional provisions. 
(a)  New development. Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any subsequent amendment thereafter, any new building, structure or lot legally established shall be used, constructed or developed only in accordance with all applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Existing development. Any existing use, lot, building or other structure legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that does not comply with all of the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of article VIII of this chapter. 
(c)  Transition to new zoning districts. The zoning district names in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived are converted as shown in table 1.1. To the extent other sections of this Code refer to such previous district names, unless and until such other sections are amended to reflect a new intent, any reference to such previous district names shall be deemed to refer to both the previous district name and the new district name to which it is converted in this zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Pre-existing violations. Any violation of the pre-existing zoning ordinance for which a citation has been issued as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall continue to be prosecuted subject to the penalties existing at the time of the issuance of the citation. If a violation of the pre-existing zoning ordinance existed as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived without a citation having been issued, and if the underlying activity that would have constituted a violation under the pre-existing zoning ordinance would not constitute a violation under this zoning ordinance, the violation shall be deemed to have been cured and no citation shall be issued. 
(e)  Completed applications prior to effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(1)  Any proper and complete application (as defined in articles VII and IX of this chapter) for a permit, license, rezoning, variance, or other approval that was submitted to and accepted by the county planning department prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be evaluated based on the applicable law, rules, regulations and development standards in place at the time the application was submitted. 
(2)  Applicants who submitted an application prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived but who wish to proceed under the standards of this zoning ordinance may withdraw their application and submit a new application in accordance with the standards in this zoning ordinance and pay any fee required under this zoning ordinance. 
(3)  In-process applications for rezonings and special land use permits that were submitted to the county prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived will have their review process grandfathered. The city review process will begin where the county review process ended. Application fees shall not be charged by the city if payment was previously submitted to the county. 
(f)  Prior approvals. 
(1)  Zoning conditions. 
a.  Any project that was approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be developed according to the provisions of the previously approved development, program, or plan. Where conditions were attached to such prior approval and such conditions conflict with a standard or requirement of this zoning ordinance, the previously approved zoning condition shall apply. If a previously approved development, program, plan or condition does not address a particular development standard or requirement of this zoning ordinance, the new standard or requirement of this zoning ordinance shall apply. 
b.  If an owner or applicant desires to have the standards and requirements of this chapter to apply instead of standards and requirements established by previously approved zoning conditions, the owner or applicant must apply for a zoning condition amendment, as provided in article VII of this chapter. 
c.  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, when no land-disturbance or building permit has been issued on property located in an overlay district and on which a zoning condition was previously approved, and if the previously approved zoning condition is in conflict with the overlay district regulations, the overlay district regulations shall supersede the previously approved zoning condition. 
(2)  Development applications. Projects with valid approvals or permits issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be developed in accordance with the applicable law, rules, regulations and development standards in effect at the time of the approval or permit issuance, provided the permit or approval is valid and has not lapsed. Any re-application for an expired approval or permit shall meet the standards of this zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Special land use permits. Properties subject to a special land use permit that was approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall continue to be subject to the terms of the special land use permit and previous zoning regulations even if the zoning district classification is amended to a new zoning district as part of the adoption of this zoning ordinance. 
Table 1.1. Prior Zoning District Conversion to Established New Districts 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.11), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (1.1.11), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-11. - Relation to and conflict with other provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to constitute the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required by any federal or state law or other city ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provision of this chapter shall govern unless preempted by said federal or state law. Whenever any provision of any federal or state law or other city ordinance, resolution or regulation imposes a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required by this chapter, the provision of such state or federal statute or other city ordinance or regulation shall apply. Whenever any conflict arises between this chapter and chapter 22, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall prevail, with the exception of chapter 22, article II, environmental control. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be interpreted to obviate the requirements for compliance with any and all other provisions of federal or state law, or the Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements for licenses or permits of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.12), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-12. - Relation to private agreements. 
This chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship, provided that when the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this chapter shall govern. Private restrictive covenants to which the city is not a party shall not be regulated or enforced by the city under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.13), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-13. - Zoning maps. 
(a)  The city shall be divided into the zoning districts identified in articles II and III of this chapter, as depicted on the official zoning maps entitled "Zoning Maps, Tucker, Georgia" (the official zoning maps). The official zoning maps, to be adopted contemporaneously with this chapter, together with all explanatory information contained or referenced thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning maps shall be adopted contemporaneously with this chapter in digital format and contained on a compact disk to be maintained in its original, unedited and unaltered form by the clerk to the mayor and city council. A printed copy of the compact disk's contents depicting the official zoning maps on the date of its initial adoption shall also be maintained in its original, unedited and unaltered form by the clerk to the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Any subsequent amendments made by the mayor and city council to the official zoning maps after the initial date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be indicated on the digital version of the official zoning maps by the community development director. The director of the GIS department shall continuously maintain the digital version of the official zoning maps so that they accurately show all amendments made thereto by the mayor and city council since the initial date of adoption, indicating the dates of said amendments. A copy of the updated and current version of the official zoning maps in digital format, showing all amendments thereto since the date of initial adoption, shall be held in custody of the community development director. 
(d)  Any condition of zoning related to any property, either existing at the time of initial adoption or subsequently imposed by the mayor and city council shall be on the official zoning maps, with reference to the applicable zoning case number. The clerk to the mayor and city council shall maintain custody of the minutes applicable to the referenced zoning case numbers, which state the zoning conditions. Uncertified copies of the official zoning maps may be provided to the public for informational purposes only. 
(e)  Verifications of the current zoning status of property shall be the responsibility of the community development director. To verify the current zoning status of a particular parcel, an individual may obtain a certified copy of the official zoning maps, or a portion thereof, from the community development director. Certified copies of the official zoning maps, or portions thereof, shall be certified by the community development director with his signature and the date on which the portions were certified. The community development director shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of all land, buildings and structures located in the city, except for: 
(1)  Amendments enacted by the mayor and city council but not yet depicted on the official zoning maps; and 
(2)  Uncertainties to be clarified by the mayor and city council as described in section 46-15. Any inaccuracy on the official zoning maps that is reasonably determined to be a scrivener's error may be corrected by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.14), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-14. - Interpretation of zoning maps. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow centerlines of rights-of-way or prescriptive easements. In case of closure of a street or alley, or vacation of any easement, the boundary shall be construed as remaining at its prior location unless ownership of the closure or vacated area is divided other than at the center, in which case the boundary shall be construed as moving to correspond with the ownership, but not beyond any previous right-of-way or easement line. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limit lines shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway in the right-of-way. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following shorelines of bodies of water shall be construed to follow such shorelines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of creeks, streams, rivers, or other predominantly linear bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or concentric with, or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section, shall be so construed. Distances and dimensions not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined from the official zoning map by the community development director. 
(7)  Where areas appear to be unclassified on the official zoning map, and classification cannot be established by the above rules, such areas shall be considered to be classified Residential Estate (RE) until action is taken by the mayor and city council to amend the official zoning map. 
(8)  Where uncertainties continue to exist or further interpretation is required beyond that provided for in the above subsections, the question shall be presented by the community development director to the mayor and city council to enact a clarifying resolution and said action shall be recorded on the official zoning map as is provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.15), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-15. - Rules applicable to parcels split into two or more zoning districts. 
(a)  Where a parcel of land is split into two or more zoning districts, each such portion of said parcel may only be used for purposes allowed within the zoning district to which each respective portion is classified. No principal or accessory use of land, buildings or structures, and no use or building or structure authorized by special administrative permit, special land use permit, or special exception, shall be authorized unless said use or building or structure is authorized or permitted within the applicable zoning district. 
(b)  Where a parcel of land contains two or more zoning classifications, the official zoning maps shall depict said parcel with a Multiple Zone ("MZ") designation. To verify the zoning status of respective portions of a parcel containing multiple zoning classifications, an individual may obtain verification from the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.16), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-16. - Severability. 
The several provisions of this chapter shall be separable in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  Should any court of competent jurisdiction adjudge any section or provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity or continued application of this chapter as a whole or any section or provision thereof other than the section or provision specifically adjudged invalid. 
(2)  Should any court of competent jurisdiction adjudge invalid the application of any section or provision of this chapter to a particular property, building or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said section or provision to any other property, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.1.17), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-17. - Annexation. 
When the city is a qualified municipality pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4(e), all annexed property shall be zoned without further action for the same use for which that property was zoned immediately prior to annexation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (1.1.18), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 46-18—46-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 

Sec. 46-42. - Relationship to comprehensive plan. 
The comprehensive plan is hereby established as the official policy of the city concerning designated land uses and development types, under which the incorporated areas of the city are divided into the following categories referred to as character areas: 
(1)  Suburban. 
(2)  Neighborhood center. 
(3)  Downtown. 
(4)  Regional activity center. 
(5)  Light industrial. 
(6)  Institutional. 
(7)  Conservation and open space. 
(8)  Commercial redevelopment corridor. 
(9)  Medical area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.2.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-43. - Character areas (land use categories). 
The boundaries of the various character areas (land use categories), as shown on the future development map and described within the policy narrative of the comprehensive plan, are made a part of this chapter. The official description of these character area boundaries shall be maintained by the community development director. Where uncertainty regarding character area boundaries exists, the rules set forth in section 46-15 shall apply. All such maps and all notations, references and information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all the matter and information set forth by the maps were fully described herein. All other writings concerning the comprehensive plan, including technical documents and appendices adopted simultaneously with the comprehensive plan, are for guidance and information purposes only, and are not made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.2.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-44. - Relationship between character areas and zoning districts. 
The character area categories established in the adopted comprehensive plan and shown on the future development map are to be implemented by approving rezonings to zoning districts listed within the following categories in table 1.2, except the scenic corridor character area in which any zoning district may be approved. The zoning districts that are permitted within each character area shall be restricted as provided by table 1.2 and the intent of the character area designations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.2.3), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-45. - Relationship between supplemental plans and zoning districts. 
(a)  Supplemental plans of the comprehensive plan references all supplemental plans that focus on areas, situations, or issues of importance to the city. These plans include, but not limited to, redevelopment plans, neighborhood plans, county wide plans, corridor plans, or plans for conservation management. Where the city council has adopted a supplemental plan's policies and development standards, these policies and development standards will serve as specific guidelines to support the existing future development plan and character area policies. 
(b)  The zoning districts identified on the chart are the districts commonly associated with the character area designations listed in the header column. The identified zoning districts may be consistent with the comprehensive plan when selected for a site having the land use designation shown on the chart and when the zoning district and proposed development is also consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the plan. 
Table 1.2. Character Areas and Permitted Zoning Districts 

 
*See suburban character area in Tucker Tomorrow Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (1.2.4), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Secs. 46-46—46-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-64. - Districts established. 
The city establishes the following zoning districts listed in table 2.1, which apply to property as illustrated on the official zoning map. See article III of this chapter for overlay districts. 
Table 2.1. Zoning Districts Established 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.1.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-65. - Prior district classifications and conversion. 
The zoning district classifications established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that are no longer active shall be treated as classifications as shown in table 1.1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.1.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-66. - Additional regulations. 
Additional regulations for a variety of development and building types can be found in article IV (use regulations), article V (site development regulations), and article VI (parking) of this chapter. Street type classifications for front setback requirements are set forth in section 22-273. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.1.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-67. - Appropriate zoning districts for character area designations. 
The zoning districts compatible with and acceptable within the character areas set forth in the comprehensive plan are established in section 46-44 and table 1.2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.1.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-68. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted principal and accessory uses by zoning district, and whether a use is allowed by right or only with special approval, are set forth in table 4.1. Table 4.1 also provides additional notation where supplemental regulations, also found in article IV of this chapter, may apply. Article III of this chapter, overlay district regulations, outlines additional uses that are allowed by right or only with special approval. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.1.5), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (2.1.5), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 46-69—46-94. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 46-95. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements, such as overall site requirements, individual lot dimensions, and setbacks for residential zoning districts are established in table 2.2, residential zoning districts dimensional requirements. Residential infill development may also be subject to compatibility regulations as specified in sections 46-1279 and 46-1280. 
Table 2.2. Residential Zoning Districts Dimensional Requirements 

 
Key: 
Housing types: SF: Single-family, TF: Two-family, TRF: Three-family, MF: Multifamily. 
*See division 10 of this article II. 
**See article V of this chapter, corner lots section for reduction eligibility. 
***Open space requirement shall apply to new subdivisions if project is >5 acres or ≥36 units (chapter 22). 
****100 feet if adjacent to property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.2.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Secs. 46-96—46-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RE (RESIDENTIAL ESTATE) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-119. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the RE (Residential Estate) District is as follows: 
(1)  To preserve estate residential character and to provide for low density residential uses; 
(2)  To provide for the protection of neighborhoods within the city where lots have a minimum area of one acre; 
(3)  To provide protections for existing development as new subdivisions are created; 
(4)  To ensure that the uses and structures authorized in the RE (Residential Estate) District are those uses and structures designed to serve the housing, recreational, educational, religious, and social needs of the neighborhood; 
(5)  To provide for appropriately sized accessible and useable open space in new developments for the health, recreational and social opportunities for city citizens; 
(6)  To provide areas for agricultural uses as appropriate; 
(7)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.3.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-120. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.3.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-121. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the RE (Residential Estate) District shall be as provided in table 2.2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.3.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-122. - Site and building design standards. 
Design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.3.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-123—46-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RLG (RESIDENTIAL LARGE LOT) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-143. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the RLG (Residential Large Lot) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide for the protection of neighborhoods within the city where lots have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet, but may have narrow lot widths; 
(2)  To provide for compatible infill development in neighborhoods; 
(3)  To provide protections for existing development as new subdivisions are created; 
(4)  To respond to existing site development conditions and patterns; 
(5)  To ensure that the uses and structures authorized in the RLG (Residential Large Lot) District are those uses and structures designed to serve the housing, recreational, educational, religious, and social needs of the neighborhood; 
(6)  To provide for appropriately sized accessible and useable open space in new developments for health, recreational and social opportunities for city residents; 
(7)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.4.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-144. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.4.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-145. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the R-LG District shall be as provided in table 2.2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.4.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-146. - Site and building design standards. 
Design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.4.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-147—46-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-100 (RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM LOT-100) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-176. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the R-100 (Residential Medium Lot-100) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide for the protection of neighborhoods within the city where lots have a minimum area of 15,000 square feet; 
(2)  To provide for compatible infill development in neighborhoods; 
(3)  To provide protections for existing development as new subdivisions are created; 
(4)  To provide flexibility in design on the interior of new development while protecting surrounding development; 
(5)  To ensure that the uses and structures authorized in the R-100 (Residential Medium Lot-100) District are those uses and structures designed to serve the housing, recreational, educational, religious, and social needs of the neighborhood; 
(6)  To provide for appropriately sized accessible and useable open space in new developments for health, recreational and social opportunities for city residents; and 
(7)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.5.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-177. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.5.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-178. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the R-100 (Residential Medium Lot-100) District shall be as provided in table 2.2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.5.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-179. - Site and building design standards. 
Design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.5.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-180—46-196. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-85 (RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM LOT-85) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-197. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the R-85 (Residential Medium Lot-85) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide for the protection of neighborhoods within the city where lots have a minimum area of 12,000 square feet; 
(2)  To provide for compatible infill development in neighborhoods; 
(3)  To provide protections for existing development as new subdivisions are created; 
(4)  To provide flexibility in design on the interior of new development while protecting surrounding development; 
(5)  To ensure that the uses and structures authorized in the R-85 (Residential Medium Lot-85) District are those uses and structures designed to serve the housing, recreational, educational, religious, and social needs of the neighborhood; 
(6)  To provide for appropriately sized accessible and useable open space in new developments for health, recreational and social opportunities for city residents; 
(7)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.6.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-198. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.6.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-199. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the R-85 (Residential Medium Lot-85) District shall be as provided in table 2.2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.6.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-200. - Site and building design standards. 
Design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.6.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-201—46-223. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - R-75 (RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM LOT-75) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-224. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and council in establishing the R-75 (Residential Medium Lot-75) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide for the protection of neighborhoods within the city where lots have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  To provide for compatible infill development in neighborhoods; 
(3)  To provide protections for existing development as new subdivisions are created; 
(4)  To provide flexibility in design on the interior of new development while protecting surrounding development; 
(5)  To ensure that the uses and structures authorized in the R-75 (Residential Medium Lot-75) District are those uses and structures designed to serve the housing, recreational, educational, religious, and social needs of the neighborhood; 
(6)  To provide for appropriately sized accessible and useable open space in new developments for health, recreational and social opportunities for city residents; 
(7)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.7.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-225. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.7.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-226. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the R-75 (Residential Medium Lot-75) District shall be as provided in table 2.2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.7.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-227. - Site and building design standards. 
Design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.7.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-228—46-247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - R-60 (RESIDENTIAL SMALL LOT-60) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-248. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the R-60 (Residential Small Lot-60) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide for the protection of neighborhoods within the city where lots have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet or 3,500 square feet if developed for cottage houses; 
(2)  To provide for compatible infill development in neighborhoods; 
(3)  To provide protections for existing development as new subdivisions are created; 
(4)  To provide flexibility in design within new development while protecting surrounding development; 
(5)  To ensure that the uses and structures authorized in the R-60 (Residential Small Lot-60) District are designed to serve the housing, recreational, educational, religious, and social needs of the neighborhood; 
(6)  To provide for appropriately sized accessible and useable open space in new developments for the health, recreational and social opportunities for city residents; 
(7)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.8.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-249. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.8.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-250. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the R-60 (Residential Small Lot-60) District shall be as provided in table 2.2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.8.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-251. - Site and building design standards. 
Design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.8.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-252—46-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - MHP (MOBILE HOME PARK) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-281. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the MHP (Mobile Home Park) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide locations within the city for the location of mobile home parks. 
(2)  To provide for the development of accessory uses that are necessary in order to provide appropriate recreational and educational opportunities to residents. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.9.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-282. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.9.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-283. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the MHP (Mobile Home Park) District shall be as provided in table 2.2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.9.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-284. - Site and building design standards. 
Design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.9.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-285. - Transitional buffer zone requirement. 
Where a lot in the MHP (Mobile Home Park) District is used for attached single-family dwellings and adjoins the boundary of any property in a Residential Single-Family District, except property on which is located a single-family attached development, a transitional buffer zone not less than 50 feet in width shall be provided and maintained in a natural state. In addition, a screening fence not less than six feet in height shall be erected and maintained either along the property line or within the transitional buffer zone separating the use from the adjoining single-family residential property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.9.5), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-286—46-303. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - RNC (RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-304. - Scope of provisions. 
The provisions contained within this division are the regulations of the RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District. This division establishes the procedures and the criteria that the mayor and city council shall utilize in making a decision on any application to amend the official zoning map so as to change any parcel of land to the RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-305. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in the RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District is as follows: 
(1)  To encourage creative residential planning and development within the city that will preserve unique environmental features and be consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and the Green DeKalb Initiative that provides greenspace areas and preserves existing natural trees and vegetation; 
(2)  To conserve significant areas of useable greenspace within single-family neighborhoods in the suburban character area of the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  To provide a residential development that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient use of land in compliance with this Code; 
(4)  To promote construction of accessible landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within subdivisions and, where possible, connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles; 
(5)  To preserve natural features, specimen trees, historic buildings, archaeological sites and establish a sense of community; 
(6)  To improve water quality and reduce runoff and soil erosion by reducing the total amount of clearing, grading, and paving, within the total area of a development; 
(7)  To encourage efficient community design that reduces infrastructure maintenance and public service costs borne by the city; and 
(8)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.2), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-306. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-307. - Scaled site plan. 
In addition to the information and materials required as part of any application to amend the official zoning map pursuant to this chapter, each applicant for RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District classification shall submit a scaled and dimensioned site plan, which, where applicable, shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Size of each lot proposed to be developed within the district; 
(2)  Housing types (e.g., single-family detached, single-family detached condominium); 
(3)  Amount of land in greenspace areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership, or control in perpetuity; 
(4)  Connections between greenspaces within the project and to greenspace areas on adjacent properties where possible; 
(5)  Building envelopes for fee simple lots; 
(6)  Building and driveway footprint for each single-family detached condominium; 
(7)  Maximum lot coverage; 
(8)  All streams and water bodies, including state and county stream buffer limits; 
(9)  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation and connections within the project and to amenities and features on adjacent property; 
(10)  Any aboveground detention areas serving as an amenity feature; 
(11)  Underground detention facilities; 
(12)  Flood hazard areas, wetlands, springheads, and all environmentally sensitive areas, if any; 
(13)  Access to public sewer; 
(14)  All easements; 
(15)  Right-of-way intended to be dedicated; 
(16)  Amount of land area and nonbuildable areas as identified in subsection (2) of this section; and 
(17)  Tree survey in compliance with section 22-34. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-308. - Calculation and design of greenspace. 
The following standards shall govern the calculation and design of greenspace in the RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District: 
(1)  The allotted greenspace shall comprise at least 30 percent of the total land area excluding the undevelopable areas as identified in subsection (2) of this section. No part of any single-family detached residential lot, private street, private drive, or street right-of-way, front yard setback, nor any area utilized for side-to-side building separation except when used for a path or sidewalk connection to greenspace, shall count towards greenspace. 
(2)  Land containing any of the following features shall not be included for the purposes of calculating whether a site plan and any subsequent development meets the greenspace requirement: 
a.  Streams and stream buffers; 
b.  Wetlands; 
c.  Rock outcroppings; 
d.  Slopes steeper than 1:2 slope; 
e.  Sites of archaeological significance; 
f.  Floodplains; or 
g.  Areas intended to be dedicated for right-of-way as shown on the scaled site plan submitted in compliance with section 46-307. 
(3)  For properties ten acres or less, at least 50 percent of the allotted greenspace shall be in an area or areas that each measure a minimum 200 square feet. For properties greater than ten acres, at least 50 percent of the allotted greenspace shall be contiguous and shall be a minimum width of 50 feet. Paths, bike paths and trails do not have to comply with the minimum width requirements set forth in this section. 
(4)  Greenspace may consist of and be designed for the following uses only: 
a.  Natural undisturbed areas; 
b.  Active recreation areas; 
c.  Community gathering places; 
d.  Trails and greenways; 
e.  Bikeways and paths; 
f.  Asphalt or concrete bikeways and paths with a maximum width of eight feet; 
g.  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, which are constructed as part of an on-site stormwater mitigation site design feature and which are graded such that no safety fencing is required; 
h.  Mature wooded areas; or 
i.  Specimen trees as defined in chapter 22. 
(5)  No impervious surface, except: 
a.  Areas used for active recreation; 
b.  Historic buildings or historic sites; and 
c.  Asphalt or concrete bike paths and paths with a maximum width of eight feet, may be considered in the greenspace calculation. Paths that require grading must not damage critical root zones of specimen trees. 
(6)  Preserved historic buildings or sites may be included in greenspace if intended to be for the common use and benefit of all residents of the subdivision. 
(7)  All dwelling units shall be provided with safe, convenient access to all greenspaces throughout the development in the form of a pedestrian circulation system consisting of structurally improved pedestrian paths and/or sidewalks, which shall be a minimum width of five feet and shall be connected so that there are no breaks in the walkable surface of the pedestrian circulation system, except where the path or sidewalk connects to a greenspace. All greenspaces shall have a minimum of two points of pedestrian access. 
(8)  Greenspace shall connect with other greenspace areas and trails on adjacent property where possible. 
(9)  Active recreation areas may be included in greenspace and shall be required in any RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District that contains 100 or more units. A conservation subdivision located in an RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District that contains between 100 and 200 units, inclusive, shall include an active recreation area of at least one acre in size. A conservation subdivision located in an RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District that contains more than 200 units shall include a minimum of either a single active recreation area of at least two acres in size or two active recreation areas that are each at least one acre in size. No active recreation area may be located within any wetland, stream buffer, or rock outcropping. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-309. - Development standards and permitted uses. 
(a)  Property within a RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District shall have a minimum of seven acres. 
(b)  Specimen trees located outside of the buildable area of a lot shall be preserved subject to the review of the county arborist. 
(c)  Active recreation areas, greenspace, stormwater management facilities, trails, bikeways, and paths, as approved, shall be installed prior to the recording of the conservation subdivision final plat. 
(d)  There shall be no impervious surfaces within the 75 foot stream buffer, except as provided for in section 46-308(4)d, e and f. Such encroachments into the stream buffer shall only be permissible in accordance with variances as allowed by chapter 22. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-310. - Minimum lot width, minimum lot size, building setback, street width, and private drive width requirements. 
(a)  The following standards shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings, other than condominiums and fee simple condominiums, located in RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District and within the suburban character area of the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  Maximum density: Up to six dwelling units per acre of total land area, excluding undevelopable areas as identified in section 46-308(2). 
(2)  Minimum lot width: At least 60 feet as measured at the required front building setback line; except for a lot on a cul-de-sac, which lot shall have a minimum width of 35 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet, except that each lot on the periphery of a development within property zoned RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District that abuts adjacent property zoned and used for single-family residential purposes shall contain a lot area that is at least 80 percent of the minimum lot area required by the adjoining residential zoning. 
(4)  Minimum building setback adjacent to public or private streets: 
a.  From thoroughfares: 30 feet. 
b.  From arterials: 30 feet. 
c.  From collector streets: 30 feet. 
d.  From local streets: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum interior lot side building setback: 7.5 feet. 
(6)  Minimum periphery lot side building setback: Lots on the periphery of any RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District development shall maintain a minimum 20-foot side yard setback from any adjacent parcel located outside of the boundary of such development. 
(7)  Minimum rear building setback: 20 feet. 
(b)  The following standards shall apply to single-family detached condominiums and fee simple condominiums located in RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District and within the suburban character area of the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  Maximum density: Up to six dwelling units per acre on total land area, excluding undevelopable areas as identified in section 46-308(2). 
(2)  Minimum building setback from all peripheral property lines: 20 feet, except that when a peripheral property line adjoins a public or private streets, the building setback shall be as required in subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
(3)  Minimum distance between building structures: 15 feet. 
(4)  Minimum building setback from a private drive or private street: Ten feet, except that where a garage door or carport entrance faces the street, in which case the minimum setback shall be 20 feet. The building setback shall be measured from back of curb, or, where a sidewalk is provided, from back of sidewalk. 
(5)  Minimum travel lane width, private drive or private streets internal to the development: 24 feet. Where on-street parking is provided, it shall be provided in the form of a parking lane located between the travel lane and the curb, which lane shall be no less than ten feet wide, measured from the edge of the travel lane to front of curb. 
(6)  Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of private drives or private streets that are internal to the development, as provided for in section 22-550. 
(7)  Street tree species shall cause minimal interference with underground utilities, subject to approval by the city arborist. 
(8)  Driveways shall be a minimum of 20 feet long, measured from back of curb or, where sidewalks are provided, from the back of sidewalk, in order to prevent vehicular encroachment on areas intended for vehicular or pedestrian circulation. 
(9)  A public access and utility easement for electric, gas, telephone, and cable television utilities, in the form of a joint utility trench, shall be located on each side of the internal private streets or internal private drives, and shall be a minimum width of six feet, five inches. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.7), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-311. - Maximum height of buildings. 
No building in the RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District shall exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-312. - Maximum lot coverage. 
The lot coverage of each lot used for a single-family detached dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-313. - Ownership, control, and maintenance of required greenspace. 
(a)  Unified control of parcel. Any applicant for rezoning or for issuance of a land-disturbance permit for property within an RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District shall be required to provide evidence of a legal mechanism for unified control of the entire parcel to be developed for review and approval by the city attorney prior to the issuance of any land-disturbance or building permit. During the development process, more than one builder may participate in the development of the approved plan so long as each parcel of land remains subject to: 
(1)  Any zoning conditions imposed on the property; and 
(2)  Terms and conditions associated with any special land use permit or any special administrative permit. 
(b)  Maintenance and protection of land held in common. Prior to the issuance of any land-disturbance permit, every applicant for development within an RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District must provide evidence of a legal mechanism under which all land to be held in common and used for greenspace purposes within the development shall be protected in perpetuity. Such legal mechanism may include deed restrictions, a homeowners' association, common areas held in common ownership or control, or conservation easements held by a land trust meeting the requirements of state law, which ensure in perpetuity each of the following mandatory requirements: 
(1)  That all land held in open space will remain undivided and shall not be subdivided or removed from joint access or benefit in perpetuity; 
(2)  That all subsequent property owners in the development will be placed on notice of this development restriction through the deed records filed with the superior court of the county; 
(3)  That all land held as greenspace will be properly maintained and that no liability or maintenance responsibilities for the land held as greenspace shall accrue to the city; 
(4)  That a legal entity exists for notice of deficiencies in maintenance of the land held as greenspace, correction of these deficiencies, and assessment of liens against the properties for the cost of the correction of these deficiencies by a third party or the city; 
(5)  That the legal mechanism will become effective and enforceable prior to or at the time of recording the final plat and the sale of any individual properties within the conservation district; 
(6)  That all requirements of the legal mechanism used to comply with the regulations of this section will be specified on the final plat to be recorded with the clerk of superior court of the county. 
(c)  Homeowners' associations. When a homeowners' association is used as the legal mechanism to comply with the requirements of this section, the applicant for any land-disturbance permit, in addition to meeting all of said requirements, shall provide for all of the following: 
(1)  Equal access and right of use to all greenspace by all homeowners; 
(2)  Mandatory and automatic membership in the homeowners' association for all homeowners and their successors; 
(3)  A fair and uniform method of assessment and collection/payment for dues, maintenance and related costs; 
(4)  Homeowners' association lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members; 
(5)  Perpetual and continued maintenance and liability by the homeowners' association of land held as greenspace; and 
(6)  Filing of all required covenants, declarations, and restrictions with the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-314. - Off-street parking requirements. 
Minimum off-street parking requirements for uses and structures authorized and permitted in the RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwelling: Three spaces. 
(2)  Detached, single-family condominium or fee simple condominium dwelling: Three spaces. 
(3)  Personal care home, group: Four spaces. 
(4)  Child caring institution, group: Four spaces. 
(5)  Adult day care facility: Three spaces. 
(6)  Child day care facility: Three spaces. 
(7)  Convent or monastery: One space for each 200 square feet of floor area within the principal structure. 
(8)  Neighborhood recreation club: One space for each five club members but in no case less than ten spaces. 
(9)  Place of worship: Where fixed seats are used, one space for each three seats in the largest assembly room used for public worship, or, where fixed seats are not utilized, one space for each 25 square feet of floor space in the largest assembly room used for public worship. 
(10)  Private elementary, middle and high school: 
a.  Elementary and middle school: Two spaces for each classroom. 
b.  High school: Five spaces for each classroom. 
(11)  Other uses: One space for each 200 square feet of floor area within the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-315. - Relation of RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District regulations to subdivision or other regulations. 
Where there are conflicts between these RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District regulations and land subdivision requirements contained in chapter 22 or other regulations within the Code, these RNC (Residential Neighborhood Conservation) District regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.10.12), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-316—46-333. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - MEDIUM AND HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 46-334. - Medium and high density. 
The medium and high density residential zoning districts allow cottage housing, attached, multifamily and mixed residential developments at the densities illustrated in table 2.3: 
Table 2.3. Summary of Density Ranges for Medium and High Density Residential Zoning Districts 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.11.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.11.1), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-335. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements, including overall site requirements, individual lot dimensions, setbacks, and heights for medium and high density residential zoning districts, are provided in table 2.4, medium and high density residential zoning districts dimensional requirements. In addition, compatibility and transitional buffers as defined and required in article V of this chapter may apply. 
Table 2.4. Medium and High Density Residential Zoning Districts Dimensional Requirements 

 
Key: 
Housing types: SFD: Single-Family Detached, SFA: Single-Family Attached, TTF: Two/Three Family, MF: Multifamily, MU: Mixed-Use. 
*Open space requirement shall apply to new subdivisions if project is >5 acres or ≥36 units (see chapter 22). See article V of this chapter for enhanced open space requirements. 
**Where two numbers are indicated, the first number is the standard and the second number applies only to housing type that is indicated, e.g., cottage or townhome. 
***See article V of this chapter for building separation and minimum multifamily unit size details 
****Requires a special land use permit if requesting more than 24 multifamily dwellings per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.11.2), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.11.2), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Secs. 46-336—46-358. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - RSM (SMALL LOT RESIDENTIAL MIX) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-359. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the RSM (Small Lot Residential Mix) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide for the creation of residential neighborhoods that allow a mix of single-family attached and detached housing options; 
(2)  To provide flexibility in design and product on the interior of new development while protecting surrounding neighborhoods; 
(3)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.12.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-360. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.12.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-361. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the RSM (Small Lot Residential Mix) District shall be as provided in table 2.4, medium and high density residential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.12.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-362. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.12.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-363—46-388. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - MR-1 (MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-1) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-389. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the MR-1 (Medium Density Residential-1) District is as follows: 
(1)  To encourage primarily residential, planned developments that allow accessory retail, office, institutional, and civic uses; 
(2)  To provide for residential neighborhoods with a mix of single-family and multifamily housing types that maintain harmony of scale, intensity, and design with surrounding development; 
(3)  To provide for connectivity of streets and communities and reduce the dependence on automobile use by increasing the ease of and opportunity for alternative modes of travel; 
(4)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.13.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-390. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.13.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-391. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the MR-1 (Medium Density Residential-1) District shall be as provided in table 2.4, medium and high density residential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.13.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-392. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.13.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-393—46-414. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - MR-2 (MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-2) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-415. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the MR-2 (Medium Density Residential-2) District is as follows: 
(1)  To encourage primarily residential, planned developments that allow accessory retail, office, institutional, and civic uses; 
(2)  To provide for residential neighborhoods with a mix of single-family and multifamily housing types that maintain harmony of scale, intensity, and design with surrounding development; 
(3)  To provide for connectivity of streets and communities and reduce the dependence on automobile uses by increasing the ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel; 
(4)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan; 
(5)  To provide districts that allow appropriate development transitions within the edges and transitional areas of the downtown and regional activity center character areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.14.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-416. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there exist supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.14.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-417. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the MR-2 (Medium Density Residential-2) District shall be as provided in table 2.4, "medium and high density residential zoning districts dimensional requirements." 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.14.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-418. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.14.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-419. - Building heights. 
Maximum building heights shall meet character area intent by compliance with the transitional height and buffer standards of article V of this chapter as well as proportional relationship of density to height as established in table 2.9. 
Table 2.9. MR-2 Building Height 

 
*Whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.14.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.14.6), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-420—46-438. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - HR-1 (HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-1) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-439. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the HR-1 (High Density Residential-1) District regulations is as follows: 
(1)  To encourage primarily residential, urban-scaled developments that allow accessory retail, office, institutional, and civic uses; 
(2)  To provide for high density, low-rise residential neighborhoods with a mix of single-family and multifamily housing types that maintain harmony of scale, intensity, and design with surrounding development; 
(3)  To provide for connectivity of streets and communities and reduce the dependence on automobile use by increasing the ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel; 
(4)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.15.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-440. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.15.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-441. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the HR-1 (High Density Residential-1) District shall be as provided in table 2.4, medium and high density residential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.15.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-442. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.15.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-443. - Building heights. 
Maximum building heights shall meet character area intent by compliance with the transitional height and buffer standards of article V of this chapter as well as proportional relationship of density to height as regulated by table 2.11. 
Table 2.11. HR-1 Building Height 

 
*Whichever is less 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.15.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.15.6), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-444—46-471. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - HR-2 (HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-2) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-472. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the HR-2 (High Density Residential-2) District regulations is as follows: 
(1)  To encourage primarily residential, urban-scaled developments that allow accessory retail, office, institutional, and civic uses; 
(2)  To provide for high density, mid-rise residential neighborhoods with a mix of single-family and multifamily housing types that maintain harmony of scale, intensity, and design with surrounding development; 
(3)  To provide for connectivity of streets and communities and reduce the dependence on automobile use by increasing the ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel; 
(4)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.16.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-473. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.16.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-474. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the HR-2 (High Density Residential-2) District shall be as provided in table 2.4, medium and high density residential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.16.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-475. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.16.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-476. - Building heights. 
Maximum building heights shall meet character area intent by compliance with the transitional height and buffer standards of article V of this chapter as well as proportional relationship of density to height as established by Table 2.13. 
Table 2.13. HR-2 Building Height 

 
*Whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.16.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.16.6), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-477—46-507. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - HR-3 (HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-3) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-508. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the HR-3 (High Density Residential-3) District regulations is as follows: 
(1)  To encourage primarily residential, urban-scaled developments that allow accessory retail, office, institutional, and civic uses; 
(2)  To provide for high density, high-rise residential neighborhoods with a mix of single-family and multifamily housing types that maintain harmony of scale, intensity, and design with surrounding development; 
(3)  To provide for connectivity of streets and communities and reduce the dependence on automobile use by increasing the ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel; 
(4)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.17.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-509. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there exist supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.17.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-510. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the HR-3 (High Density Residential-3) District shall be as provided in table 2.4, medium and high density residential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.17.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-511. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.17.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-512. - Building heights. 
Maximum building heights shall meet character area intent by compliance with the transitional height and buffer standards of article V of this chapter as well as proportional relationship of density to height as regulated by table 2.15. 
Table 2.15. HR-3 Building Height for Density 

 
*Whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.17.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.17.6), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-513—46-534. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-535. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing all districts designated as Mixed-Use (MU-1, MU-2, MU-3, MU-4 and MU-5) Zoning Districts are as follows: 
(1)  To encourage the development of master or comprehensively planned, mixed-use developments; 
(2)  To permit flexible and compatible arrangements of residential, commercial, office, institutional, and civic uses; 
(3)  To offer a variety of housing options, including multifamily residential and single-family attached housing of various densities, upper-floor residential units over nonresidential space; 
(4)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan; 
(5)  To maintain harmony of scale, intensity, and design of character areas with varying housing options; 
(6)  To accommodate and promote mixed-use buildings with amenities and services provided by a variety of nonresidential uses, as appropriate in the activity centers established by the comprehensive plan; 
(7)  To promote the health and well-being of residents through the development of living environments that accommodate pedestrians and bicyclists; 
(8)  To encourage a sense of community through design that promotes social interaction; and 
(9)  To reduce automobile traffic and congestion and promote the use of transit by encouraging appropriate development densities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.18.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 1, 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 46-536. - Mixed-use district densities. 
(a)  Table 2.16, which summarizes the allowed densities and eligible character areas for mixed-use zoning districts, is provided for the aid of the reader. Any conflict between table 2.16 and any other provision of this chapter shall be resolved in favor of the other provision of this chapter. 
Table 2.16. Summary of Mixed-Use Zoning District Densities 

 
(b)  Individual buildings in any mixed-use district may exclusively consist of only residential uses, provided that they are part of a larger mixed-use development that meets the overall percentage mix of nonresidential to residential floor area established by table 2.17. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.18.2), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.18.2), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-537. - Mixed-use dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements including overall site requirements, individual lot dimensions, setbacks, and heights for mixed-use districts are provided in table 2.17, mixed-use zoning districts dimensional requirements. Compatibility rules and transitional buffers as defined and required in article V of this chapter may apply. 
Table 2.17. Mixed-Use Zoning Districts Dimensional Requirements 

 
Key: 
Housing types: SFD: Single-Family Detached, SFA: Single-Family Attached, TTF: Two/Three Family, MF: Multifamily, MU: Mixed-Use, CM: Commercial, OF: Office. 
*See article V of this chapter for enhanced open space requirements. 
**SFD Cottage type exempt; see article V of this chapter for standards. 
***See article V of this chapter for building separation and minimum multifamily unit size details. 
****Requires a special land use permit if requesting more than 24 multifamily dwellings per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.18.3), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.18.3), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Secs. 46-538—46-567. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - MU-1 (MIXED-USE LOW DENSITY) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-568. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District shall be as provided in table 2.17. Dimensions are established in table 2.17 for the overall development site (development parcel) and for individual lots intended for single-family detached or single-family attached housing types, when such lots include yards. A mixed-use development may be subject to both the overall development site dimensions and the individual lot dimensions, depending on the mixture of housing types that are proposed for the overall development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.19.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-569. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations shall be as provided in table 2.17 and article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.19.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-570. - Rezoning to the MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District. 
Properties within the downtown, regional activity center, Institutional, medical area and commercial redevelopment corridor character areas of the city comprehensive plan future development map are eligible to be rezoned to the MU-1 district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.19.3), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-571. - MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District rezoning submittal requirements. 
The following standards only apply to rezoning applications initiated by the owner of the subject property or the authorized agent of the owner. In the interest of economic development and to spur redevelopment, applications initiated by the city are not required to comply with the standards in this section. Prior to the submittal of an application for a land-disturbance permit or building permit, an applicant for development of a city-initiated MU-zoned property, shall comply with the following standards. The application will be reviewed administratively by the director. 
(1)  Pre-application meeting. Before submitting an application for rezoning to the MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District, the applicant shall confer with the community development director to discuss the feasibility of the proposed plan and its relationship to the comprehensive plan and city ordinances. 
(2)  Submittal of master development plan. The submittal package for rezoning to the MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District shall include all items indicated by the application and instruction form established by the community development department. The master development plan shall include: 
a.  Pre-application meeting minutes. Applicants shall provide documentation showing that the required pre-application meeting occurred. 
b.  Master development plan. A master development plan shall illustrate the project showing the location of proposed uses identified by type, site functions, and internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation, along with proposed access points. (Note: prefer multi-modal access plan as specified in the overlays.) 
c.  Master development standards. An applicant for rezoning to the MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District shall submit the following with the rezoning application: 
1.  A set of tables, matrices, and/or diagrams shall document the proposed standards that will regulate the permitted use, density, lot dimensions, setbacks, site and building form for each area identified in the master concept plan, and indicate all instances where proposed standards vary from this division. 
2.  A summary of the anticipated maintenance and ownership of streets and open spaces. 
3.  Proposed gross and net nonresidential floor area, maximum number of residential dwelling units by type and minimum lot size, and amount of enhanced open space. 
d.  Master development plan architectural standards. An applicant for rezoning to the MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District shall include with the master development plan a set of binding and enforceable architectural standards that will be utilized by the developer to ensure aesthetic continuity throughout the life of the project. 
1.  At a minimum, the architectural standards shall address lighting, signage, fences, landscaping, building materials, and other architectural features proposed to be included by the applicant. 
2.  A master sign plan may be proposed for approval at the time of rezoning with dimensions that vary from the sign chapter, provided that the proposed plan demonstrates pedestrian-oriented scale. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.19.4), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.19.4), 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 46-572. - Mixed-use building restrictions. 
The following restrictions shall also apply to mixed-use buildings: All uses allowed in the MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District, as provided in table 4.1, may occupy the ground level of a mixed-use building; however, any residential uses shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the floor area of the ground level. All levels above ground level shall only be occupied by residential, professional office or service uses. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.19.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-573. - MU-1 retail size restrictions. 
Standalone retail or other uses shall not exceed 40,000 square feet total floor area without a special land use permit, which may be issued based on the criteria provided in section 46-1594. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.19.8), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-574—46-596. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 20. - MU-2 (MIXED-USE LOW-MEDIUM DENSITY) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-597. - District requirements, standards and criteria. 
All provisions found in the MU-1 (Mixed-Use Low Density) District shall apply to the MU-2 (Mixed-Use Low-Medium Density) District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.20.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.20.1), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-598—46-627. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 21. - MU-3 (MIXED-USE MEDIUM DENSITY) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-628. - District requirements, standards and criteria. 
All provisions found in the MU-2 (Mixed-Use Medium Density) District shall apply to the MU-3 (Mixed-Use Medium Density) District, except that: 
(1)  Section 46-573 regarding retail size restrictions shall not apply. 
(2)  Height restrictions apply to the MU-3 (Mixed-Use Low-Medium Density) District based on a relationship of density, in accordance with table 2.9. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.21.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.21.1), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-629—46-659. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 22. - MU-4 (MIXED-USE HIGH DENSITY) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-660. - District requirements, standards and criteria. 
All provisions found in the MU-3 (Mixed-Use Medium Density) District shall also apply to the MU-4 (Mixed-Use High Density) District, except that height restrictions apply to the MU-4 (Mixed-Use High Density) District in accordance with table 2.11. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.22.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.22.1), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-661—46-678. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 23. - MU-5 (MIXED-USE VERY HIGH DENSITY) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-679. - District requirements, standards and criteria. 
All provisions found in the MU-3 (Mixed-Use Medium Density) District shall also apply to the MU-5 (Mixed-Use Very High Density) District, except that height restrictions apply to MU-5 in accordance with table 2.13. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.23.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(2.23.1), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-680—46-701. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 24. - NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 46-702. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements including overall site requirements, lot dimensions, setbacks, and heights for nonresidential districts are provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. Building setback, height and lot width may be tied to lot size compatibility, averaging as defined and required in article V of this chapter. 
Table 2.24. Nonresidential Zoning Districts Dimensional Requirements 

 
*If located next to single-family residential and the building will exceed 35 feet, the building setback from SF residential shall be increased 50 percent. 
**Fire department and rescue services must approve over three stories to ensure adequacy of fire protection facilities. 
***Five story/70 feet if in an activity node, two story/35 feet outside an activity node, unless obtaining a special land use permit for up to five story/70 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.24.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Secs. 46-703—46-732. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 25. - NS (NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-733. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the NS (Neighborhood Shopping) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide convenient neighborhood retail shopping and service areas within the city for all residents; 
(2)  To provide for the development of new neighborhood shopping districts where so designated on the comprehensive plan especially for commercial uses in downtown, neighborhood center, regional activity center and commercial redevelopment corridor character areas; 
(3)  To ensure that the size and scale of neighborhood shopping centers and individual uses within said centers are compatible with the scale of adjoining neighborhoods; 
(4)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.25.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-734. - Intensity limitations. 
In a building that contains more than one business establishment, no single business establishment shall occupy more than 15,000 square feet, whether owned or leased. No building occupied by a single business establishment shall exceed 50,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.25.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-735. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply and must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.25.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-736. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the NS (Neighborhood Shopping) District shall be as provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.25.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-737. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.25.5), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-738—46-757. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 26. - C-1 (LOCAL COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-758. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the C-1 (Local Commercial) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide convenient local retail shopping and service areas within the city for all residents; 
(2)  To provide for auto-oriented needs outside of the downtown, medical area, commercial redevelopment corridor, institutional and regional activity center character areas, but to focus on the pedestrian oriented development within these districts; 
(3)  To provide for quality control in development through materials and building placement; 
(4)  To ensure that the uses authorized within the C-1 (Local Commercial) District are those uses which are designed to serve the convenience shopping and service needs of groups of neighborhoods; 
(5)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.26.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-759. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted, but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply and must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.26.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-760. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the C-1 (Local Commercial) District shall be as provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.26.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-761. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.26.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-762—46-790. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 27. - C-2 (GENERAL COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-791. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the C-2 (General Commercial) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide convenient general business and commercial service areas within the city for all residents; 
(2)  To provide for the development of new general commercial districts where so designated on the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  To provide for auto-oriented needs outside of the neighborhood center, downtown and regional activity center character areas, but to focus on the pedestrian oriented development which in these districts; 
(4)  To provide for quality control in development through materials and building placement; 
(5)  To ensure that the uses authorized within the C-2 (General Commercial) District are those uses which are designed to serve the general business and commercial service needs of the city; 
(6)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.27.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-792. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply and must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.27.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-793. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the C-2 (General Commercial) District shall be as provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.27.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-794. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.27.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-795—46-811. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 28. - OD (OFFICE-DISTRIBUTION) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-812. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the OD (Office-Distribution) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide convenient areas within the city for the development of office and distribution establishments which are necessary for the residents and business practitioners within the city; and 
(2)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.28.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-813. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there exist supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply and must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.28.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-814. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the OD (Office-Distribution) District shall be as provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.28.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-815. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.28.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-816—46-838. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 29. - OI (OFFICE-INSTITUTIONAL) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-839. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the OI (Office-Institutional) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide convenient areas within the city for the location of office and institutional uses which are necessary for the residents and business and professional practitioners within the city; 
(2)  To provide accessory commercial and residential uses to reduce auto dependence; 
(3)  To provide locations for the development of cultural, recreational, educational and health service facilities for the city; 
(4)  To promote compatible development, in size and scale, to surrounding development; 
(5)  To promote campus style developments; 
(6)  To promote pedestrian oriented compact design; 
(7)  To implement the future development map of the city's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.29.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-840. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply and must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.29.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-841. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the OI (Office-Institutional) District shall be as provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.29.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-842. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.29.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-843—46-862. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 30. - OIT (OFFICE-INSTITUTIONAL-TRANSITIONAL) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-863. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the OIT (Office-Institutional-Transitional) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide areas within the city for the location of office and institutional uses which are necessary for the residents, business practitioners, and professional practitioners in existing buildings no longer viable for residential uses; 
(2)  To limit said buildings' height to be compatible to those potential redevelopment parcels and structures; 
(3)  To provide for the transition from residential to office and associated commercial uses which do not generate large volumes of traffic, noise or other harmful effects, and which are compatible with residential uses in locations so designated in the comprehensive plan along commercial redevelopment corridor character areas and along the edge of the office park and institutional character areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.30.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-864. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted, but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply and must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.30.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-865. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the OIT (Office-Institutional-Transitional) District shall be as provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.30.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-866. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.30.4), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-867—46-895. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 31. - M (LIGHT INDUSTRIAL) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-896. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the M (Light Industrial) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide areas for the establishment of businesses engaged in the manufacturing, processing, creating, repairing, renovating, painting, cleaning, or assembling of goods, merchandise, or equipment and the sale and distribution of such goods, merchandise or equipment in locations so designated in the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  To provide an environment for light industrial uses that produces no appreciable impact on adjacent properties and preserve the appeal and appearance of residential and commercial areas; 
(3)  To ensure that all establishments located within the M (Light Industrial) District operate in compliance with the noise standards contained in this chapter and that any negative noise impact resulting from the use of land within the M (Light Industrial) District is contained within the boundaries of said district and does not create noise problems for adjoining residential, office or commercial districts; 
(4)  To provide an area within the city for recycling and green businesses to locate; 
(5)  To generate employment opportunities and economic development; 
(6)  To ensure that M (Light Industrial) Districts are so located that transportation access to thoroughfares and freeways is available; 
(7)  To allow for the conversion of industrial buildings which are 50 years of age or older to multifamily dwellings so as to promote living and working space as well as historic preservation; 
(8)  To implement the future development map of the county's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.31.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-897. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply and must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.31.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-898. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the M (Light Industrial) District shall be as provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.31.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-899. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.31.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-900. - Multifamily use provisions for industrial conversion. 
The conversion of industrial buildings to residential use shall be permitted by a special land use permit. The following shall be considered: 
(1)  Whether the building is located on the interior or periphery of an established industrial park or area; 
(2)  Whether the building or area should no longer be used for industrial uses; 
(3)  Adequate parking is provided in accordance with article VI of this chapter, for multifamily or live-work. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.31.5), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-901—46-918. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 32. - M-2 (HEAVY INDUSTRIAL) DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-919. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the M-2 (Heavy Industrial) District is as follows: 
(1)  To provide areas for manufacturing, warehousing and distribution facilities at locations so designated in the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  To provide for a location for intense industrial uses that do not require and may not be appropriate for a nuisance free environment; 
(3)  To provide for a location that allows nuisances such as noise, vibration and other impacts which cannot be contained on-site; 
(4)  To ensure that all businesses located within the M-2 (Heavy Industrial) District operate in compliance with the noise standards contained in this chapter and that any negative noise impact resulting from the use of land within the M-2 (Heavy Industrial) District is contained within the boundaries of said district and does not create noise problems for adjoining residential, office or commercial districts; 
(5)  To ensure that industrial districts are so located that transportation access to thoroughfares and freeways is available; 
(6)  To implement the future development map of the county's most current comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.32.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-920. - Permitted and special land uses. 
Permitted uses and uses requiring special land use permits shall be as provided in table 4.1. In cases where a use is permitted but there are supplemental use regulations for that use specified in article IV of this chapter, such regulations shall also apply and must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.32.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-921. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for the M-2 (Heavy Industrial) District shall be as provided in table 2.24, nonresidential zoning districts dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.32.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-922. - Site and building design standards. 
Site and building design standards and regulations to be applied in this zoning district shall be as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.32.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-923. - Solid waste facility/landfill use provisions. 
Any solid waste facility, solid waste handling facility, or landfill must obtain a special land use permit from the mayor and city council and a modification or addition of zoning conditions that specifically authorizes and identifies all necessary zoning requirements for each such facility. If granted, the zoning district classification for such property shall be identified as M-2 (Conditional Landfill). 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (2.32.5), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-924—46-949. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-950. - Applicability. 
Overlay districts are supplemental to the zoning district classifications established in article II of this chapter. This section shall supersede the applicability statements in each overlay district, and are applicable as follows: 
(1)  All development and building permits for lots located, in whole or in part, within any overlay district shall meet all of the regulations of the underlying zoning district in which they are located as well as all of the regulations of the applicable overlay district. 
(2)  For new development after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, when no complete application for a land-disturbance or building permit has been filed with respect to a property located within an overlay district and the property has conditions of zoning that were approved prior to, and in conflict with the overlay district regulations contained in this article, the overlay district regulations shall prevail. If a condition of zoning does not conflict with the overlay district regulations, the condition of zoning shall remain applicable to the property. 
(3)  For existing development, if overlay district regulations conflict with the conditions of zoning applicable to property within in an overlay district, the existing zoning conditions remain applicable to the property. 
(4)  If a use is permitted in the overlay district, but the underlying zoning requires a special land use permit for the same use, the overlay shall govern, and no special land use permit is required. 
(5)  If overlay district regulations conflict with other regulations contained in this chapter, the overlay district regulations shall prevail. 
(6)  The use of property may be permitted without rezoning if listed as allowed by the overlay. Uses allowed by the underlying zoning in article IV of this chapter, may also be permitted in the overlay district, unless it is listed as prohibited or if the zoning district is not applicable in the overlay. 
(7)  Each application for a business license, land-disturbance permit, building permit or sign permit, which involves the development, use, exterior alteration, exterior modification or addition of any structure, must demonstrate compliance with all overlay district regulations, subject to article VIII of this chapter, Nonconforming uses, structures and buildings. 
(8)  The zoning district designations contained in article III of this chapter, are not revised to reflect the new zoning district designations utilized in the adopted zoning ordinance effective July 11, 2016. The county zoning district references contained in this article III of this chapter shall therefore be construed using the conversion chart contained in table 1.1, and applied as appropriate to the current provision of the zoning ordinance. 
(9)  The overlay districts include some uses which require a special land use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.1.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (3.1.1), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-951. - Purpose and intent. 
Each subarea overlay has its own purpose and intent based on original overlay requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.1.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-952. - Plan submittal, review and approval. 
(a)  Pre-submittal conference. Prior to the submittal for review of a land-disturbance or building permit application for property located within an overlay district, the applicant and the staff shall have a preliminary meeting to discuss the submittal requirements. 
(b)  Conceptual plan submittal requirements. As part of any land-disturbance permit, building permit, or sign permit application, the applicant shall submit to the community development director a conceptual plan package and a final design package. Each package must include full architectural and landscape plans and specifications. The submitted plans must include a site plan, architectural elevations and sections, renderings depicting the building design including elevations and architectural details of proposed buildings, exterior materials and colors, and plans and elevations of all hardscape, landscape and signs, all of which shall demonstrate that the proposed design is in compliance with all the requirements of the applicable overlay district and the underlying zoning classification. The community development director shall provide a copy of the submittals to the mayor and city council and the citizen stakeholder in the area the property is located for review and comments. If the proposed development is also located in an historic district as designated in the Code, the development shall also comply with the regulations established for the historic district. 
(c)  Review by staff. Staff will review the conceptual plans for compliance with specifications and design guidelines contained in this zoning ordinance. If the application fails to comply with any section in this zoning ordinance, the application shall be marked "failed compliance," shall be returned to the applicant with any comments and/or redlines for revisions, and may be re-submitted with corrections addressing the staff's comments and/or redlines for further consideration. Once the application is found to be in compliance, the final design shall be forwarded to the community development director for approval. 
(1)  Where the community development director determines that said plans comply with the requirements of the overlay district, the community development director shall approve the plans for compliance as part of the application for land-disturbance, building or signs permits. 
(2)  Where the community development director determines that submitted conceptual plans do not comply with the requirements of this chapter, then the community development director shall notify the applicant in writing of the manner in which the conceptual plans fail to comply with such requirements. All applications shall be considered and decided by the community development director within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. 
(3)  Any appeal to vary overlay district development standards shall be to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to article VII of this chapter. 
(d)  Fees. Plans shall be accompanied by an application and payment of a fee in an amount determined by mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.1.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-953. - Conceptual plan package review. 
The conceptual plan package shall include the following: 
(1)  A narrative addressing the proposed development explaining how it meets the purpose, intent, and standards of this article. The narrative shall include a tabulation of the approximate number of acres for each different land use type within the project, the approximate number of dwelling units by type, the approximate gross residential density, the approximate commercial density as well as square feet, the common open space acreage, the approximate open space acreage, the anticipated number, type and size of recreational facilities and other public amenities, and the legal mechanism for protecting and maintaining common/public open, as required in article V of this chapter. 
(2)  A site location map showing the proposed development, abutting properties, the access connections of the proposed development to surrounding and existing development, and transitional buffer zones, if required. 
(3)  A multimodal access plan, prepared at a scale not greater than one inch equals 100 feet, to demonstrate a unified plan of continuous access to and between all structures in the proposed development and adjacent properties where connections are appropriate. The multimodal access plan shall cover the entire proposed development along with public right-of-way of adjoining streets and any other property lying between the subject property and any primary or secondary streets. Safe and convenient pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each structure entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Connections to available transportation nodes, such as driveways, sidewalks, and bike paths shall be shown along adjacent streets and those entering adjoining properties. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,250 feet from the nearest boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may safely travel from such station or stop to the subject property. Where an existing or planned bike path is located within 1,500 feet from the nearest boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle access shall be provided to the subject property. 
(4)  Two copies of a plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the state, presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches, and one 8.5 inches by 11 inches reduction of the plan. A ".pdf" copy of the plan shall be e-mailed to the community development director for distribution to the mayor and city council and the citizen stakeholder in the area the property is located for review and comments. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. Such plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Boundaries of the entire property proposed to be included in the development, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines; 
b.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plat and on all supporting graphics; 
c.  Location and approximate dimensions in length and width, for landscape strips and required transitional buffers, if any; 
d.  Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of five feet and a statement indicating whether it is an air survey or field run; 
e.  Delineation of any floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, United States Geological Survey, or the city; 
f.  Delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands as defined by section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act; 
g.  Approximate delineation of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will impact it; 
h.  Delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished; 
i.  General location, in conceptual form, of proposed uses, lots, buildings, building types and building entrances; 
j.  Height and setback of all existing and proposed buildings and structures; 
k.  Location, size and number of all on-street and off-street parking spaces, including a shared parking analysis, if shared parking is proposed; 
l.  Identification of site access points and layout, width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets; 
m.  Conceptual plans for drainage with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed; 
n.  Development density and lot sizes for each type of use; 
o.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control; 
p.  Identification of site access points and layout, width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets; 
q.  Location of proposed sidewalks and bicycle facilities, trails, recreation areas, parks, and other public or community uses, facilities, or structures on the site; 
r.  Conceptual layout of utilities and location of all existing and proposed utility easements having a width of ten feet or more; 
s.  Standard details of signs, sidewalks, streetlights, driveways, medians, curbs and gutters, landscaped areas, fencing, street furniture, bicycle lanes, streets, alleys, and other public improvements demonstrating compliance with the design guidelines for the overlay district; and 
t.  Seal and signature of the professional preparing the plan. 
(5)  Two copies of the conceptual building designs including elevation drawings drawn to a scale of not less than one-sixteenth inch equals one foot showing architectural details of proposed building, exterior materials, all of which demonstrate that the proposed design is in compliance with the subarea overlay district in which it is located. Drawings shall be presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches, along with one 8.5 inches by 11 inches reduction of each sheet. A ".pdf" copy of the drawings shall be e-mailed to the community development director or designee for distribution to the mayor and city council and the citizen stakeholder in the area the property is located for review and comments. If the drawings are presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. 
(6)  Lighting plan. See article V of this chapter. 
(7)  Traffic study. See article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.1.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-954. - Final design package. 
Upon receiving and addressing the city's comments with respect to the conceptual design package, the applicant must submit the final design package, including color ".pdf" copies, for review and approval. The final design package must contain full architectural and landscape plans, site plan, elevations, section renderings depicting the building design containing elevations and architectural detailing of proposed buildings, exterior materials and color, and plans and elevations of hardscape landscape and signs all of which must demonstrate compliance with overlay district regulations. All items and specifications necessary for obtaining land-disturbance and building permits must be submitted with the final design package. The applicant may submit the final design package simultaneously with the land-disturbance or building permit application, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.1.5), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-955—46-982. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN TUCKER COMPATIBLE USE OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-983. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  This division establishes standards and procedures that apply to any development, use, alteration, height, density, parking, open space, and building that lies, in whole or in part, within the Downtown Tucker Compatible Use Overlay District, hereinafter referred to as the Tucker Overlay District. The Tucker Overlay District is based upon the urban design and development guidelines included in the downtown Tucker Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) plan. 
(b)  The LCIs plan calls for a community that incorporates higher density development in the downtown Tucker area while providing a mix of commercial, office, recreation, and housing options. Also included in the LCI's goals is the improved mobility on the major corridors. Wherever the underlying zoning regulations are in conflict with the provisions of this overlay district, the regulations of this overlay district shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-984. - Applicability of regulations. 
This division applies to each application for a business license, land-disturbance permit, building permit or sign permit which involves the development, use, alteration, or modification of any structure where the subject property is located in whole, or in part, within the boundaries of the Tucker Overlay District. The procedures, standards, and criteria herein apply only to that portion of the subject property within the boundaries of the Tucker Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-985. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the Tucker Overlay District is as follows: 
(1)  To promote the development of a more dynamic, mixed-use district of appropriate scale and magnitude in the downtown Tucker area; 
(2)  To ensure that new structures and developments are consistent with the vision and recommendations of the downtown Tucker LCI plan (completed in 2005) with significant community involvement and input; 
(3)  To provide a variety of housing types and promote mixed-income residential opportunities; 
(4)  To design and arrange structures, buildings, streets, and open spaces to create an inviting, walkable, human-scale environment; 
(5)  To provide for connectivity of streets and communities and reduce the dependence on automobile use by increasing the ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel; 
(6)  To ensure a proportional relationship of surrounding buildings with respect to the general spacing of structures, building mass and scale, and street frontage by using techniques to achieve compatibility, such as: 
a.  Use of additional facade detail; proportion of facade elements, doorways, projections and insets; window scale and pattern; and creation of strong shadow lines as decorative elements; 
b.  Use of consistent setbacks from property lines; 
c.  Development of consistent sidewalks and a more active, interesting pedestrian environment; 
d.  Use of landscaping, lighting and street furniture to unify district buildings and define space; 
e.  Use of compatible building materials to promote a design and building aesthetic compatible with the desired urban character. 
(7)  To implement the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance of the city within the Tucker Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-986. - District boundaries and map. 
(a)  The boundaries and development categories of the Tucker Overlay District are described below and shall be established by a zoning map amendment adopted pursuant to this division which amendment shall be incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter: 
(b)  The foregoing Tucker Overlay District shall be divided into three development categories: 
(1)  Neighborhood zone. The intent of the neighborhood zone is to preserve the residential neighborhood character and uses while allowing mixed-use and commercial uses along the major roads within the district. This neighborhood character shall be guided by residential architecture such as pitched roofs, smaller scale, fenestration, cornices, columns, etc. The height in this district should be compatible to residential structures. 
(2)  Corridor zone. The intent of the corridor zone is to encourage mixed-use-type development along Lawrenceville Highway and LaVista Road that creates a more aesthetically pleasing and pedestrian friendly environment. Commercial, office, residential and multifamily mixed-use-type developments are desired. Although a mixture of uses is allowed, multifamily, townhouse, condominium and loft-type structures are preferred. The orientation of any development shall be toward Lawrenceville Highway and LaVista Road; however access can be from the rear. 
(3)  Village zone. The intent of the village zone is to revitalize Main Street and create a well-defined core area for the downtown Tucker area. Mixed-use-type development with commercial, residential, and office uses is encouraged to help create the downtown, Main Street atmosphere. Additionally, the intent of the Tucker Overlay District is to incorporate the varying institutional uses such as churches, schools, public buildings, public squares/plazas, and government uses into the character of the district. The urban character of this district shall be guided by zero setbacks, urban edges, and common architectural themes, continuation of architectural rhythms, and building materials and massing. 
(c)  The community development director or designee shall have the final authority to determine whether any property is located within the boundaries of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-987. - Principal uses and structures. 
The principal uses of land and structures which are allowed in the Tucker Overlay District are as provided by the underlying zoning district, subject to the limitations and standards contained within this division. All properties zoned C-1 (Local Commercial) District, C-2 (General Commercial) District, O-I (Office-Institutional) District, O-D (Office-Distribution) District, M (Industrial) District, RM (Multifamily Residential) District, or any R (Single-Family Residential) District shall be used in accordance with the underlying zoning district and/or for the following principal uses of land and structures or a combination of uses in a mixed-use development subject to the standards and limitations contained within this division. 
(1)  Principal uses and structures. 
a.  Neighborhood zone. 
1.  Single-family detached. 
2.  Two-family detached. 
3.  Single-family attached. 
4.  Office uses—Not to exceed 5,000 square feet per use along primary streets (La Vista Road, Fellowship Road, and 1st Avenue). 
5.  Retail uses—Not to exceed 5,000 square feet per use along primary streets. 
6.  Live-work units along primary streets. 
b.  Corridor zone. 
1.  Single-family attached. 
2.  Live-work units. 
3.  Multifamily residential units, up to and including 24 units per acre. 
4.  Mixed-use with ground floor retail, office and/or service, and residential and/or office located on upper stories shall be allowed. 
5.  Office uses—Not to exceed 10,000 square feet per use. 
6.  Retail uses—Not to exceed 10,000 square feet per use. 
c.  Village zone. 
1.  Single-family attached. 
2.  Live-work units. 
3.  Multifamily residential units, up to and including 24 units per acre. 
4.  Government uses. 
5.  Institutional uses. 
6.  Mixed-use with ground floor retail, office and/or service, and residential and/or office located on upper stories shall be allowed. 
7.  Office uses—Not to exceed 10,000 square feet per use. 
8.  Retail uses—Not to exceed 10,000 square feet per use. 
(2)  Live-work units, which consist of buildings used jointly as dwellings and nonresidential (work) purposes that are both permitted in the Tucker Overlay District. Live-work units shall meet all of the following standards: 
a.  Work uses shall be compatible with residential uses and shall not produce or create noise, smoke, vibrations, smells, electrical interferences, or fire hazards that would unreasonably interfere with residential uses. Permitted uses shall include: 
1.  Accounting office; 
2.  Planning, engineering, or architectural office; 
3.  Financial services office; 
4.  Insurance office; 
5.  Legal office; 
6.  Counseling office; 
7.  Real estate office; 
8.  Information processing uses; 
9.  Tutorial/educational services; 
10.  Fine arts studios and/or galleries; 
11.  Photography studios; and 
12.  Consulting services. 
b.  The maximum number of employees on the premises shall be two, in addition to the occupants of the residential space. 
c.  The unit shall not accommodate more than two customers/clients at a time. 
d.  The minimum size of the live-work unit shall be 1,200 square feet with at least one-third of the unit designated for residential space. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (3.34.6), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-988. - Prohibited uses. 
The following principal uses of land and structures shall be prohibited within the Tucker Overlay District: 
(1)  Boarding and breeding kennels. 
(2)  Storage yard for damaged or confiscated automobiles. 
(3)  Tire retreading and recapping. 
(4)  Adult entertainment establishments. 
(5)  Adult service facility. 
(6)  Go-cart concession. 
(7)  Outdoor equipment and materials storage. 
(8)  Heavy repair shop and trade shop. 
(9)  Extended-stay motels. 
(10)  Used cars sales. 
(11)  Temporary and/or seasonal outdoor sales. 
(12)  Title and pawn shops 
(13)  Liquor stores. 
(14)  Night clubs. 
(15)  Salvage yards/junkyards. 
(16)  Self-service car wash and detailing. 
(17)  Self-storage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-989. - Accessory uses, buildings, and structures. 
Accessory uses and structures permitted within this district shall include these structures, incidental to any authorized use and structure, specifically including clubhouses, pods and other recreational amenities: 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any authorized use. 
(2)  Parking lots and parking garages. 
(3)  Club house, including meeting room or recreation room. 
(4)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, and other recreation areas and similar amenities. 
(5)  Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 34 and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-990. - Special permits. 
The following uses and structures shall be authorized only by permits of the type indicated: 
(1)  Special administrative permit from the community development director or designee as referenced in article IV of this chapter. 
a.  Art shows, carnival rides, festivals and special events of community interest. 
b.  Temporary outdoor social, religious, entertainment or recreation activity where the time period does not exceed 14 days' duration, and adequate parking is provided on the site. 
c.  Telecommunications antennas that are incorporated in architectural features such as steeples, clock towers, water towers and attached to the top of high-rise buildings subject to the requirements of section 46-1194. 
d.  Outdoor recreation entertainment facilities. 
(2)  Special land use permit from the mayor and city council. 
a.  Health spa. 
b.  Heliport. 
c.  Massage establishment. 
d.  Multifamily residential units, over 25 units per acre. 
e.  Multifamily residential units, when the proposed project abuts a residential zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.9), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (3.34.9), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.34.9), 6-28-2017; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(3.34.9), 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 46-991. - Development standards. 
The following requirements shall apply to new structures in the Tucker Overlay District: 
(1)  Development standards for live-work units. 
a.  All off-street parking shall be hidden behind or within individual units. Garages may not face the public street. 
b.  The front entrance to each unit shall be at grade opening directly onto the public sidewalk or a public space adjacent to the public sidewalk. 
(2)  Development standards for commercial and mixed-use buildings. 
a.  Ground floor commercial and retail uses shall have entrances at grade opening directly onto the public sidewalk or a public space adjacent to the public sidewalk. 
b.  Canopies over retail and commercial entrances and/or windows shall be mounted at a single consistent height for each building. 
c.  The size of lease commercial space shall vary within each development to allow for diversity of tenants. 
d.  A minimum of 65 percent of the ground floor facade of mixed-use and commercial buildings shall be clear and untinted, transparent glass storefront. 
e.  Pedestrian access shall be provided from parking behind buildings to the public sidewalk through the ground floor of the building or via sidewalks between buildings. 
(3)  Development standards for multifamily buildings. 
a.  Ground floor residential units that face the street shall have entrances with a stoop or porch between the sidewalk and the building facade. A sidewalk shall connect all ground floor entrances to the public sidewalk. 
b.  Multifamily buildings shall be set back between five and 15 feet from the back of the sidewalk. This area between the sidewalk and the building facade shall contain only steps, front porches or stoops, balconies, or landscaping. Mechanical equipment and other building service items may not be located within the setback area between the public sidewalk and building facade. 
(4)  Site design requirements. 
a.  When blocks are subdivided by new streets, the maximum length of resulting new blocks shall be 300 linear feet. Along Lawrenceville Highway and LaVista Road, the maximum block length shall be 700 feet. 
b.  The maximum curb radius at any intersection or curb cut is 30 feet. 
c.  All parking shall be accessed via shared alleys or private drives. No curb cuts shall be allowed on primary streets (Lawrenceville Highway, Main Street, La Vista Road, Fellowship Road, and 1st Avenue) if the development is accessible by another street. If an existing block face on a primary street exceeds 700 linear feet, then one curb cut per 700 linear feet is allowed. If a development is accessible from more than one secondary street, the development shall be limited to one curb cut per block face. If a development is only accessible from one street, the development is limited to two curb cuts on that street. 
d.  All curb cuts shall be a maximum of 24 feet wide. 
e.  Common or joint driveways are encouraged and may be authorized by the community development director or designee. 
f.  Driveways must be perpendicular to the adjacent street. Circular and nonperpendicular driveways are prohibited. 
g.  Buildings shall be located toward the front of each lot no more than 20 feet from the public sidewalk. If a lot is bound by more than one public street, the front of the lot shall be considered the side adjacent to the street with the highest classification as follows: Primary: Lawrenceville Highway, LaVista Road, Main Street, 1st Avenue, and Fellowship Road; Secondary: new streets and other existing streets. If the building is contained on a lot at the intersection of two primary streets, the building shall be oriented towards the intersection. 
h.  For nonresidential purposes, the primary ground floor entrance to all buildings shall be clearly visible from the street, shall face the street, and shall be unlocked during operating business hours. If a building fronts more than one public street, the primary entrance shall face the street with the highest classification as follows: Primary: Lawrenceville Highway, LaVista Road, Main Street, Fellowship Road, and 1st Avenue; Secondary: new streets and other existing streets. 
i.  Where development is on a primary or secondary street and also across the street from existing single-family homes which face the street, the development shall contain buildings facing the primary or secondary street and the existing single-family development. 
j.  Maximum spacing between buildings along a primary street shall be 20 feet unless a public space, such as a park or plaza, is provided between the respective buildings. Exceptions will be made for curb cuts approved according to subsection (4)c of this section. 
k.  Minimum space between buildings shall be zero feet, but if the property is adjacent to an existing building with windows facing the property line, the setback shall be 20 feet from the face of the existing building. 
l.  All service areas shall be screened from view from the street with buildings, landscaping, or decorative fencing. 
m.  Decorative fencing shall only be made of brick, stone, wrought iron, or wood. Fencing in the front yard of any property shall not be higher than four feet. Fencing to the rear or side of a building shall not be higher than six feet. 
n.  No barbed wire, razor wire, chainlink fence or similar elements shall be visible from any public plaza, ground level or sidewalk level outdoor dining area or public right-of-way. 
o.  Gates and security arms shall be prohibited from crossing any public street or sidewalk. 
p.  All utilities shall be located underground. 
(5)  Building height. 
a.  Within the Tucker Overlay District, there shall be three development categories for the purpose of establishing allowable building heights. The boundaries of these development categories shall be established by a zoning map amendment adopted pursuant to this chapter which amendment shall be incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter. 
b.  All building heights are to be measured from the finished sidewalk to the top of cornice (or top of parapet wall) for flat-roofed buildings or the bottom of the eave for sloped-roofed buildings along the facade that faces the street with the highest volume of daily traffic. Levels measuring less than six feet in height for the purposes of raising the first-floor level above the street level, providing a consistent first-floor level (crawl space), or for the sole purpose of housing, mechanical, plumbing or electrical equipment shall not be counted as stories for the purposes of calculating maximum building heights. 
c.  All buildings within the Tucker Overlay District shall be a minimum of two stories tall and 28 feet in height except for single-family detached houses in the neighborhood zone. Single-family detached houses shall be allowed to be a minimum one story. 
d.  The maximum height for buildings for the Tucker Overlay District shall be three stories or 45 feet, whichever is less, except as provided in subsection (5)f of this section. 
e.  Single-family attached townhomes or live/work units in all of the development zones shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet, whichever is less. 
f.  Buildings in the corridor zone and village zone (excluding those located along Main Street) shall be permitted to exceed the maximum building height limit in subsection (d) of this section provided it meets one or more of the following: 
1.  Single-family attached and live/work units are permitted to add one additional story if 20 percent of the total number of residential units within a development of 15 units or more are priced for workforce housing as defined in article IX of this chapter. Mixed-use buildings that include residential units and multifamily buildings are permitted to add one additional story if 20 percent of the total number of residential units within a development of 20 units or more are priced for workforce housing as defined in article IX of this chapter. 
2.  Commercial and residential developments are permitted to add one additional story to each building on a given lot if a contiguous publicly accessible open space, as defined by section 46-1772, not including on-street parking and public sidewalks along roadways, comprising at least 25 percent of the development, is provided. 
3.  Commercial and multifamily buildings fronting Lawrenceville Highway are permitted to add one additional story to the respective building if 75 percent or more of the ground floor space is used for retail or service commercial uses with storefronts oriented toward a public street. 
4.  The maximum building height with any combination of height bonuses listed above shall be dependent upon building use according to the chart below. Special land use permits and variances shall not alter or allow structures taller than the maximum building heights provided herein within the Tucker Overlay District: 
          Table 3.10. Maximum Building Heights in Downtown Tucker Compatible Use Overlay  District 

 
*Whichever is less 
(6)  Building setbacks. The following requirements shall apply to all structures in the downtown Tucker Overlay District: 
a.  Minimum front setback shall be zero feet. Buildings shall be permitted to be set back from the public sidewalk to allow for building stoops, front porches, balconies or steps, a public space or public park, outdoor dining, outdoor merchandising, or landscaping that does not completely cover the facade of the building. All ground floor uses shall have a sidewalk along the street. 
b.  The minimum side and rear setbacks shall be zero feet, however if the property is adjacent to an existing building with windows facing the property line, the setback shall be no less than 20 feet from the face of the existing building. The side of a building facing a public street shall be permitted to be set back from a public sidewalk to allow for building stoops, front porches, balconies or steps, a public plaza or park, outdoor dining, outdoor merchandising, or landscaping that does not completely cover the facade of the building. All ground floor uses must have a sidewalk or clear hardscape pathway connecting the building entrance to the public sidewalk along the street. 
c.  For buildings located along Main Street, the maximum front setback shall be no greater than the average of the current buildings on the block. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-992. - Open space requirements. 
(a)  Within the Tucker Overlay District, there shall be three development categories for the purpose of establishing required public space. The boundaries of these development categories shall be established by a zoning map amendment adopted pursuant to this chapter which amendment shall be incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  A publicly accessible open space shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  A publicly accessible open space, which is at grade and a minimum of 20 percent of the total development lot, shall be provided by each new development that includes residential uses in the corridor zone and the neighborhood zone. 
(2)  A publicly accessible open space, which is at grade and a minimum of ten percent of the total development lot, shall be provided by each new development that includes residential uses in the village zone. 
Table 3.11. Open Space Requirements in Tucker Compatible Use Overlay District 

 
*Applies only to new development that includes residential uses. 
(c)  All publicly accessible open spaces shall be at grade, open to general public access during daylight hours, surrounded by buildings with a mix of active uses on the ground floor on at least one side, face the public street, and be directly accessible from a public sidewalk along a street. Ground floor active uses shall include primary entries and exits into the building and may include, but are not limited to, retail storefronts, professional office storefronts and/or the primary facade of residential buildings with direct entries and exits to multiple residential units. 
(d)  Publicly accessible open spaces should include appropriate landscaping, including shade trees. At least one shade tree must be provided within or directly adjacent to the open space for every 2,000 square feet of open space. Shade trees must be a minimum of 3.5 inches in caliper measured 12 inches aboveground, shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of eight feet. 
(e)  Publicly accessible open spaces including front yards, planted areas, fountains, parks, plazas, trails, paths, and hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas and similar features which are located on private property and accessible to the general public, the portion thereof located on private property; and natural stream buffers shall be permitted to count toward the 20 percent open space requirement. 
(f)  Private courtyards and other private outdoor amenities shall be located at the interior of the block, behind buildings or on rooftops. Private courtyards and outdoor amenities shall be prohibited from being counted toward the 20 percent minimum open space requirement and other open space calculations that may increase maximum building heights. 
(g)  All open space including buffers, setbacks, sidewalk clear zones, sidewalk zones, and open spaces shall be fully implemented prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the primary development. 
(h)  When a private property owner provides landscaping within the public right-of-way and the landscaping dies within one year of installation, such landscaping shall be replaced within the earliest possible planting season. 
(i)  Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of all open spaces, the method of and responsibility for maintenance, taxes, and insurance, compulsory membership and assessment provisions, and shall be incorporated into legal instruments sufficient to ensure that the open space requirements of this section are maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-993. - Transitional buffer zone requirements. 
Where a lot on the external boundary of the Tucker Overlay District is used for nonresidential purposes and adjoins the boundary of any property outside the district that is zoned for any R zoning classification, RM zoning classification, MHP zoning classification, or TND classification, a transitional buffer zone of not less than 50 feet in width shall be provided and maintained in a natural state or so as to maintain an effective visual screen. Said transitional buffer zone shall not be paved or otherwise covered with nonpervious surfaces and shall not be used for parking, loading, storage, or any other uses, except that portions of the transitional buffer zone may be utilized for installation of utilities when necessitated by the development, and when the applicant shows that the utilities cannot be located outside of the transitional buffer zone. Water detention ponds shall not be located within the transitional buffer zones. No trees, other than dead or diseased trees, shall be removed from said transitional buffer zone, but additional trees and plant material may be added to the transitional buffer zone. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.12), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-994. - Architectural regulations. 
(a)  Allowable building materials shall include brick, stone, wood, architectural metal siding, and fiber cement siding. The following building materials shall be prohibited: vinyl siding, exposed concrete block or concrete masonry units, exposed plywood, plastic or PVC, and synthetic stucco or EIFS. 
(b)  Large buildings, longer than 100 continuous feet, shall vary the cornice height and create variations in facades with changes in facade depth, materials, textures, colors, and/or window and door patterns to provide visual interest and prevent a massive imposing appearance. 
(c)  Building facades should promote architectural and visual interest. A minimum of 35 percent of any facade facing a public street shall consist of openings including windows and doorways. 
(d)  Service areas, trash dumpsters, trash compactors and all other mechanical areas and equipment shall be screened from view from all streets and public rights-of-way. Screening shall be permitted to include landscaping and/or architectural treatment of color similar to the building, to screen the equipment. 
(e)  Roof structures visible from the public right-of-way may be sloped or flat. Sloped roofs shall be hip roofs of less than 45 degrees in pitch or gable roofs of at least 30 degrees in pitch. Sloped roofs shall have overhangs of at least 12 inches on all sides and shall not exceed 100 feet in length without a change in plane. Permitted roofing materials for sloped roofs include asphalt or fiberglass shingles, solar shingles used with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, standing seam metal roof, ceramic tile, and slate or synthetic slate. Flat roofs shall have decorative and/or corbelled parapets on all sides visible from public rights of way and drain to internal roof drains and/or to the rear of the structure, limiting downspouts on facades along primary and secondary streets. Simple barrel vaults or roofs are allowable. Mansard, gambrel, and shed roof forms are prohibited. 
(f)  Any linear lighting around windows, rooflines, doors, signs or building structures is prohibited. Linear lighting may include, but is not limited to neon tubes, rope lighting, and other similar lighting devices. Linear lighting devices that form letters or words shall be considered signs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.13), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.34.13), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-995. - Streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  All streets within the Tucker Overlay District shall be public streets. Private streets are prohibited. 
(b)  All streets shall comply with the requirements of public streets found in chapter 22 and other applicable sections of this Code. 
(c)  Streets shall be designed to create an interconnected system of grid-patterned roads, modified only to accommodate topographical conditions. 
(d)  Pedestrian zones shall be provided on all streets and shall consist of a landscape zone and a sidewalk zone of widths as provided below. Landscape zones shall be planted with trees, grass, ground cover or flowering plants, or consist of brick pavers, concrete pavers, or granite pavers where on-street parking is provided or pedestrian crossing and/or congregation is likely. Sidewalk zones shall be paved in concrete and kept clear and unobstructed for the safe and convenient use of pedestrians. 
(1)  The intent of this subsection is to provide for a 15-foot-wide pedestrian zone with a five-foot-wide landscape zone measured from the back of the adjacent street curb and a ten-foot-wide sidewalk zone along Main Street. However, Main Street right-of-way variations and the current conditions may not provide for a uniform application of this requirement. As such, the community development director or designee in consultation with the director of public works shall determine on a case by case basis, the requirements for the pedestrian zone along Main Street. The pedestrian zone shall consist of a landscape zone and a sidewalk zone. This applies to all properties abutting Main Street that are within the Tucker Overlay District boundaries. 
(2)  New development shall provide a 15-foot-wide pedestrian zone consisting of a five-foot-wide landscape zone measured from the back of the adjacent street curb and a ten-foot-wide sidewalk zone along First Avenue. 
(3)  New development within the Tucker Overlay District shall provide a 15-foot-wide pedestrian zone consisting of an eight-foot-wide landscape zone measured from the back of the adjacent street curb and seven-foot-wide sidewalk zone along Lawrenceville Highway, LaVista Road, and Fellowship Road. 
(4)  New development within the Tucker Overlay District shall provide a ten-foot-wide pedestrian zone consisting of a four-foot-wide landscape zone measured from the back of the adjacent street curb and a six-foot-wide sidewalk zone elsewhere along all new and existing streets other than Main Street, 1st Avenue, Lawrenceville Highway, LaVista Road, and Fellowship Road. 
(5)  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent pedestrian sidewalk area with all driveway crossings meeting ADA standards. 
(6)  Pedestrian sidewalk areas paved with materials other than concrete that are consistent in color with concrete sidewalks may be allowed with the approval of the community development director or designee, as long as the materials meet ADA standards. 
(7)  Where newly constructed sidewalks abut existing sidewalks, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide safe facilitation of pedestrian traffic flow to adjacent sidewalks. Any development that disturbs existing sidewalks on the adjacent property shall replace disturbed areas to their predisturbance state and condition. 
(8)  Safe and convenient pedestrian pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each structure entrance, including pedestrian access routes to parking decks and through parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. All such pathways shall be concrete and a minimum width of five feet. 
(e)  Landscape zones. 
(1)  Street trees shall be planted in all landscape zones spaced at a maximum distance of 30 feet on center. 
(2)  New street trees must be a minimum of 3.5 inches in caliper measured 12 inches aboveground, shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of eight feet. 
(3)  Street trees shall have a minimum planting area of four feet by eight feet. Tree-planting areas shall provide porous drainage systems that allow for drainage of the planting area. 
(4)  Street tree species shall be consistent for entire block lengths. Species shall be permitted to change on individual block face due only to limited supply and/or concerns regarding disease or the health of existing and proposed trees with approval from the community development director or designee and consultation from a certified arborist. 
(5)  All initial plantings and plant removal other than routine maintenance or replacement shall be approved by the community development director or designee. 
(6)  Benches, trash receptacles, and bike racks shall be placed within the landscape zone on the following streets: Lawrenceville Highway, LaVista Road, Main Street, 1st Avenue, and Fellowship Road. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.14), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-996. - Parking. 
(a)  Off-street parking requirements for uses and structures are authorized and permitted, as follows: 
(1)  Residential. 
a.  Single-family detached. One space minimum, two spaces maximum. 
b.  Two-family detached. One space per family unit minimum, two spaces per family unit maximum. 
c.  Single-family attached. One space minimum, two spaces maximum. 
d.  Multifamily. One space per dwelling unit minimum, two spaces per dwelling unit maximum. 
(2)  Commercial. One parking space for every 400 square feet of gross building area (minimum and maximum). 
(3)  Retail. One parking space for every 300 square feet of gross building area (minimum and maximum). 
(4)  Other uses. One parking space for every 300 square feet of gross building area. 
(b)  Shared parking is encouraged and may result in permitted reductions of off-street parking requirements. Parking facilities within a lot may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate parking facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily when the remaining uses are not in operation. Applicants shall make an application to the community development director or designee for authorization for shared parking. Applicants shall include proof of a written formal shared-parking agreement between the applicant and all affected property owners. Shared parking arrangements may be approved by the community development director or designee upon determination that the above stated off-street parking requirements for each use are met during said use's operational hours. Required parking for residential units shall be prohibited from being shared. 
(c)  Required residential parking shall be segregated from parking for all other uses with the exception of additional parking provided for live/work single-family units. 
(d)  Each development which provides automobile parking facilities shall provide bicycle parking facilities in adjacent parking structures, parking lots, or the landscape zone of the adjoining sidewalk. Nonresidential developments shall provide bicycle parking at a ratio of one bicycle parking space for every 20 vehicular spaces. Multifamily residential developments shall provide bicycle parking facilities at a minimum ratio of one bicycle parking space for every five multifamily units. No development shall have fewer than three bicycle parking spaces nor be required to exceed a maximum of 50 bicycle parking spaces. 
(e)  All off-street parking including surface lots and parking decks shall be located behind or beside buildings. 
(f)  Off-street parking shall be screened from view from any public street by buildings and/or landscaping. Off-street parking may not be located between the public street and the building's front facade. If a lot is bound by more than one public street, the front of the lot shall be considered the side adjacent to the street with the highest classification as follows: Primary: Lawrenceville Highway, LaVista Road, Main Street, Fellowship Road, and 1st Avenue; Secondary: new streets and other existing streets. 
(g)  Any portion of a parking deck that is adjacent to a public street shall be screened with retail on the ground floor. Any upper stories of a parking deck that are visible from a public street shall be clad with materials permitted in subsection (a) of architectural design standards to resemble office or residential buildings with fenestration. 
(h)  Surface parking provided to the side of any building along a public street shall be designated for short-term (no longer than two hours') parking. 
(i)  Wheel stops or bumpers shall be placed at the head of all off-street parking spaces that abut a landscape strip or sidewalk. 
(j)  All surface parking lots of 20 parking spaces or more must include landscaping in the form of shade trees within the confines of the surface parking lot. One shade tree must be provided for every ten parking spaces. Shade trees must be a minimum of 3.5 inches in caliper measured 12 inches aboveground, shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of eight feet. 
(k)  All surface parking, parking decks, and parking structures shall have a landscape strip minimum of six feet in width immediately contiguous to the parking facility for the whole of the exterior perimeter of the parking facility except at vehicular or pedestrian entrances and exits and where ground floor retail uses are located. Such landscape strips shall contain no less than one understory or overstory tree per 50 linear feet, ten shrubs per 50 linear feet, and a minimum of 90 percent living ground cover, sod and/or annual or perennial color in the landscape strip surface area. 
(l)  If required automobile parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby property within the overlay district through a shared parking agreement approved per subsection (b) of this section, provided a majority of such spaces lie within 700 feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which the parking is provided. 
(m)  On-street parking spaces provided by a development shall be permitted to be counted toward the minimum parking requirements for the respective development for all uses except single-family attached dwellings. On-street parking spaces shall be prohibited from being counted toward the maximum parking limitations. 
(n)  No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, service, or long-term storage of any vehicles or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.15), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-997. - Signs. 
(a)  The Tucker Overlay District shall comply with the requirements of chapter 34. 
(b)  Ground signs shall be monument style signs with a base and framework made of brick or stone. 
(c)  Blinking lights and neon lights shall be prohibited on all signs. 
(d)  The combined area of any and all signage of any building or structure shall not exceed ten percent of the main building facade. 
(e)  The maximum height of any freestanding sign above the average grade elevation of the nearest public way or within a 20-foot radius of the sign shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Eight feet where the sign face does not exceed 40 square feet; 
(2)  Ten feet where the sign face does not exceed 60 square feet; or 
(3)  Twelve feet where the sign face exceeds 60 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.16), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-998. - Underground utilities. 
All utilities except for major electric transmission lines and substations are required to be placed underground except where the community development director or designee determines that underground utilities are not feasible due to pre-existing physical conditions, such as conflicting underground structures or utilities, shallow rock, high water table, or other similar geologic or hydrologic conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.17), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-999. - Street lights and street furnishings. 
Street lights and street furnishings are required for all public streets and shall conform to the design guidelines for the Tucker Overlay District. 
(1)  Street and pedestrian lighting shall be alternated along roadways. 
(2)  Street lights shall be located within the landscape zone spaced at a maximum distance of 180 feet on center on the following streets: Lawrenceville Highway, LaVista Road, Main Street, 1st Avenue, and Fellowship Road. 
(3)  Pedestrian lights shall be located within the landscape zone spaced at a maximum distance of 90 feet on center on the following streets: Lawrenceville Highway, LaVista Road, Main Street, 1st Avenue, and Fellowship Road. 
(4)  Lighting fixtures must be approved by the public works transportation division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.18), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1000. - Interparcel access. 
To the maximum extent possible, sidewalks and parking lots serving adjacent lots shall be interconnected to provide continuous driveway connections and pedestrian connections between adjoining lots and streets, except that this requirement shall not apply to lots zoned for single-family residential development. Where necessary, the city may require access easements be provided to ensure continuous access and egress routes connecting commercial, office and multifamily lots. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.19), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1001. - Multimodal access plan. 
(a)  Multimodal access plan required. Each new application for a development permit within the Tucker Overlay District shall be accompanied by a multimodal access plan prepared at a scale not greater than one inch equals 100 feet. The multimodal access plan shall cover the full extent of the proposed development along with public rights-of-way of adjoining streets and any other property lying between the subject property and the nearest public streets on all sides. The purpose of the multimodal access plan is to demonstrate a unified plan of continuous access to and between all buildings in the proposed development and adjacent properties. 
(b)  Connections. Connections to available transportation modes, such as driveways, sidewalk, and bike paths shall be shown along adjacent streets and those entering adjoining properties. Safe and convenient pedestrian ways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,250 feet (straight-line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may safely travel from such station or stop to the subject property. The access plan shall show how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle access shall be provided to the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.20), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1002. - Design guidelines. 
The community development director or designee is authorized to create, administer, and amend design guidelines for the Tucker Compatible Use Overlay District. These standards shall provide acceptable architectural design controls, landscaping, detail drawings, signage, fencing, lighting, street and site furniture and grating. These standards shall be used to promote proper design criteria for the overlay district and shall guide the community development director in deciding whether a proposed design complies with the requirements of this overlay district. The design guidelines are hereby made a part of this division and shall be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.21), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1003. - Plans required; certificate of compliance. 
(a)  Application for overlay district compliance. No permit or license shall be issued within the Downtown Tucker Overlay District until the applicant for such a permit or license has submitted an application for overlay district compliance to the community development department that meets all requirements of this division and such application has been approved as an application provision provided herein. 
(b)  Plans required. Prior to the issuance of any land-disturbance permit, building permit, or sign permit, the applicant shall submit a conceptual design package and final design package to the community development director or designee. The community development director or designee shall provide a copy of the submittals to the mayor and city council for review and comment. The final design package must include full architectural and landscape architectural plans and specifications. The submitted plans must include a site plan, architectural elevations and sections; renderings depicting the building design including elevations and architectural details of proposed buildings, exterior materials and colors, and plans and elevations of all hardscape, landscape and signs, all of which shall demonstrate that the proposed design is in compliance with all the requirements of this Tucker Overlay District and the underlying zoning classification. 
(c)  Fees. The conceptual design package shall be accompanied by an application and payment of a fee in an amount determined by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.22), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1004. - Conceptual plan package review. 
The conceptual plan package shall be composed of the following: 
(1)  Ten copies of a site plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the state, presented on a sheet having a maximum size of two inches by 36 inches, and one 8.5-inch by 11-inch reduction of the plan. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. Such plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Boundaries of the entire property proposed to be included in the development, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines; 
b.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the site plan and on all supporting graphics; 
c.  Location, size and dimensions in length and width of all landscaped areas, transitional buffers, and open space; 
d.  Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of five feet and a statement indicating whether it is an air survey or field run; 
e.  Delineation of any floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, United States Geological Survey, or the city; 
f.  The delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands as defined by section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act; 
g.  Approximate delineation of any significant historic or archeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will impact it; 
h.  A delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished; 
i.  Location of all proposed uses, lots, buildings, building types and building entrances; 
j.  Height and setback of all buildings and structures; 
k.  Areas, lot sizes and development density for each type of proposed use; 
l.  Location, size, and number of all on-street and off-street parking spaces, including a shared parking analysis, if shared parking is proposed; 
m.  Identification of site access points and layout, width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets; 
n.  Conceptual plans for drainage with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed; 
o.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership, or common control; 
p.  Location of proposed sidewalks and bicycle facilities trails, recreation areas, parks, and other public or community uses, facilities, or structures on the site; 
q.  Conceptual layout of utilities and location of all existing or proposed utility easements having a width of ten feet or more; 
r.  Standard details of signs, sidewalks, streetlights, driveways, medians, curbs and gutters, landscaped areas, fencing, granting street furniture, bicycle lanes, streets, alleys, and other details demonstrating compliance with the Tucker Overlay District regulations; 
s.  Seal and signature of professional preparing the plan. 
(2)  Ten copies of conceptual building designs including elevation drawings drawn to a designated scale of not less than one-sixteenth inch equals one foot showing architectural details of proposed buildings, exterior materials, all of which demonstrate that the proposed design is in compliance with the requirements of the Tucker Overlay District regulations. Drawings shall be presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches, and one 8.5-inch by 11-inch reduction of each sheet. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. 
(3)  A written statement explaining how the proposed development will meet the standards of this division, including the purposes and intent contained in section 46-985. Statement of purpose and intent. The written statement shall also include information describing the number of acres contained in the development; the number of dwelling units by type; the gross residential density; the area (in square feet) of any commercial uses; the common open space acreage; the anticipated number, type, and size of other public amenities; and the proposed legal mechanism for protecting and maintaining common open space, if applicable. 
(4)  A multimodal access plan, prepared at a scale not greater than one inch equals 100 feet, to demonstrate a unified plan of continuous access to and between all structures in the proposed development and adjacent properties where connections are appropriate. The multimodal access plan shall cover the entire proposed development along with public rights-of-way of adjoining streets and any other property lying between the subject property and any primary or secondary streets. Safe and convenient pedestrian pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each structure entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.23), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1005. - Final design package review and approval process. 
(a)  Final design package. Upon receiving comments on the conceptual design package, the applicant will submit the final design package for review and approval. The final design package must include full architectural and landscape architectural plans and specifications. The submitted plans must include a site plan, architectural elevations and sections; renderings depicting the building design including elevations and architectural details of proposed buildings, exterior materials and colors, and plans and elevations of all hardscape, landscape and signage, all of which shall demonstrate that the proposed design is in compliance with all requirements of this Tucker Overlay District and the underlying zoning classification. The final design package must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer/architect. The final design package must contain all plans, elevations, sections and specifications necessary for obtaining development and building permits. The applicant may submit the final design package simultaneously with the submission for permitting. 
(b)  Review. The community development director or designee shall review each application for compliance with all requirements of the Tucker Overlay District and the underlying zoning classification. Where the director or designee determines that said plans comply with the requirements of the Tucker Overlay District a certificate of compliance shall be issued in the form of the director or designee signing the plans and drawings after which the applicant shall then apply for land-disturbance, building or signs permits. Where the director or designee determines that said plans do not comply with the requirements of this chapter, then the director or designee shall notify the applicant in writing stating the manner in which said applicant fails to comply with such requirements. All applications shall be considered and decided by the community development director or designee within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. Any appeal of the director of planning's decision in this regard shall be to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to section 46-1632. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.24), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1006. - Final approval of plans. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of any development or building permit, the application shall be submitted to and approved by community development director or designee. A final site plan shall be submitted and shall be consistent with the Tucker Overlay District. 
(b)  By enacting the Tucker Overlay District, the mayor and city council authorizes the community development director to approve the proposed development that provides for unique site features and innovative design in concert with the design guidelines and all related requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.34.25), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1007—46-1025. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NORTHLAKE OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-1026. - Scope of regulations. 
This division establishes standards and procedures that apply to any development, use, alteration, height, density, parking, open space, or building on any lot or portion thereof which is in whole or in part contained within the boundaries of the Northlake Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1027. - Applicability of regulations. 
This division applies to each application for a business license, land-disturbance permit, building permit or sign permit which involves the development, use, exterior alteration, exterior modification, or addition of any structure where the subject property is in whole or in part contained within the boundaries of the Northlake Overlay District. The procedures, standards, and criteria herein apply only to that portion of the subject property within the boundaries of the Northlake Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1028. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the Northlake Overlay District is as follows: 
(1)  To encourage development and redevelopment of properties within the district so as to achieve a mixed-use community; 
(2)  To provide for the development of sidewalks and walkways in order to promote safe and convenient pedestrian access and to reduce dependence on automobile travel; 
(3)  To promote a physically attractive, environmentally safe and economically sound mixed-use community; 
(4)  To permit and to encourage mixed-use developments containing both commercial and residential uses to create a pedestrian oriented community in which people can live, work and play; 
(5)  To improve the visual appearance and increase property values within the Northlake Overlay District. To implement the policies and objectives of the DeKalb County 2025 Comprehensive Plan and the policies and objectives of the design guidelines for the Northlake Overlay District; 
(6)  To enhance the long-term economic viability of this portion of the city by encouraging new commercial and residential developments that increase the tax base and provide jobs to the citizens of the city; 
(7)  To establish and maintain a balanced relationship between industrial, commercial, and residential development to ensure a stable and healthy tax base in the city; 
(8)  To provide a balanced distribution of regional and community focused commercial and mixed-use office centers; 
(9)  To support higher-density housing, office and mixed-use centers which have appropriate access and infrastructure as approved by the community development director, or designee; 
(10)  To encourage mixed-use developments that meet the goals and objectives of the Atlanta Regional Commission's smart growth and livable centers initiatives; 
(11)  To allow flexibility in existing underlying development standards in order to encourage the design of innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, green space, urban design, and public amenities; 
(12)  To encourage an efficient land use and development plan by forming a live-work-play environment that offers employees and residents the opportunity to fulfill their daily activities with minimal use of single-occupant automobiles; 
(13)  To allow and encourage development densities and land use intensities that are capable of making productive use of alternative transportation modes such as bus transit, rail transit, ridesharing, bicycling and walking; 
(14)  To encourage the formation of a well-designed, pedestrian-friendly activity center with high-density commercial and residential development that increases vitality and choices in living environments for the citizens of the city; 
(15)  To protect established single-family residential areas surrounding the Northlake Overlay District from encroachment of commercial, retail, office, and industrial uses by providing for increased density of development within the boundaries of the Northlake Overlay District; 
(16)  To protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city; and 
(17)  To promote uniform and visually aesthetic architectural features which serve to unify the distinctive visual quality of the Northlake Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1029. - Maps and boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries and tiers (development categories) of the Northlake Overlay District shall be established by a zoning map amendment adopted pursuant to this chapter which amendment shall be incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The community development director or designee shall be the final authority to determine whether any property is located within the boundaries of the Northlake Overlay District. 
(c)  The Northlake Overlay District shall be divided into three tiers to guide future development and redevelopment. The tiers are based on the future land use recommendations—ten-year planning horizon as adopted in the Northlake Livable Centers Initiative/Activity Center Town Center Investment Policy Study. 
(1)  Tier 1. A high-intensity commercial area focused around the intersections of LaVista Road with Briarcliff Road, Henderson Mill Road, and Northlake Parkway, and including Northlake Mall and around the Northlake Tower Festival Center. 
(2)  Tier 2. An office park area which follows both the east and west sides of I-285 and includes Northlake Parkway and Crescent Center Boulevard, and an eastern portion of LaVista Road. 
(3)  Tier 3. An employment center area immediately north of the CSX Railroad track between Montreal Road and I-285. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1030. - Principal uses and structures. 
All principal uses of land and structures which are allowed in the Northlake Overlay District are as provided by the underlying zoning district, subject to the limitations and standards contained within this division. All properties, excluding those zoned under any "R" (Residential) designation, may be used in accordance with the uses authorized in the underlying zoning district or for the following principal uses of land and structures or a combination of these uses in a mixed-use development subject to the standards and limitations contained within this division: 
(1)  Animal hospital, veterinary clinic, pet supply store, animal grooming shop, or pet boarding only in conjunction with a veterinary clinic. 
(2)  Art gallery or art supply store. 
(3)  Automobile services as follows: 
a.  Automobile service station. 
b.  Automobile full service wash. 
c.  Minor automobile repair and maintenance. 
d.  Retail automobile parts or tire stores. 
(4)  Bank, credit union or other similar financial institution. 
(5)  Business service establishment. 
(6)  Child day care center or kindergarten. 
(7)  Communications uses as follows: 
a.  Radio or television broadcasting station. 
b.  Telephone business office. 
(8)  Community facilities as follows: Cultural facilities. 
(9)  Dwellings, multifamily, up to and including 24 units per acre, subject to the requirements of the development categories as described within section 46-1034. 
(10)  Education uses as follows: 
a.  Vocational schools. 
b.  Private elementary, middle or high school. 
c.  Specialized non-degree schools. 
(11)  Lodging uses, as follows: Bed and breakfast inn. 
(12)  Movie theater, bowling alley, or other recreational facilities where such activities are wholly enclosed within a building. 
(13)  Office uses, and similar service, business and professional office uses as follows: 
a.  Accounting, auditing or bookkeeping office. 
b.  Engineering or architectural office. 
c.  Building or construction contractor office. 
d.  Financial services office. 
e.  Insurance office. 
f.  Legal office. 
g.  Medical or dental office. 
h.  Real estate office. 
i.  Wholesale sales office. 
j.  Place of worship. 
(14)  Restaurants, as follows: Restaurant, excluding drive-through facilities. 
(15)  Retail sales as follows, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Apparel and accessories store. 
b.  Book, greeting card, or stationery store. 
c.  Camera and photographic supply store. 
d.  Computer and computer software store. 
e.  Convenience store. 
f.  Farm and garden supply store. 
g.  Florist. 
h.  Food stores, including bakeries. 
i.  Furniture, home furnishings and equipment store. 
j.  General merchandise store. 
k.  Gift, novelty, or souvenir store. 
l.  Hardware store. 
m.  Hobby, toy or game store. 
n.  Jewelry store. 
o.  Music and musical equipment store. 
p.  News dealers or newsstand. 
q.  Office supplies and office equipment store. 
r.  Pharmacy or drugstore. 
s.  Quick copy printing store. 
t.  Radio, television and consumer electronics store. 
(16)  Retail sales, building supplies and farm equipment, as follows: 
a.  Electrical supply store. 
b.  Hardware or other building materials establishments. 
c.  Paint, glass and wallpaper store. 
(17)  Services, medical and health as follows: 
a.  Health service clinic. 
b.  Medical and dental laboratories. 
c.  Offices of health service practitioners. 
d.  Pharmacy. 
(18)  Services, personal, as follows: 
a.  Barber shop, beauty shops, or similar personal service establishments. 
b.  Funeral home. 
c.  Laundry and dry cleaning establishment and pickup station. 
d.  Linen and diaper service, garment pressing, alteration and repair. 
e.  Photographic studios. 
(19)  Services, repair, as follows: 
a.  Home appliance repair and service including radio, television, and computer repair and service. 
b.  Jewelry repair service. 
c.  Radio, television or similar home appliance repair service. 
d.  Furniture upholstery and repair shop within a shopping center. 
e.  Shoe repair store. 
(20)  Shopping center. 
(21)  Taxi stands and limousine livery rental only in conjunction with hotels, motels or entertainment facilities. 
(22)  Tennis center, club and facilities. 
(23)  Utility structure necessary for the transmission or distribution of service, subject to the requirements of all relevant sections of this Code and a maximum height of 75 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.5), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (3.35.5), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-1031. - Prohibited uses. 
The following principal uses of land and structures shall be prohibited within the Northlake Overlay District: 
(1)  Storage yard for damaged, inoperable, or confiscated automobiles. 
(2)  Tire retreading or recapping. 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishments, including adult bookstores, adult video sales rental, and smoking paraphernalia. 
(4)  Adult service facility, including massage parlors not associated with medical uses. 
(5)  Go-cart concession. 
(6)  Outdoor equipment or materials storage. 
(7)  Heavy repair shop or trade shop. 
(8)  Flea markets. 
(9)  Storefront churches. 
(10)  Extended-stay motels or hotels. 
(11)  Used appliances stores. 
(12)  Title and pawn shops. 
(13)  Night clubs. 
(14)  Salvage yards/junkyards. 
(15)  Thrift stores. 
(16)  Coin-operated self-service car wash. 
(17)  Mini-warehouses. 
(18)  On-site dry cleaning facilities. 
(19)  Check cashing or payday loan office. 
(20)  Automobile sales, new or used. 
(21)  Truck or trailer sales or rental. 
(22)  Boat or recreational vehicle sales or rental. 
(23)  Freestanding commercial parking lot or deck, except as an accessory use to a principal retail or office use. 
(24)  Heliport. 
(25)  Roominghouse. 
(26)  Transitional housing or halfway house. 
(27)  Homeless shelter. 
(28)  Tattoo parlor establishments. 
(29)  Boarding or breeding kennel as a primary use. 
(30)  Taxi and limousine livery dispatch. 
(31)  Special event facility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-10-37, att. (3.35.6), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 46-1032. - Accessory uses and structures. 
The following accessory uses of land and structures shall be authorized within the Northlake Overlay District: 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any authorized use or structure, specifically including clubhouses, pools and other recreational amenities. 
(2)  Parking lots and parking garages. 
(3)  Clubhouse, including meeting room or recreation room. 
(4)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, and other recreation areas and similar amenities. 
(5)  Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 34 and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1033. - Special permits. 
The following uses and structures shall be authorized only by permits of the type indicated: 
(1)  Special administrative permit from the director of public works. 
a.  Art shows, carnival rides and special events of community interest. 
b.  Temporary outdoor social, religious, entertainment or recreation activity where the time period does not exceed 14 days' duration, adequate parking is provided on the site, and where the same lot or any portion thereof is so used for no more than one such 14-day time period within any calendar year. 
(2)  Special administrative permit from the community development director or designee. Temporary seasonal outdoor sales. 
(3)  Special exception permits from the zoning board of appeals. None. 
(4)  Special land use permit from the mayor and city council. 
a.  Drive-through facilities. 
b.  Health spa. 
c.  Hotel. 
d.  Massage establishment. 
e.  Motel. 
f.  Personal care home, congregate. 
g.  Personal care home, family. 
h.  Personal care home, group. 
i.  Personal care home, registered. 
j.  Dwellings, multifamily, over 25 units per acre. 
k.  Multi-warehouses, per the standards in section 46-1179(a) in tier 2 and tier 3 only. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.8), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (3.35.8), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-10-37, att. (3.35.8), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.8), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1034. - Development categories. 
The Northlake Overlay District shall be divided into three development categories described below as tier 1, tier 2, and tier 3. 
(1)  Tier 1: High-intensity commercial. 
a.  Purpose and goal. The purpose of tier 1 is to allow for the most intense mixed-use development. The goal is to allow for redevelopment of the oversized parking areas with new buildings, including retail, office, and residential on one lot to decrease the need for automobile trips. The desirable tier-wide development mix in this tier should be 60 percent retail, 30 percent residential and ten percent office. 
b.  Building setbacks. The following requirements shall apply to all structures in the tier 1—high intensity commercial development category of the Northlake Overlay District: 
1.  The minimum front yard setback shall be zero feet where the public right-of-way allows room for sidewalks as prescribed in section 46-1035. A maximum front yard setback of 20 feet shall be imposed where the public right-of-way does not allow the required sidewalk width. Buildings shall be permitted to be set back from the public sidewalk to allow for building stoops, front porches, balconies, canopies, or steps, a public space or park, and or outdoor dining. All ground floor uses shall have a sidewalk or paved walkway that connects the building entrances to the public sidewalk along the street. Parking shall not be permitted between the building and the public right-of-way. 
2.  The minimum interior side yard setbacks shall be zero feet. However, if the property is adjacent to a building with windows or other materials that allow for ventilation that faces the adjoining property line, the setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the property line. The side of a building facing a public street shall be permitted to be set back from the public sidewalk to allow only for building stoops, porches, balconies or steps, a public plaza or park, outdoor dining or landscaping that does not obstruct the facade of the building. All ground floor uses must have a sidewalk or other paved walkway that connects the building entrances to the public sidewalk along the street. 
3.  The minimum rear yard setbacks shall be 20 feet. 
c.  Height of buildings and structures. The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall be 15 stories and no building or structure shall exceed 180 feet in height. Parking decks and other accessory structures shall not exceed ten stories either as a separate deck or as part of an office building. 
d.  Mixed-use developments. Tier 1 mixed-use developments shall contain a minimum of two principal uses that are planned in accordance with the following provisions. Proposed mixed-use developments shall be comprised of a floor area that has a minimum of 65 percent office and/or residential components. 
e.  Density. The maximum residential density, with a special land use permit, shall be 60 dwelling units per acre. Density over 25 units per acre will require a special land use permit. No development within the tier 1 development category shall exceed a floor area ratio (FAR) of 2.5, and/or it provides additional public space or other amenities singly or in combination as provided below: 
1.  Bonus density. The maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) of a building or development in a tier 1 zone shall be increased to a floor area ratio (FAR) not to exceed a total of 4.5 in exchange for one or more of the additional amenities provided in the table below: 
          Table 3.12. Maximum Bonus Floor Area Ratio in Northlake Overlay District, Tier I 

 
(2)  Tier 2: Office park. 
a.  Purpose and goal. The purpose of this tier is to recognize the existing office, retail, and infill multifamily development in the area. The intent is to allow opportunities for residents to live close to employment and to provide accessibility to shopping areas. This development concept will thereby decrease the number of automobile trips and traffic congestion. The desirable tier-wide development mix in this tier should be 60 percent office, 30 percent residential and ten percent retail. 
b.  Building setbacks. The following requirements shall apply to all structures in the tier 2—office park development category of the Northlake Overlay District: 
1.  The minimum front yard setback shall be zero feet where the public right-of-way allows room for sidewalks as prescribed in section 46-1035. A maximum front yard setback of 30 feet shall be imposed where the public right-of-way does not allow the required sidewalk width. Buildings shall be permitted to be set back from the public sidewalk to allow for building stoops, front porches, balconies, canopies, or steps, a public space or park, and/or outdoor dining. All ground floor uses shall have a sidewalk or other paved walkway that connects the building entrances to the public sidewalk along the street. Parking shall not be permitted between the building and the public right-of-way. 
2.  Interior side yard and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The side of a building facing a public street shall be permitted to allow encroachments in the setback area for building stoops, porches, balconies or steps, a public plaza or park, outdoor dining or landscaping that does not obstruct the facade of the building. All ground floor uses must have a sidewalk or other hardscaped walkway that connects the building entrances to the public sidewalk along the street. 
c.  Height of buildings and structures. The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall be nine stories and no building or structure shall exceed 135 feet in height. Parking decks and other accessory structures shall not exceed seven stories either as a separate deck or as part of an office building. 
d.  Mixed-use developments. Tier 2 mixed-use developments shall contain a minimum of two principal uses that are planned in accordance with the following provisions. Proposed mixed-use developments shall be comprised of a floor area that that has a minimum of 65 percent office and/or residential components. 
e.  Density. The maximum density for residential uses, with a special land use permit, shall be 30 dwelling units per acre. Density over 25 units per acre will require a special land use permit. No development within the tier 2 development category shall exceed a floor area ratio (FAR) of 1.5, unless it additional public space or other amenities singly or in combination as provided below: 
1.  Bonus density. The maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) of a building or development in a Tier 2 zone shall be increased to a floor area ratio (FAR) not to exceed a total of 3.5 in exchange for one or more of the additional amenities provided in the table below: 
          Table 3.13. Maximum Bonus Floor Area Ratio in Northlake Overlay District, Tier II 

 
(3)  Tier 3: Employment center. 
a.  Purpose and goal. The purpose of this tier is to recognize and protect the existing employment base in the area. The intent is to allow light manufacturing, distribution, showroom and small supporting retail uses. The desirable tier-wide development mix in this tier should be 70 percent industrial, 20 percent retail and ten percent residential. 
b.  Building setbacks. The following requirements shall apply to all structures in the tier 3: employment center development category of the Northlake Overlay District: 
1.  Minimum front yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet where site conditions allow room for sidewalks as prescribed in section 46-1035. A maximum front yard setback of 30 feet shall be imposed where the public right-of-way does not allow the required sidewalk width. Buildings shall be permitted to be set back to allow for building stoops, front porches, balconies or steps, a public space or park, and/or outdoor dining. All ground floor uses shall have a sidewalk or other paved walkway that connects the building entrances to the public sidewalk along the street. Parking shall not be permitted between the building and the public right-of-way. 
2.  Minimum interior side yard and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The side of a building facing a public street shall be permitted to allow encroachments in the setback area for building stoops, porches, balconies, canopies or steps, a public plaza or park, outdoor dining or landscaping that does not obstruct the facade of the building. All ground floor uses must have a sidewalk or other paved walkway that connects the building entrances to the public sidewalk along the street. 
c.  Height of buildings and structures. The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall be four stories and no building or structure shall exceed 60 feet in height. 
d.  Mixed-use developments. Tier 3 mixed-use developments shall contain a minimum of two principal uses that are planned in accordance with the following provisions. Proposed mixed-use developments shall be comprised of a floor area that has a minimum of 70 percent for industrial components. 
e.  Density. The maximum density for residential uses shall be 15 development units per acre. No development within the tier 3 development category shall exceed a floor area ratio (FAR) of 1.0, unless it provides additional public space or other amenities singly or in combination as provided below: 
1.  Bonus density. The maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) of a building or development in a tier 3 zone shall be increased to a floor area ratio (FAR) not to exceed a total of 3.0 in exchange for one or more of the additional amenities provided in the table below: 
          Table 3.14. Maximum Bonus Floor Area Ratio in Northlake Overlay District, Tier III 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.9), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (3.35.9), 9-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-1035. - Sidewalks/streetscapes. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be provided on all streets and shall consist of a street furniture zone and a pedestrian zone of widths that are based on the development category and location. The street furniture zone shall consist of landscape and hardscape items. This zone shall be the location of all signage, seating, trash receptacles, bus shelters, and other site amenities. The landscape elements will vary by development category. They shall consist of trees, grasses, and ground covers. The pedestrian zone shall be paved and kept clear and unobstructed for the safe and convenient use of pedestrians. 
(b)  Sidewalks along LaVista Road in tier 1 shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, consisting of a minimum fifteen-foot-wide pedestrian zone and a minimum five-foot-wide street furniture zone. 
(c)  Sidewalks along other streets within tier 1 shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide, consisting of a minimum ten-foot-wide pedestrian zone and a minimum five-foot-wide street furniture zone. 
(d)  Sidewalks in tier 2 shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide, consisting of a minimum ten-foot-wide pedestrian zone and a minimum five-foot-wide street furniture zone. 
(e)  Sidewalks in tier 3 shall be a minimum of ten feet wide, consisting of a minimum five-foot-wide pedestrian zone and a minimum five-foot-wide street furniture zone. 
(f)  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent pedestrian sidewalk area. 
(g)  Pedestrian sidewalk areas shall be paved with either broom finished poured-in-place concrete, or pavers of brick, concrete, or stone. Other materials may be allowed with the approval of the community development director, or designee. 
(h)  Where newly constructed sidewalks abut existing adjacent sidewalks, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide safe facilitation of pedestrian traffic flow to adjacent sidewalks. A ten-foot-long taper shall be provided in cases where an existing sidewalk is a different width than the new sidewalk. Any development that disturbs existing sidewalks on an adjacent property shall replace disturbed areas to their original state and condition. 
(i)  Safe and convenient pedestrian pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each structure's entrance, including pedestrian access routes to parking decks, and through parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. All such pathways shall be concrete and have a minimum width of five feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1036. - Street furniture zone. 
(a)  The street furniture zone component of a required sidewalk shall be located immediately adjacent to the street, between the street and the pedestrian zone component of the sidewalk. All hardscape items shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines dated May 2008, (hereinafter referred to as the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines) a copy of which shall be maintained by the community development director and available for public inspection. Street furniture shall match the Northlake LaVista Road streetscape improvement project standards. 
(b)  The street furniture zone shall contain all landscape and hardscape elements that will provide for the comfort and enjoyment of pedestrians. This zone shall also serve as a transitional edge between pedestrian traffic and vehicular traffic. The street furniture zone shall include all street trees, pedestrian lights, benches, bus shelters, traffic lights, and other such elements. 
(1)  Pedestrian lights shall be located within the landscape zone spaced at a maximum distance of 60 feet on center. 
(2)  Benches, trash receptacles, and bike racks may be placed either within the street furniture zone, or in the space between the sidewalk and the building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1037. - Street trees. 
(a)  Street trees shall be planted in all street furniture zones spaced at a maximum distance of 30 feet on center at a distance of 2.5 feet behind the curb. 
(b)  New street trees must be a minimum of 3.5 inches in caliper measured six inches above the ground, shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet and shall be limbed up to a minimum of eight feet. 
(c)  Street trees shall have a minimum unpaved planting area of four feet by eight feet. Tree planting areas shall provide porous drainage systems that allow for drainage of the planting area. Tree grates are prohibited. Ground cover in accordance with section 46-1043, shall be provided and maintained for the entire planting area. 
(d)  Street tree species or planting patterns of varied species shall be consistent for an entire block length. Similar species shall be permitted to change on individual block faces only when approved by the community development director, or designee. Ground cover in accordance with section 46-1043 shall be provided and maintained for the full extent of the planting area. 
(e)  All initial plantings and plant removal other than routine maintenance or replacement shall be approved by the community development director, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.12), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1038. - Open space requirements. 
(a)  A minimum of 20 percent of the gross land area shall be provided on site as open space for each new development. 
(b)  Where feasible, open space shall be at grade, and surrounded on at least one side by buildings with active uses on the ground floor facing the space, and directly accessible from a public sidewalk and building entrance. 
(c)  Open spaces may include any combination of the following: yards, planted areas, fountains, parks, plazas, trails and paths, hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas, outdoor dining for restaurants, outdoor amenities, and similar features which are located on private property and accessible to the general public; and natural stream buffers may be counted toward the 20-percent public space requirement. 
(d)  Parking lots and parking lot landscaping, as required by sections 46-1041(11) and 46-1043(6), and sidewalks and streetscaping in the right-of-way, as required by section 46-1035, shall not be counted towards the open space requirement. 
(e)  All open space including buffers, setbacks, sidewalk clear zones, sidewalk zones and open spaces shall be fully constructed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal structure. 
(f)  Each applicant shall present as a part of the application for a building permit within the Northlake Overlay District a legal mechanism under which all land to be used for open space purposes shall be maintained and protected. Such legal mechanism may include deed restrictions, property owners' associations, common areas held in common ownership or control, maintenance easements, or other legal mechanisms, provided that said legal mechanism shall be approved by the city attorney as ensuring each of the following mandatory requirements: 
(1)  That all subsequent property owners within said Northlake Overlay District be placed on notice of this development restriction through the deed records of the county superior court; 
(2)  That all open space held in common will be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the county; 
(3)  That a legal mechanism exists for notice of deficiencies in maintenance of the open space held in common, correction of these deficiencies, and assessment and liens against the properties for the cost of the correction of these deficiencies by a third party or the city; 
(4)  When an applicant chooses to utilize a property owners' association in order to comply with the requirements of subsection (f) of this section, the applicant, in addition to meeting all of said requirements, shall provide for all of the following: 
a.  Mandatory and automatic membership in the property owners' association as a requirement of property ownership; 
b.  A fair and uniform method of assessment for dues, maintenance and related costs; 
c.  Where appropriate, party wall maintenance and restoration in the event of damage or destruction; and 
d.  Continued maintenance of public space held in common and liability through the use of liens or other means in the case of default. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.13), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.13), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1039. - Maintenance of common land. 
Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of all open spaces, the method of and responsibility for maintenance, taxes and insurance, compulsory membership and assessment provisions, and shall be incorporated into legal instruments sufficient to ensure that the public space requirements of section 46-1038 are maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.14), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.14), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1040. - Transitional buffer zone and transitional height requirements. 
(a)  Where a lot on the external boundary of the Northlake Overlay District adjoins the boundary of any property outside the district that is zoned for any R, RM, MHP, or TND zoning classification, a transitional buffer of not less than 30 feet in width, in addition to the required setbacks, shall be provided and maintained in a natural state or so as to maintain an effective visual screen. Said transitional buffer zone shall not be paved or otherwise covered with impervious surfaces and shall not be used for parking, loading, storage or any other use, except that portions of the transitional buffer zone may be utilized for installation of utilities when necessitated by the development, and when the applicant shows that the utilities cannot be located outside of the transitional buffer zone. Stormwater detention ponds shall not be located within the transitional buffer zones. No trees, other than dead or diseased trees, shall be removed from said transitional buffer zone, but additional trees, shrubs and plant material may be added to the transitional buffer zone to provide an effective visual screen. 
(b)  Where a lot on the external boundary of the Northlake Overlay District adjoins the boundary of any property outside the district that is zoned for any residential zoning classification, a transitional height plane as described herein shall apply. No portion of any structure within the Northlake Overlay District shall exceed such transitional height plane. The transitional height plane shall be determined by beginning 45 feet above the property line between the district and the adjacent property outside the district, then extending parallel to the ground toward the interior of the district 30 feet over the transitional buffer zone and then at an upward angle of 45 degrees over the Northlake Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.15), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1041. - Required parking. 
In order to promote a pedestrian-oriented community, required parking may be provided through a combination of off-street or shared parking, provided that all required parking is located within 700 feet of the principal entrance of the building which it is intended to serve. In this pedestrian-oriented district, parking shall be encouraged in the rear of proposed structures, in parking decks and internal to new developments. The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be as follows: 
(1)  Shopping centers, retail uses, personal service uses, and other commercial and general business uses, including food stores. Minimum of four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Office and clinic uses. Minimum of three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  Hotel and motel uses. Minimum of one space per room and one space per employee based on the largest shift. 
(4)  Multifamily residential uses. Minimum of one space per unit for the first bedroom, plus one-half space per additional bedroom. 
(5)  Restaurant uses. Minimum of five spaces per 1,000 square feet. 
(6)  Shared parking. Shared parking is encouraged and may result in permitted reductions of off-street parking requirements. Parking facilities within a lot may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate parking facilities, and if these uses generate parking demands primarily when the remaining uses are not in operation, so that the above stated off-street parking requirements for each use are met during said use's operational hours. Applicants shall make an application to the community development director or designee for authorization for shared parking. Applicants shall include proof of a written formal shared-parking agreement between all applicants prior to consideration. Shared parking lots shall be fully implemented prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development. A majority of shared spaces must lie within 700 feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which the parking is provided. A minimum of 50 percent of the minimum parking requirement must be met on-site before qualifying for shared parking. Required parking for residential units shall be prohibited from being shared. 
(7)  Residential parking. Required residential parking shall be segregated from parking for all other uses with the exception of additional parking provided for live-work single-family detached units. 
(8)  Bicycle parking. All nonresidential developments which provide automobile parking facilities shall provide bicycle parking facilities in parking structures, parking lots or the landscape zone of the sidewalk at a ratio of one bicycle parking space for every 20 automobile spaces. Multifamily residential developments shall provide bicycle parking facilities at a ratio of at least one bicycle parking space for every five multifamily units. No nonresidential development shall have fewer than three bicycle parking spaces nor be required to exceed a maximum of 50 bicycle parking spaces. 
(9)  Location. All off-street parking including surface lots and parking decks shall be located behind or beside buildings. Off-street parking shall be screened from view from any public street using buildings and/or landscaping. 
(10)  Screening. Any portion of a parking deck that is visible from a public street shall be screened from public view with ground floor retail, and any upper stories shall have a facade constructed with materials permitted in the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines and designed to resemble office or residential buildings with fenestration. 
(11)  Duration of parking. Surface parking provided to the side of any building along a public street shall be designated for short-term (no longer than two hours) parking and must be buffered from the public street and sidewalk with a landscape strip no less than six feet in width containing a minimum of 90 percent living shrubs, ground cover, sod and/or annual or perennial flowering plants the landscape strip surface area. 
(12)  Wheel stops, bumpers. Wheel stops or bumpers shall be placed at the head of all parking spaces that abut a landscape strip or sidewalk. 
(13)  Landscaping. See section 46-1043(6) for landscaping requirements for parking lots and parking structures. 
(14)  Alternate locations. If required automobile parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby property within the overlay district, provided a majority of such spaces lie within 700 feet of the main entrance to the principal structure for which the parking is provided. 
(15)  On-street parking. On-street parking spaces provided by a development shall not be permitted to be counted toward the minimum parking requirements for the respective development. 
(16)  Restrictions. No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing, or long-term storage of any vehicles or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.16), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.16), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1042. - Development and architectural controls. 
The architectural style within the Northlake Overlay District shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines and shall comply with the additional following architectural design controls: 
(1)  All building facades visible from the public street shall consist of brick, stone, or cement stucco or other equivalents subject to review and approval by the community development director or designee. 
(2)  Architectural accents, where utilized, shall consist of non-reflective glass, glass block, natural stone, precast concrete, brick, terra cotta, stucco, wood, cast stone, cast-iron, or decorative architectural grade steel or other equivalents subject to review and approval by the community development director or designee. 
(3)  Building facades, where visible from a public street, shall not consist of aluminum, metal, corrugated steel, vinyl siding, plywood, pressed wood, synthetic stucco, or concrete block. 
(4)  A minimum of 30 percent of the facade area must be window area. All windows are to be transparent. In addition, in buildings which contain ground level retail uses, a minimum of 45 percent of the width of the front facade of the building at the ground level shall consist of window area. 
(5)  Burglar bars and steel roll-down doors or curtains shall not be visible from the public street. 
(6)  Service bays for automobile service and repair uses shall be designed so that the openings of service bays are not visible from a public street. 
(7)  Chainlink fences and metal or temporary awnings are not permitted within the Northlake Overlay District. 
(8)  Dumpsters shall not be visible from the public street and shall be fenced or screened so as not to be visible from any adjoining residential district or any residential unit in a mixed-use building. 
(9)  Fabric and canvas awnings and all other building materials must be of durable quality and shall be compatible with materials used in adjoining buildings. 
(10)  Each building shall be designed such that the main entrance and front facade faces the public street. If a building fronts more than one public street, the main entrance and front facade shall face the primary street. 
(11)  Mansard roofs are prohibited. 
(12)  Reflective roof finishes are permitted only on roofs sloped less than one inch per foot. 
(13)  All parking and service areas shall be screened from view from the street with buildings, landscaping, walls or decorative fencing. 
(14)  Ground floor commercial and retail uses shall have entrances at grade opening directly onto the public sidewalk or a public space adjacent to the public sidewalk. 
(15)  Pedestrian access shall be provided from parking areas to the public sidewalk either through the ground floor of the building or via sidewalks between buildings. 
(16)  Ground floor commercial and retail uses shall have a canopy not less than six feet wide across the entire length of ground floor entrances and fenestration for that use. Where multiple ground floor commercial and retail uses exist in the same building along the same facade, the canopies shall be continuous between them. Canopies over retail and commercial entrances and/or windows shall be mounted at a single consistent height for each building. 
(17)  Any linear lighting around windows, rooflines, doors, signs or building structures is prohibited. Linear lighting may include, but is not limited to neon tubes, rope lighting, and other similar lighting devices. Linear lighting devices that form letters or words shall be considered signs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.17), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.17), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1043. - Landscape buffer requirements. 
Where the community development director, or designee, deems it necessary and appropriate, there shall be the following landscape buffer requirements between buildings, structures, parking areas, etc. and the public sidewalk: 
(1)  Landscape strips. Landscape strips not less than five feet in width shall be provided along all side and rear property lines and on both sides of all public streets. The landscape strip in the front yard shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and shall be planted with plant materials identified in the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines. Continuous landscaped strips shall be constructed along public rights-of-way except at points of ingress or egress into the facility. 
(2)  Ground cover. Ground cover shall also be provided in accordance with the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines in order to protect tree roots and to prevent erosion. Ground cover shall consist of evergreen shrubs or ground cover plant material mulched with pine bark mulch, or other similar landscaping material. 
(3)  New trees. Newly planted trees shall conform to the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines. 
(4)  Location of trees. No tree shall be planted closer than 2.5 feet from the street or sidewalk, and no closer than eight feet from a fire hydrant, sign post, streetlight standard, utility pole, or similar structure. 
(5)  Plant materials along streets. Landscaping plant materials required to be provided along streets to meet the minimum requirements of this overlay division shall be selected from the following list of species in the minimum sizes shown. Plant materials provided in locations other than along streets, and plant materials provided along streets in excess of those required to meet this overlay division may be any species appropriate to the design and location subject to the approval of the plan reviewer. 
a.  Flowering shrubs. 
1.  Abelia X Grandiflora, three-gallon; 
2.  Jasminum Nudiflorum, three-gallon; 
3.  Coreopsis Auriculata, one-gallon; 
4.  Narcissus. 
b.  Ground cover. 
1.  Liriope Muscari, one-gallon; 
2.  Rubus Caleinoides, one-gallon. 
c.  Trees along LaVista Road. 
1.  Cercis Canadensis, two-inch caliper; 
2.  Chionanthus Virginicus, 1½-inch caliper; 
3.  Hemerocallis Species, one-gallon; 
4.  Pranus Okame, 1½-inch caliper; 
5.  Quercus Shumardii, 3½-inch caliper; 
6.  Lagerstroemia Indica, ten feet high. 
d.  Trees along remaining streets. 
1.  Any tree listed in subsection (5)c of this section; 
2.  Crape myrtle, standard trunk; 
3.  October Glory red maple; 
4.  Sunset maple; 
5.  Nuttal oak (Quercus Nattalli); 
6.  Shumard oak (Quercus Shumardii); 
7.  Willow oak; 
8.  Zelkova Serrata; 
9.  Ginkgo (Ginkgo Biloba); 
10.  Trident maple (Acer Buergeranum); 
11.  Allee Laechark elm (Ulmus Parvifolia Emer II). 
(6)  Parking lot landscaping requirements. All parking lots within the Northlake Overlay District shall be landscaped in accordance with all the requirements of section 46-1337 and shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
a.  Each such parking lot shall include a landscaped area that is a minimum of ten percent of the total lot area of the interior of the parking lot in addition to the landscaping required elsewhere in this section and in article VI of this chapter. 
b.  A minimum of one tree per six parking spaces shall be included in the required landscaped areas. For the purpose of satisfying this requirement, existing trees that are three inches or more in caliper as measured at a height of six inches above the ground shall be considered to be equivalent to one or more newly planted trees on the basis of one tree for each three inches of caliper. 
c.  Where the landscaped area is in the interior of a parking lot, the landscaped area shall be a minimum of six feet in width and serve as a landscaped median between parking bays. The area of the landscaped median will be determined by the parking configuration. In no case will the landscaped area be less than 60 square feet. 
d.  All landscaped areas shall be properly maintained in accordance with approved landscape plans. In the event that a tree or any plant material dies, it shall be replaced within 90 days of such occurrence, so as to meet all requirements of this section and to allow for planting in the appropriate planting season. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.18), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1044. - Multimodal access plans required. 
Each new application for a development permit within the Northlake Overlay District shall be accompanied by a multimodal access plan prepared at a scale not greater than one inch equals 100 feet. The multimodal access plan shall cover the full extent of the proposed development along with public rights-of-way of adjoining streets and any other property lying between the subject property and the nearest public streets on all sides. The purpose of the multimodal access plan is to demonstrate a unified plan of continuous access to, and between, all buildings in the proposed development and adjacent properties. Connections to available transportation modes, such as driveways, sidewalks, and bike paths shall be shown along adjacent streets and those entering adjoining properties. Safe and convenient pedestrian ways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,250 feet (straight-line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may safely travel from such station or stop to the subject property, and the access plan shall show how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle access shall be provided to the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.19), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1045. - Sign regulations. 
All lots in the Northlake Overlay District shall comply with all requirements of chapter 34 and all of the following additional requirements: 
(1)  All signs shall be designed so as to be compatible with the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines. Such sign design is to be characteristic of the Northlake Overlay District area; 
(2)  All freestanding signs shall be ground-mounted monument-style signs with a base and framework made of brick or stone. Pole-mounted signs are prohibited; 
(3)  Each lot shall have no more than one ground-mounted sign; 
(4)  The sign area of ground signs shall not exceed 32 square feet, unless the lot contains a shopping center, in which case ground signs are limited to 64 square feet; 
(5)  Ground-mounted signs shall not exceed a height of six feet, unless the lot contains a shopping center, in which case ground signs shall not exceed a height of 15 feet; 
(6)  Each separate storefront may have a maximum of two wall signs, each of which shall not exceed an area of ten percent of the area of the facade of the ground floor of the building or 75 square feet, whichever is less. If the storefront is more than 200 feet from the public right-of-way as measured from the front of the lot, each separate storefront may have a maximum of two wall signs, each of which shall not exceed an area of ten percent of the area of the facade of the ground floor of the building or 150 square feet, whichever is less; 
(7)  The primary wall sign shall be located on the primary building facade and within 15 feet of the main entrance. A second wall sign can be located at the side or rear building facade, including facing I-285; 
(8)  Window signs are prohibited; 
(9)  Banners are prohibited; 
(10)  Billboards are prohibited; 
(11)  Wall-mounted signs shall be channel cut letters applied directly to the building facade. Flashing, animated, marquee, sound emitting, fluorescent, rotating or otherwise moving signs are prohibited; and 
(12)  Sign shape and lettering shall be limited as follows: 
a.  Signs with more than two faces are prohibited; 
b.  Sign facing shall be flat in profile and shall not exceed a thickness of eight inches; 
c.  Sign faces shall be parallel. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.20), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1046. - Shared parking. 
Shared parking is encouraged and may be authorized by the community development director or designee. Applicants may make application to the community development director or designee for authorization for a special exception for shared parking. Said applications shall be considered and decided by the community development director or designee pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in section 46-1667(3) and (4). 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.21), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1047. - Streets, curb cuts, and driveways. 
(a)  Public and private streets shall comply with the requirements of public streets found in chapter 22 and other applicable sections of this Code. 
(b)  All new streets must connect to at least two public streets. 
(c)  When blocks are subdivided by new streets, the maximum length of resulting new blocks shall be 300 linear feet. Along the portion of LaVista Road within the Northlake Overlay District, the maximum block length shall be 700 linear feet. 
(d)  All curb cuts shall comply with the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines and all other applicable requirements of this Code and state law. 
(e)  The maximum curb radius at any intersection or curb cut shall be 20 feet. 
(f)  All curb cuts shall be a maximum of 24 feet wide. 
(g)  Common or joint driveways are encouraged and may be authorized by the community development director or designee. Common or joint driveways on a state right-of-way may be allowed if approved in writing by the state department of transportation. 
(h)  Each driveway shall be perpendicular to the street to which it connects. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.22), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1048. - Townhouse and multifamily development standards. 
(a)  Mechanical equipment and other building service items may not be located within the setback area between the public sidewalk and building facade. 
(b)  Each individual townhouse shall have a front entrance with either a front porch or a front stoop between the front facade and the sidewalk. 
(c)  The front entrance of each townhouse unit may be above the average grade of the sidewalk directly in front of it to a maximum of three feet above grade. 
(d)  All parking shall be hidden behind or within individual units. Access to parking shall be permitted only via an alley or private drive located behind the units. Garages may not face the public street. 
(e)  The maximum height of townhouses shall be the lesser of three stories or 45 feet. 
(f)  Multifamily ground floor residential units that face the street shall have entrances with a stoop or porch between the sidewalk and the building facade. A sidewalk shall connect all ground floor entrances to the public sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.23), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1049. - Underground utilities. 
All utilities except for major electric transmission lines and sub-stations are required to be placed underground except where the planning director or designee determines that underground utilities are not feasible due to pre-existing physical conditions, such as conflicting underground structures or utilities, shallow rock, high water table, or other similar geologic or hydrologic conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.24), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1050. - Pedestrian lights. 
Pedestrian lights are required for all public streets and shall be consistent with the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.25), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1051. - Inter-parcel access. 
To the maximum extent possible, sidewalks and parking lots serving adjacent lots shall be interconnected to provide continuous driveway connections and pedestrian connections between adjoining lots and streets, except that this requirement shall not apply to lots zoned for single-family or two-family/duplex residential units. Where necessary, the city may require that access easements be provided to ensure continuous access and egress routes connecting commercial, office and multifamily lots. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.26), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1052. - Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines. 
The community development director, or designee, is authorized to create, administer, and amend the Northlake Overlay Design Guidelines dated May 2008. These design guidelines provide acceptable architectural design controls, landscaping, detail drawings, signage, fencing, lighting, street and site furniture and grating. These design guidelines shall be used to promote proper design criteria for the overlay district and shall guide the community development director, or designee, in deciding whether a proposed design complies with the requirements of this overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.24), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.27), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1053. - Plans required; certificates of compliance. 
(a)  Plans required. Prior to the issuance of any land-disturbance permit, building permit, or sign permit, the applicant shall submit to the community development director or designee a conceptual design package and a final design package. The final design package must include full architectural and landscape architectural plans and specifications. The submitted plans must include a site plan, architectural elevations and sections, renderings depicting the building design including elevations and architectural details of proposed buildings, exterior materials and colors, and plans and elevations of all hardscape, landscape and signs, all of which shall demonstrate that the proposed design is in compliance with all the requirements of this Northlake Overlay District and the underlying zoning classification. 
(b)  Fees. Plans shall be accompanied by an application and payment of a fee in an amount determined by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Review. The director of community development or designee shall review each application for compliance with all requirements of the Northlake Overlay District and the underlying zoning classification. Where the community development director or designee determines that said plans comply with the requirements of the Northlake Overlay District a certificate of compliance shall be issued in the form of the director or the director's designee signing the plans and drawings after which the applicant shall then apply for land-disturbance, building or signs permits. Where the director or his designee determines that said plans do not comply with the requirements of this division, then the director or his designee shall notify the applicant in writing stating the manner in which said applicant fails to comply with such requirements. All applications shall be considered and decided by the community development director or his designee within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. Any appeal of the community development director's decision in this regard shall be to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to section 46-1632. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.25), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.28), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1054. - Conceptual plan package review. 
(a)  The conceptual plan package shall be composed of the following: 
(1)  A narrative addressing the proposed development explaining how it meets the purpose, intent, and standards of this division. The narrative shall include a tabulation of the approximate number of acres in each land use, the approximate number of dwelling units by type, the approximate gross residential density, the approximate commercial density, the approximate public space acreage, the anticipated number, type and size of recreational facilities and other public amenities, and the legal mechanism for protecting and maintaining public space, as required in section 46-1038(a); 
(2)  A site location map showing the proposed development, abutting property, the relationship of the proposed development to surrounding and existing development, and transitional buffer zones, if required; and 
(3)  A multimodal access plan meeting the requirements of section 46-1044. 
(b)  The plan to be submitted in the conceptual plan package shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Six copies of a plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the state, presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches, and one 8.5-inch by 11-inch reduction of the plan. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. Such plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Boundaries of the entire property proposed to be included in the development, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines; 
b.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plat and on all supporting graphics; 
c.  Location and approximate dimensions in length and width, for landscape strips and required transitional buffers, if any; 
d.  Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of five feet and a statement indicating whether it is an air survey or field run; 
e.  Approximate delineation of any floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, United States Geological Survey, the county, or the city; 
f.  The delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands as defined by section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act; 
g.  Approximate delineation of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will impact it; 
h.  A delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished; 
i.  General location, in conceptual form, of proposed uses, lots, buildings, building types and building entrances; 
j.  Height and setback of all buildings and structures; 
k.  Approximate areas and development density for each type of proposed use; 
l.  Location, size and number of all on-street and off-street parking spaces, including a shared parking analysis, if shared parking is proposed; 
m.  Identification of site access points and layout, width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets; 
n.  Conceptual plans for drainage with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed; 
o.  Development density and lot sizes for each type of use; 
p.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control; 
q.  Identification of site access points and layout, width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets; 
r.  Location of proposed sidewalks and bicycle facilities trails recreation areas, parks, and other public or community uses, facilities, or structures on the site; 
s.  Conceptual layout of utilities and location of all existing or proposed utility casements having a width of 25 feet or more; 
t.  Standard details of signs, sidewalks, streetlights, driveways, medians, curbs and gutters, landscaped areas, fencing, street furniture, bicycle lanes, streets, alleys, and other public improvements demonstrating compliance with the design guidelines for the Northlake Overlay District; and 
u.  Seal and signature of professional preparing the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.26), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.29), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1055. - The final design package. 
Upon receiving comments on the conceptual design package, the applicant must submit the final design package for review and approval. The final design package must contain all plans, elevations, sections and specifications necessary for obtaining development and building permits. The applicant may submit the final design package simultaneously with the submission for permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.35.27), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.35.30), 6-28-2017) 
Secs. 46-1056—46-1065. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR THE NORTHLAKE COMMERCIAL CENTER COMPATIBLE USE OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-1066. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  In order to protect the interests of property owners in the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District and to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, it is essential that development within the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District be of a consistently high design character. This goal is best fulfilled by the establishment of orderly and consistent standards for the design, construction and maintenance of public and private improvements. Following consistent design guidelines promotes the identity and integrity of this important activity center and advances the public purpose of securing a high quality of life and promoting the economic health of the city. 
(b)  The mayor and city council has established the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District and adopted these design guidelines by reference as minimum standards to govern the overlay area. It is thereby declared to be a public purpose to administer and enforce the following minimum design guidelines and development standards for all new development within the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District. 
(c)  These design guidelines are intended to augment and enhance chapter 14, this chapter, and other regulations of this Code, which shall remain in full force and effect within the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District. 
(d)  These design guidelines shall be administered by the city community development department. Applicants for development permits are encouraged to schedule a preapplication conference with the community development department in order to ensure full understanding and compliance with these design guidelines. Wherever there are conflicts between these design guidelines and other laws and ordinances of the city, these guidelines shall have precedence. Interpretations, disputes, and appeals with respect to the interpretation and application of these design guidelines by the city community development department shall be resolved by the city board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (art. 3, div. 35, att.), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1067. - Design guidelines. 
(a)  Streets. Public and private streets shall meet all the requirements for public streets in chapter 38, and the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District. The design requirements for all streets and sidewalks shall be as required in sections 46-1035 and 46-1047 of the Northlake Overlay District ordinance. The following exceptions and enhancements shall be incorporated where deemed necessary. The width of travel lanes may be reduced to 11 feet on all private streets except alleys and except on all public streets that are designated by the community development department as truck routes. The width and design of alleys shall be as required in chapter 22. 
(1)  The design of streets within the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District shall provide for the continuous and interconnected travel of automobiles, transit buses, bicycles, and pedestrians between points of origin and destination within the district, and shall provide for maximum continuity with streets, transit routes, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, trails, paths, and greenways that enter and leave the overlay district from surrounding areas. 
(2)  Exhibits 1 and 2, along with table 1, indicate the arrangement, location, and width of the required elements of street design within the overlay district. All streets except alleys shall be paved to county or city specifications. Right-of-way would be increased on state and federal routes or truck routes where 12-foot-wide lanes are required. 
Table 1. Dimensions for Elements of Street Design 

 
Exhibit 1. Boulevards, Avenues, and Major Collector Streets 

Exhibit 2. Minor Collector Streets and Local Streets 

(b)  Medians. Raised medians with curb and gutter shall be required where indicated in table 1. Raised medians shall be designed to provide for safe and convenient crossings for persons with disabilities and shall provide refuge for pedestrians at crosswalks, as shown in exhibit 3. Raised medians shall be landscaped with trees, shrubbery, landscaping, and other approved ground cover materials as described in exhibit 3 and the plant list contained in the appendix in section 10-1069 unless otherwise approved by the community development director. Shrubbery and ground cover planted in medians within 30 feet of the nose of the median shall not exceed 18 inches in height. 
Exhibit 3. Medians 

(c)  On-street parking. On-street parking shall be provided on street types as indicated in table 1 and in exhibits 1 and 2. On-street parking stalls shall be demarcated with painted boundaries not less than three inches in width and shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet in length. 
(d)  Outdoor lighting. 
(1)  The following standards apply to all properties within the Northlake Overlay District, excluding those with frontage along LaVista Road. In such areas The LaVista Road sidewalk and streetscape plan dated December 18, 2006, shall govern. Pedestrian lights shall be provided where required using fixtures specified in table 2. In addition, all streets and parking lots shall have lighting designed to provide adequate lighting levels for pedestrians and bicyclists as well as for automobiles. Street lighting fixtures shall be located as shown in exhibits 1, 2 and 3 and shall meet the specifications indicated in table 2 and exhibit 4. Pedestrian lighting within rights-of-way shall be mounted no higher than 15 feet above the grade of the adjacent sidewalk. 
Exhibit 4. Outdoor Lighting 

(2)  Parking lot lighting shall be as shown in exhibit 4 and shall meet the specifications indicated in table 2. 
Table 2. Outdoor Lighting Specifications 

 
(3)  Light levels of 1.5 footcandles are recommended for parking areas and four footcandles at vehicular drives, entrances, and pedestrian and bicycle ways. 
(4)  All exterior lighting shall be located and designed with cut-offs to minimize glare on adjacent occupied properties. 
(5)  Ground-mounted floodlights shall be screened with planting or other means so that the light source is not visible. 
(6)  The use of flashing, rotating, or oscillating lighting is prohibited in any manner that may be visible from the exterior of buildings. 
(7)  After-hours security lighting shall equal at least 25 percent of the normal parking lot lighting level for security. 
(e)  Street furniture. The following standards apply to all properties within the Northlake Overlay District, excluding those with frontage along LaVista Road. In such areas the LaVista Road sidewalk and streetscape plan dated December 18, 2006, shall govern. Sidewalks, plazas, parks, trails, and other public spaces may contain outdoor furniture such as benches, tables, trash receptacles, or other similar appurtenances. Street furniture shall be designed to be comfortable, resist damage and vandalism and be easy to maintain. Table 3 and exhibit 5 provide specifications of acceptable street furniture. The street furniture types recommended below may be substituted subject to review and approval by the city community development department. 
Table 3. Street Furniture 

 
Exhibit 5. Street Furniture 

(f)  Transit stops. MARTA bus service is provided on certain streets within the overlay district. These bus stops shall be located within public rights-of-way as determined by MARTA. Subject to agreement of MARTA, bus stops may also be located on private property. Transit stops shall provide adequate, lighted and landscaped hard surface areas for waiting patrons. All transit stops shall include at least 40 square feet of surface paved in concrete and be accessed by concrete sidewalks along streets and connected to building entrances as provided in subsection (h) of this section of these guidelines. Transit stops anticipated to serve more than an average of ten passengers per weekday shall include shelters designed as shown in Exhibit 6. Trash receptacles are required at all transit stops. 
Exhibit 6. Transit Shelters 

(g)  Bicycle lanes and bicycle racks. Paved bicycle lanes shall be provided adjacent to both sides of streets, adjacent to their paved travel lanes as indicated in table 1 and exhibits 1 and 2. Bicycle lanes shall be not less than five feet in width with signs and pavement markings as required by the latest version of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Off-street bicycle paths shall be paved not less than eight feet in width and shall be designed with profile not to exceed a 4.9 percent grade or else provide approved handrails for use by handicapped persons. Trail cross-slopes shall not exceed two percent. Buildings that require more than 100 parking spaces shall provide bike racks with at least one bicycle parking stall per 100 vehicular parking spaces. Bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to the ground or a permanent structure and provide outdoor lighting. 
(h)  Sidewalks and pedestrian ways. The Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District shall be designed to minimize the need for vehicular transportation and to promote pedestrian and bicycle circulation throughout the overlay district. The construction of continuous sidewalks along all streets and off-street pedestrian ways between all building entrances, between adjacent parking lots where shared parking is allowed, and connecting streets with adjacent parking lots, transit stops and building entrances is required throughout the overlay district. See exhibits 1 and 2 showing sidewalks along streets. See exhibit 7 for an illustration of off-street pedestrian ways linking parking lots and building entrances. Sidewalks are also encouraged within trails, greenways, and other outdoor recreational areas. 
(1)  Sidewalks in the overlay district shall be as required in the Northlake Overlay District Ordinance and constructed of four-inch-thick poured-in-place concrete. Minimum slope for all sidewalks shall be two percent. Alternatively, sidewalks may be constructed with brick, stone, or similar durable payer materials to add aesthetic interest and visibility, especially at building entrances, in plazas, in pedestrian crosswalks and at other pedestrian intersections with vehicular routes. Asphalt is not an acceptable paving material for sidewalks or pedestrian ways. 
(2)  To the extent feasible, sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall be aligned vertically and horizontally to minimize the impact on existing topography and vegetation while forming a continuous pedestrian system. Sidewalks and pedestrian ways that join at property lines or with existing sidewalks shall match the elevation, alignment and cross slope of the abutting sidewalks to form a safe, smooth, and continuous sidewalk system. 
(i)  Crosswalks. All crosswalks and other intersecting points between the pedestrian and vehicular traffic systems shall be clearly marked as shown in exhibit 7. The use of approved brick, concrete, or stone paving materials to identify crosswalk areas is encouraged. Crosswalks shall be designed to meet the city's standards of use for disabled persons. Crosswalks for median-divided streets shall provide for barrier-free passage and refuge areas as illustrated in exhibit 3. Crosswalks shall be accompanied by pedestrian signals where required by the county or the city and in conformity with the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Exhibit 7. Crosswalk Demarcation 

(j)  On-street parking. On-street parking is an efficient manner to provide convenient store-front parking and residential parking on minor streets in order to reduce the need for large surface parking lots. See exhibits 1 and 2. An on-street parking space along the street frontage of an adjacent parcel shall not be counted with off-street and shared parking to meet parking requirements of this chapter when such parking space is within 700 feet of a building entrance for which the parking space is required. On-street parking spaces shall be safely accessed from the travel lanes of the adjoining street, paved to the specifications of public streets and demarcated with painted lines not less than three inches in width. Parallel parking spaces shall be not less than nine feet wide and not less than 20 feet in length. The city shall have sole authority to determine time limits, metering, and signage of on-street parking spaces on public streets within the overlay district. 
(k)  Off-street parking lots. Off-street parking lots shall be provided where there is not enough on-street parking available to satisfy the minimum parking requirements of this chapter and the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District. Where possible, off-street parking lots shall be designed with interconnecting driveways and parking areas to encourage shared use with adjacent parcels. Joint access driveways and continuous access drives behind or between multiple parcels is encouraged to provide continuous inter-parcel access and lessen the need to re-enter public streets to make short trips. The satisfaction of minimum parking requirements with shared parking shall be subject to approval by the city community development director based on a shared parking analysis performed to the standards of the institute for transportation engineers. 
(1)  Off-street parking lots shall be designed to minimize the view of parking from adjacent streets and sidewalks. No more than 30 percent of the required parking spaces for a parcel shall be located in front yards. Off-street parking lots shall be separated from abutting streets by landscape strips and sidewalks as illustrated in exhibits 1 and 2. Parking lots shall be separated from parking lots on adjacent parcels by landscape strips not less than ten feet in width, planted with shrubbery, trees, and ground cover. Landscape strips may be broken by perpendicular access drives and pedestrian walkways or sidewalks. Plant materials shall be selected from the approved plant list in the appendix unless otherwise approved by the planning director. 
(2)  Off-street parking lots shall be designed to provide for safe and continuous passage of pedestrians between parking bays and building entrances, and between adjacent parking areas and buildings. Landscape strips at the perimeter of off-street parking lots shall provide for safe and convenient crossings by vehicles and pedestrians as shown in exhibit 8. Pedestrian pathways in parking lots and pedestrian ways that cross vehicular aisles in parking lots shall be appropriately demarcated as shown in exhibit 8. 
Exhibit 8. Off-Street Parking Lots 

(l)  Landscaping. Planting design should reflect and enhance the natural surroundings of each site as well as the design objectives of the building. Existing trees and native ground cover should be preserved wherever possible and integrated into the overall landscape design. Existing plant materials that are to be retained shall be clearly designated on the landscape plans and their root zones and tree canopies shall be adequately protected from damage or destruction during construction using suitable barricades or fencing. Newly planted trees, shrubs and ground cover materials used in landscaped areas shall be selected from the approved plant list in the appendix unless otherwise approved by the planning director. 
(1)  Plant materials shall be of a size, species and variety specified in the approved plant list in the appendix unless otherwise approved by the community development director. Street trees must be a minimum of 3.5-inch caliper as measured at six inches aboveground and help to articulate the pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems, except for perpendicular crossings of driveways and utility easements. Street trees shall be planted with a spacing not to exceed 30 feet. Street trees shall not be placed closer than eight feet from a building, driveway, light standard, sign standard, post, fire hydrant, or other permanent structure. 
(2)  Evergreen ground cover planting shall be used on all slopes steeper than 2.5 to one to aid in erosion control. 
(3)  Landscape planting and irrigation plans must be prepared by a landscape architect registered in the state for each application for a land-disturbance permit. 
(4)  Transitional buffer zone. Where the transitional buffer zone is well vegetated and provides an adequate visual screen at eye level, it shall be undisturbed. Otherwise, the transitional buffer zone shall be either planted with double staggered rows of approved evergreen trees and shrubbery to form a dense visual screen or the existing vegetation shall be enhanced with native landscaping and ground cover adequate to provide an effective visual screen at eye level from adjacent properties. However, transitional buffer zones may be interrupted where necessary for perpendicular crossings of streets, fences, driveways utilities, and trails, bikeways or pedestrian ways. 
(5)  Parking lot landscaping. The total length of any parking area facing a street shall be separated from the street by landscaping, including evergreen shrubbery at least 18 inches in height. Off-street parking lots shall be designed to maximize coverage by shade trees. Shade trees in parking lots shall be a minimum of 2.5-inch caliper as measured at six inches aboveground. Off-street parking areas shall provide landscape islands and perimeter landscape strips that provide a cumulative total of at least one shade tree per six parking spaces. Each shade tree shall be planted in a planting area at least eight feet wide. The planting area for a tree shall consist of permeable and well-drained soils with suitable ground cover that provides a minimum of 100 square feet for the roots of each large tree and 50 square feet for the roots of each small tree. Landscape materials suitable for parking areas shall be selected from the approved plant list in the appendix unless otherwise approved by the community development director. 
(6)  Irrigation. 
a.  All newly planted landscape areas (including parking lot islands) shall be irrigated by a fully automatic, commercial, underground irrigation system in according with the following standards: 
1.  All irrigation systems shall be provided with backflow preventers approved by the county. Such devices shall be located or screened so that they are not visible or accessible to the public from adjacent sidewalks, streets, alleys, or parking lots. 
2.  Spray heads shall be located to provide 100 percent, overlapping coverage. Overspray onto sidewalks and other paved areas should be minimized. 
3.  Control boxes and panels shall be located inside buildings or where they will not be visible or subject to vandalism. 
4.  All main and lateral lines shall be commercial grade PVC pipe. 
b.  Irrigation systems are not required in undisturbed buffers or in areas where they would disrupt existing native vegetation. 
(m)  Signage and street graphics. 
(1)  Purpose. The following standards are intended to advance the governmental purposes of protecting public safety by minimizing distraction to motorists and improving aesthetics of the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District by: 
a.  Providing a more consistent pattern and appearance for signs and street graphics than would otherwise result from existing sign regulations; 
b.  Establishing signage as a design element that contributes a sense of place to the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District; 
c.  Generating varied and creative tenant signage through application of distinctive design; 
d.  Reducing the prominence of signage and balancing commercial and aesthetic interests; 
e.  Providing clear standards of acceptability for signs in order to facilitate the review and approval process. 
(2)  Authority. These regulations apply only to the time, place and manner of sign display by limiting the size, number and height of signs in the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District. Nothing in these standards is intended to regulate the content of sign graphics or limit the free expression of speech guaranteed under the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America. These standards do not replace the sign regulations of the city with respect to the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District, but where these standards vary from the underlying city standards, these standards shall apply. 
a.  These design guidelines shall not prohibit political signs. 
b.  All signs shall be designed, erected, inspected, altered, reconstructed, illuminated, located, moved and/or maintained in accordance with these design guidelines and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, the state, and the United States of America. 
c.  No sign may be installed, reconstructed, illuminated, or moved that varies from these standards without approval of a variance by the city board of appeals. 
(3)  Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited: 
a.  Motorist distractions. Signs that incorporate flashing lights or beacons, highly reflectant materials, rotating graphics, motion, smoke or visible matter, noise or changeable copy (copy that changes at materials of more than once every six seconds) are prohibited. 
b.  Roof signs. Signs that are placed on or above roofs, penthouses, mechanical equipment screens, and other like structures and any signs that extend above the building parapet or roof fascia line. 
c.  Signs that are visible from the street and placed on vehicles or trailers that are not in regular use. 
d.  Pole signs and other signs with exposed structural supports that are more than three feet in height and have post supports larger than two inches in diameter or a total of four square inches in cross-section area. 
e.  Vacuum molded or pre-manufactured signs. 
(4)  Authorized signs. The following signs are authorized within the Northlake Commercial Center Overlay District and shall be permitted upon the issuance of a valid sign permit issued by the city: 
a.  Single-tenant development signs. The following sign standards apply to all parcels that have a single tenant or occupant, including, but not limited to, commercial, retail, services, office, office-distribution, wholesale, hotel, office, financial, or multifamily uses: 
1.  Monument sign. Each parcel or building with a single tenant or multifamily residential tenants shall be permitted to use one monument sign per public street frontage, not to exceed a total of two. Signs shall be of a design similar to exhibit 9 subject to the following: 
(i)  Only one sign placard is allowed per sign face—maximum ten square feet per face. 
(ii)  Sign may not exceed six feet in height. 
(iii)  Sign may be single-faced or double-faced. 
(iv)  Sign shall be externally front-lighted, using ground-mounted floodlighting. 
A single tenant building with more than 50,000 square feet of space or occupying a site larger than ten acres may use a monument sign similar to exhibit 10. Such sign shall not exceed six feet in height or 15 feet in length. Sign face may be double-faced and must comply with the size requirements of the Northlake Overlay District Ordinance. 
2.  Single-tenant building mounted sign. Each parcel or building with a single nonresidential tenant shall be permitted one building-mounted sign per street frontage. Letter height and copy area for each single-tenant building-mounted sign shall not exceed the following maximum dimensions: 

 
Exhibit 9. Single Tenant Monument Sign 

3.  Entrance sign. A major development containing ten contiguous nonresidential lots accessed from internal streets may be permitted one entrance sign of a design similar to Exhibit 10, to be placed on private property adjacent to the major entrance to such development or within the median of the public street providing the principal route of access to such development. Such sign shall not exceed six feet in height or 15 feet in length. Sign face may be double-sided and must comply with the size requirements of the Northlake Overlay District Ordinance. 
Exhibit 10. Ground-Mounted Monument Sign 

b.  Multiple-tenant buildings and parcels. The following sign standards apply to all parcels that have more than one nonresidential tenant or occupant, including, but not limited to, commercial, retail, services, office, office-distribution, wholesale, hotel, office, or financial tenants: 
1.  Monument sign. Each parcel or development with more than one nonresidential tenant and a total of more than 100,000 square feet shall be permitted one freestanding multitenant monument sign per public street frontage, not to exceed a total of three. Signs shall be of a design similar to exhibit 10 and the following: 
(i)  No more than eight sign placards shall be used per side of the monument sign. 
(ii)  Maximum height 15 feet. 
(iii)  Total sign faces may not exceed 64 square feet per side. 
(iv)  Sign may be single-faced or double-faced. 
(v)  Sign shall be externally front-lighted, using ground mounted flood lighting. 
Each parcel or development with more than one nonresidential tenant totaling 100,000 square feet or more and having a total street frontage of more than 500 feet on all streets combined shall be permitted one freestanding multitenant monument sign similar to exhibit 10 for each curb cut, not to exceed a total of three monument signs for a single development. 
Exhibit 11. Multi-Tenant Monument Sign 

2.  Building-mounted signs. Each multitenant parcel or development, other than residential tenants, shall be permitted one building mounted sign per building tenant, similar to that shown in exhibits 12 and 13. Letter height and copy area of the building-mounted sign for each tenant within a multitenant development or building-mounted sign shall not exceed the following maximum dimensions: 

 
Exhibit 12. Single Tenant Building-Mounted Sign 

Exhibit 13. Multi-Tenant Building-Mounted Sign 

c.  Signs on residential parcels. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit display of at least one sign on a residential property. However, signs on residential property other than multitenant residential buildings shall be limited to one sign per street frontage. No such sign shall exceed three feet in height and 16 square feet in size. Signs on single-family residential parcels shall not be illuminated. Home occupations within residential property are not entitled to additional signs. 
(n)  Architectural design of buildings and facades. 
Exhibit 14. Front Yards 

(1)  Building massing. 
a.  Street fronting building facades greater than 150 feet in length shall be modulated with breaks in wall surfaces, materials and rooflines at intervals not to exceed 150 feet, measured parallel to the street as shown in exhibit 15. 
b.  For buildings taller than five stories, floors shall be delineated at third story above sidewalk level and lower and shall be executed through windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural detailing as shown in exhibit 16. 
Exhibit 15. Building Modulation 

Exhibit 16. Architectural Delineation 

(2)  Building facades and fenestration. 
a.  For the purposes of this document, fenestration includes all glazed areas including, but not limited to, storefront windows, display windows and doors containing glazed panels at least four feet in height. 
b.  Street-fronting nonresidential building facades shall meet the following sidewalk level requirements: 
1.  The length of facade without intervening fenestration or entryway shall not exceed 30 feet. See exhibit 17. 
2.  A minimum percentage of fenestration of 30 percent shall be provided for the length of the building facade. For buildings that front two or more streets, said minimum percentage is only required along one such street frontage. Buildings which contain ground-level retail uses shall have a minimum percentage of fenestration of 45 percent of the length of the building facade. See exhibit 17. 
3.  All fenestration shall: 
(i)  Begin at a point not more than three feet above the sidewalk, to a height no less than ten feet above the sidewalk; 
(ii)  Begin at the finished floor elevation to a height no less than ten feet above the finished floor elevation when the finished floor elevation is three or more feet above the sidewalk; or 
(iii)  Begin at a point not more than sidewalk level, to a height no less than ten feet above the finished floor elevation when the finished floor elevation is below the sidewalk. See exhibit 17. 
4.  Fenestration shall not utilize painted glass, reflective glass or other similarly treated or opaque windows. Entrances may be counted towards fenestration requirements. 
Exhibit 17. Building Facades and Fenestration 

(3)  Roof design. 
a.  Gable roof designs are encouraged and shall be required for all multifamily residential and hotel buildings less than six stories in height. 
b.  Roof-mounted mechanical equipment and appurtenances shall be located or screened so that they are not visible from the ground level. Screening shall be of a material and design that are compatible with the surrounding building materials and architectural design. Rooftop appurtenances shall be painted to be compatible with the colors of the roof. 
c.  Roof-mounted radio, TV, and telecommunication towers and antennas are prohibited. Satellite dishes 24 inches or less in diameter are permitted provided that they are located out of sight from the ground floor or completely screened from view 
d.  The following roof materials are preferred: 
1,  Fiberglass architectural profile shingles; 
2.  Slate shingles; 
3.  Clay or concrete tile; 
4.  Standing seam metal (dark green or earth tone only). 
(4)  Recommended building materials. The following exterior building materials are preferred: 
a.  Stone; 
b.  Brick; 
c.  Pre-cast concrete; 
d.  Glass; 
e.  Ceramics or tile. 
(5)  Exterior walls and parapets. The following materials are prohibited for exterior walls and parapets: 
a.  Imitation wood; 
b.  Vinyl or plastic; 
c.  Concrete masonry units, except ribbed or rusticated units; 
d.  Corrugated metal; 
e.  EIFS; 
f.  EIFS moldings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (art. 3, div. 35, att.), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1068. - Appendices. 
Plant list is as follows: 
(1)  Flowering shrubs. 
a.  Abelia X Grandiflora, three gallon; 
b.  Jasminum Nudiflorum, three gallon; 
c.  Coreopsis Auriculata, one gallon; 
d.  Narcussus. 
(2)  Ground cover. 
a.  Liriope Muscari, one gallon; 
b.  Rubus Calcinoides, one gallon. 
(3)  Trees along LaVista Road. 
a.  Cercis Canadensis, two-inch caliper; 
b.  Chionanthus Virginicus, 1½-inch caliper; 
c.  Hemerocallis species, one gallon; 
d.  Pranus "Okame," 1½-inch caliper; 
e.  Quercus Shumardii, 3½-inch caliper; 
f.  Lagerstroemia Indica, ten feet high. 
(4)  Trees along remaining streets. 
a.  Any tree listed in subsection (3) of this section; 
b.  Crape myrtle, standard trunk; 
c.  October glory red maple; 
d.  Sunset maple; 
e.  Nuttal Oak (Quercus Nattalli); 
f.  Shumard oak (Quercus Shumardii); 
g.  Willow oak; 
h.  Zelkova Serrata; 
i.  Ginkgo (Ginlgo Biloba); 
j.  Trident maple (Acer Buergeranum); 
k.  Allee Lacebark elm (Ulmus Parvifolia Emer II). 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (art. 3, div. 35, app.), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1069—46-1084. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MOUNTAIN INDUSTRIAL BOULEVARD OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-1085. - Scope of regulations. 
This division establishes standards and procedures that apply to any development, use, or redevelopment on any lot or portion thereof which is, in whole or in part, contained within the boundaries of the Mountain Industrial Boulevard Overlay District, hereinafter referred to as the "district." 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.40.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1086. - Applicability of regulations. 
This division applies to each application for a permit which involves the development, use, construction, exterior alteration or modification of any structure where the subject property is, in whole or in part, contained within the boundaries of the district. The procedures, standards, and criteria herein apply only to that portion of the subject property within the boundaries of the district. All procedures, standards, and criteria not specifically identified herein shall be as provided by the applicable underlying zoning district regulations. In cases where a conflict exists between the requirements of this district and the underlying zoning district, the requirements of this district shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.40.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1087. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mayor and city council in establishing the district is as follows: 
(1)  To preserve and enhance the long-term economic viability of the Mountain Industrial Boulevard corridor by encouraging investment that increases the tax base and provides employment opportunities to the citizens of the city; 
(2)  To improve the visual appearance and increase property values within the corridor; 
(3)  To allow flexibility in development standards in order to encourage the design of innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, green space, urban design, and public amenities; and 
(4)  To promote uniform and visually aesthetic architectural features which serve to unify the distinctive visual quality of the corridor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.40.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1088. - District boundaries and maps. 
The boundaries of the district shall be established by the zoning map which is adopted contemporaneously with the adoption of this division and is hereby incorporated by this reference as if fully set forth herein and is hereby made a part of this chapter. Said zoning map amendment shall be maintained by the community development director or designee and shall be available for public inspection in the office of the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.40.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1089. - Principal uses and structures. 
The uses of land and structures which are allowed in this district as principal, accessory, or by special permit or special land use permit are as provided by the applicable underlying zoning district regulations, subject to the requirements, limitations and standards contained within this division, with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Special permits. The following uses and structures shall be authorized only be permits of the type indicated: 
a.  Special land use permit from the mayor and city council. 
1.  Health spa. 
2.  Massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.40.5), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06-69, exh. A(3.40.5), 6-28-2017) 
Sec. 46-1090. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses of land shall be prohibited within the district: 
(1)  Storage yard for damaged automobiles or confiscated automobiles; 
(2)  Tire retreading and recapping; 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishments; 
(4)  Adult service facility; 
(5)  Late night establishments; 
(6)  Extended stay motels; 
(7)  Title and pawn shops; 
(8)  Salvage yards/junkyards and automobile wrecking yards, not including recovered material or recycling yards; 
(9)  Self-service car wash and detailing; 
(10)  Temporary and portable saw mills; 
(11)  Mines and mining operations, quarries, gravel pits, and sand pits; 
(12)  Sewage treatment plants; 
(13)  Asphalt plants; 
(14)  Fat rendering and fertilizer manufacture; and 
(15)  Distillation of bones and glue manufacture. 
(b)  Parking or storing of trucks and trailers between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. is prohibited, unless such truck or trailer is parked or stored pursuant to an accessory use incidental to the permitted principal use of the land. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.40.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1091. - Architectural regulations. 
The following architectural regulations shall apply to all uses and structures within the district. 
(1)  Building exteriors shall be limited solely to the following materials: 
a.  Brick or brick veneers; 
b.  Stone or stone veneers of natural stone such as granite, limestone and marble. Terra Cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also allowed. Painted stone is not allowed; 
c.  Pre-cast concrete; 
d.  Painted concrete block, which may only be used on a side or rear facade that does not face a public right-of-way; 
e.  Split-face block/concrete masonry unit; and 
f.  Hard coat stucco and synthetic stucco. 
(2)  Architectural accents, where utilized, shall consist of metal, non-reflective glass, glass block, natural stone, pre-cast concrete, brick, or terra cotta. Architectural accents shall only cover ten percent of the surface area of each exterior wall. When calculating the ten percent limitation on architectural accents, the surface area covered by a window shall not be used in the calculation. 
(3)  Service bays for automobile service and repair uses shall be designed or screened so that the openings of service bays are not visible from a public right-of-way. 
(4)  Chainlink fences shall be screened from the public right-of-way and shall be galvanized or vinyl coated. Uncoated chainlink is prohibited. 
(5)  Within a front or exterior side yard, the keeping of goods, materials, merchandise, or inoperable vehicles in the same place for more than 24 consecutive hours is prohibited. 
(6)  Within a side yard that adjoins a public right-of-way, the keeping of goods, materials, merchandise, or inoperable vehicles in the same place for more than 24 consecutive hours is only permitted when the side yard is fenced, screened, or otherwise screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
(7)  Outdoor storage that is not prohibited by this section, and outdoor areas housing service areas, trash dumpsters, trash compactors, equipment, or mechanical devices shall be screened so that such outdoor area cannot be seen from any public right-of-way. Screening shall be permitted to include landscaping, and/or fencing and walls with architectural treatment of color and material similar to the building. 
(8)  Any linear lighting around windows, rooflines, doors, signs or building structures is prohibited. Linear lighting may include, but is not limited to neon tubes, rope lighting, and other similar lighting devices. Linear lighting devices that form letters or words shall be considered signs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.40.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1092. - Signage. 
Properties within the district are required to comply with the sign regulations of chapter 34 except as follows: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Portable sign means any sign designed to be transported by trailer or by a design element that includes wheels attached to the sign, or wheels attached to the sign but detachable, the removal of such wheels creating an A-frame or T-frame sign that may attach temporarily or permanently to the ground. The term "portable sign" shall also include vehicles with signs painted or mounted thereon that are parked or immobilized in a single location for more than 14 consecutive days. 
Sandwich board sign means any sign that rests on the ground that is not anchored or otherwise securely attached thereto. 
(2)  Prohibited signs. 
a.  Sandwich board signs are prohibited except within five feet of a building entrance; 
b.  Banner signs of any size, except as a special event sign. 
(3)  Convenience store and service stations. Convenience store and service stations with pump islands may have one sign per canopy face per public street frontage up to a maximum of 36 square feet of total canopy sign space. 
(4)  Directional signs. Directional signs are permitted up to six feet above the ground. 
(5)  Nonresidential zoning districts. 
a.  All lots located in nonresidential districts not developed as a planned commercial center may display signs as follows: 

 
b.  A lot located in a nonresidential district developed as a planned commercial center may display signs as follows: 

 
c.  Property zoned for nonresidential use may have only one ground sign per street that is oriented towards travelers along that same street. 
d.  The district is exempt from total aggregate sign area requirements in chapter 34. 
e.  Wood and flexible plastic are prohibited for use in permanent signs in nonresidential zoning districts. 
(6)  Special event signage. All special event signs are subject to the requirements of chapter 34, including section 34-72, except that the maximum number of special event sign permits to be issued to a single site or location shall be one per year for a period of time not to exceed 30 days for each permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (3.40.8), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1093—46-1122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-1123. - Overview of use categories and use table. 
The regulations contained within this article shall apply to all zoning districts within the city except as otherwise specified herein. Certain uses require imposition of additional regulations to mitigate environmental, visual and infrastructure impacts. Dimensions, site location and architectural requirements shall be indicated on required site development plans. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.1.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1124. - Interpretation of unlisted uses. 
Where a particular use is not specifically listed in table 4.1, the community development director shall have the authority to permit the use if the use is similar to uses permitted by this article. The community development director shall give due consideration to the purpose and intent statements contained in this zoning ordinance concerning the base zoning districts involved, the character of the uses specifically identified and the character of the uses in question. 
Table 4.1. Use Table 
Key: 
P—Permitted use; SA—Special administrative permit from director of planning; Pa—Permitted as an accessory use; SP—Special land use permit from BoC (SLUP) 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.1.2), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (4.1.2), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-10-37, att. (4.1.2), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 3, 3-27-2017; Ord. No. O2017-09-76, exh. A(4.1.2), 10-9-2017; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(4.1.2), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1125. - Use table. 
Table 4.1 indicates the permitted uses within the base zoning districts. Even though a use is listed as an allowable use within a particular base zoning district, additional use restrictions may apply based on the applicable overlay zoning district requirements specified in article III of this chapter. 
(1)  The uses listed in table 4.1 shall be permitted only within the zoning districts identified, and no use shall be established and no structure associated with such use shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged unless the use is permitted as: 
a.  A permitted use (P); 
b.  A special use (SP) subject to the special land use permit application procedures specified in article VII of this chapter; 
c.  An administratively approved use (SA) subject to the special administrative permit procedures specified in article VII of this chapter; 
d.  An accessory use (Pa) as regulated by this article IV of this chapter. Table 4.1 does not list all accessory uses but clarifies uses acceptable as accessory, though not typically considered principal uses for the zoning classification; 
e.  Uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Any use not listed in table 4.1 or interpreted to be allowed by the community development director pursuant to section 46-1224 is prohibited. Any applicant denied a permit to allow a use of property in a zoning district other than as provided in this section may file an appeal before the zoning board of appeals as provided in article VII of this chapter. 
(3)  If there is a conflict between table 4.1 and the text of this chapter, the text shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.1.3), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1126—46-1143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-1144. - Accessory buildings, structures, and uses. 
Accessory buildings, structures and uses determined by the director to be normally incidental to one or more permitted principal uses are hereby permitted as follows: 
(1)  Accessory structures allowed in all residential districts may include, but are not limited to: garages, storage sheds, and personal recreational facilities such as swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(2)  Accessory structures must be constructed in conjunction with or after the principal building is constructed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1145. - Accessory buildings, structures and uses: location, yard and building restrictions. 
The following provisions apply to accessory buildings, structures, and uses of land that are incidental to authorized and permitted uses: 
(1)  All accessory buildings, accessory structures, and accessory uses of land, including off-street parking, shall be located on the same lot as the principal building to which they are accessory. 
(2)  All accessory structures in which effluent is produced shall be connected to water and sewer if the primary structure is connected to water and sewer. 
(3)  Yard and setbacks. 
a.  All accessory buildings or structures shall be located in the rear yard of the lot, with the exception of ATM bank machines which are also allowed in the front or side yard. 
b.  Accessory structures must not encroach in the minimum yard setbacks for the district in which they are located. 
c.  Accessory buildings or structures shall meet the minimum side yard setback for the district or ten feet, whichever is less, and shall not be located closer than ten feet to a rear lot line in any district. 
d.  Basketball goals attached to the principal residential structure or erected adjacent to and abutting the driveway of the principal residential structure shall be allowed in the front yard but not within the right-of-way of a public street. No basketball goal shall be erected in such a manner that the play area for the basketball goal is located within any portion of a public right-of-way. 
e.  Additional supplemental regulations in this division regarding minimum yards and setbacks for specific accessory buildings, structures, or uses of land may also apply. 
(4)  Corner lot, rear yards. Where the rear yard of a corner lot adjoins the side yard of a lot in a residential district, no accessory building or structure shall be located closer than 15 feet to the rear property line and no closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
(5)  Materials. Accessory structures that are buildings or sheds shall be constructed out of a material similar to the principal structure. 
(6)  No accessory building or structure in a nonresidential district shall be used by anyone other than employees of the owner, lessee or tenant of the premises, unless otherwise allowed by provisions of this division. 
(7)  Where an accessory building or structure is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, the accessory building or structure shall comply with the yard setback requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(8)  Setbacks for swimming pools, as accessory structures in a residential district, shall be measured from the edge of the decking to the applicable property line. No part of the decking for an accessory swimming pool shall be within five feet of a side or rear property line. 
(9)  Except as expressly provided elsewhere in this chapter, an accessory structure shall be limited to the lesser of 24 feet in height or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
(10)  The floor area of an accessory building that is accessory to a single-family, two-family, or three-family residential structure shall not exceed the maximum floor areas set forth in table 4.2 below. 
  Table 4.2. Maximum Accessory Building Floor Area—Select Residential Structures 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1146. - Accessory dwelling unit, guesthouse, in-law suite. 
(a)  On parcels zoned for residential single-family dwellings as a principal use, an accessory dwelling unit may be allowed as one of the following: 
(1)  Attached (addition to existing building); 
(2)  Detached; or 
(3)  Within existing house (renovations to basements, wings or attics converted into separate living unit). 
(b)  The heated floor area of a dwelling unit shall not include the square footage of the garage. 
(c)  Attached and detached accessory dwelling units are permitted by right, subject to the following: 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  The accessory dwelling unit shall conform to applicable standards of the state and city building codes for residential units as principal uses. 
(3)  The property owner, who shall include titleholders and contract purchasers, must occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit as their residence, and possess a homestead exemption. 
(4)  The appearance of the accessory dwelling unit shall be similar to that of the principal residence. 
(5)  Only one accessory dwelling unit of any type shall be permitted on a lot. 
(6)  Prior to issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, an applicant must provide evidence to the community development director showing that existing or proposed septic tank facilities, as applicable, are adequate to serve both the principal dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit. 
(7)  Any detached accessory dwelling unit shall be located in the rear yard. 
(8)  A second kitchen facility may be constructed and used within a single-family residence. 
(9)  Paved off-street parking shall be provided for one additional vehicle. 
(10)  Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 900 square feet of heated floor area and shall not exceed 24 feet in height. 
(11)  The main entrance shall not face the closest property line. Windows, doors, balconies, porches and decks shall be sited to ensure the privacy of neighbors. 
(12)  For parcels located in a designated historic district and individually designated historic structures, the placement of an accessory dwelling unit and its architectural design shall require a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1147. - Adult day care center (seven or more clients). 
Each adult day care center shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  All outdoor recreation areas shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height. 
(2)  Each adult day care center shall provide off-street parking spaces as required by the applicable zoning district and an adequate turnaround on the site. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1148. - Adult day care facility (up to six clients). 
Each adult day care facility shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  All outdoor recreation areas shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height. 
(2)  Each adult day care facility shall provide off-street parking spaces as required by the applicable zoning district. 
(3)  No adult day care facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of another adult day care facility. 
(4)  No adult day care facility may be established and operated until a permit to do so has been obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth below: 
a.  Permit application. Persons seeking to operate an adult day care facility in the city must file a permit application with the community development department. Each application shall also be accompanied by the applicant's affidavit certifying the maximum number of adults that will be served simultaneously and that the proposed adult day care facility will meet and be operated in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations and with all ordinances and regulations of the city. The community development department may require clarification or additional information from the applicant that is deemed necessary by the city to determine whether the proposed service will meet applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
b.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, if a proposed adult day care facility is subject to the requirement that the applicant obtain a certificate of registration from the state department of human resources, and even though the application may have been approved under the provisions of this section, a permit for the operation of such facility shall not be issued until proof has been submitted by the applicant that the certificate of registration has first been obtained from the state. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1149. - Adult entertainment establishments; adult services facility. 
(a)  The regulations that follow and that otherwise are contained in this Code regarding adult entertainment establishments constitute content-neutral requirements that have been carefully designed to minimize adverse impacts caused by secondary effects of these establishments. The city finds that studies in other jurisdictions, including, but not limited to, studies referenced in article XI of chapter 10, demonstrating a correlation between these establishments and such negative secondary effects as diminishing market values in neighboring residential and related areas, increasing crime rates, difficulty in securing residential and related financing, an influx of patrons to these establishments from outside the immediate neighboring areas, and similar effects, are pertinent and relevant to the situation that exists in the city. The city further finds that there is evidence in the city demonstrating a correlative link between adult entertainment establishments and pernicious secondary effects upon surrounding communities. The city finds that adoption of regulations restricting these establishments to certain districts and imposing distance and development standards is consistent with the general comprehensive planning standards and policies of the city, will reduce the negative secondary effects caused by these establishments, and will afford protection to residential uses and other uses consistent with residential uses so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare while respecting and protecting the free speech rights of these establishments. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishments shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from another adult entertainment establishment. The measurement of distances for purposes of this subsection shall be from structure to structure along the shortest possible course (i.e., "as the crow flies"), regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel. 
(2)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be located on property that is located no closer than 1,000 feet from a residential district or from property being used for residential purpose. The measurement of distances for purpose of this subsection shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course (i.e., "as the crow flies"), regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel. 
(3)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 500 feet from any church and no closer than 1,000 feet from any governmental facility, residence, park, library, school ground, day care, or college campus. The measurement of distances for purposes of this subsection shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course (i.e., "as the crow flies"), regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel. 
(4)  The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment establishment shall be two acres. 
(5)  Adult entertainment establishments shall be located on lots with a minimum of 150 feet of road frontage on a public road, street, or highway. 
(6)  In addition to development standards governing C-2 and M zoning districts, buildings established in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be set back at least 40 feet from any other business establishment. 
(7)  Adult entertainment establishments shall be required to provide one automobile parking space for each 75 square feet of gross building area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1150. - Agriculture and forestry. 
(a)  Agricultural produce stands. Agricultural produce stands shall comply with the front yard setback requirement for the district in which they are located, and shall provide a minimum of four off-street parking spaces. If temporary, mobile, or farmer's market, see temporary uses, section 46-1223. 
(b)  Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries. Any structure used as a commercial greenhouse or plant nursery shall be set back no less than 100 feet from any adjoining property that is zoned for residential use. 
(c)  Dairies. Notwithstanding subsection (e) of this section, any structure used for housing or processing of dairy cows shall be set back not less than 200 feet from property lines, and all dairy cows shall be kept at least 100 feet from property lines. 
(d)  Structures used in production and processing of fruits, tree nuts and vegetables. Any structure used in the processing or production of fruits, tree nuts, and vegetables that uses mechanized equipment or is not fully enclosed in a building, that emits noise, dust or vibration, shall be setback no less than 50 feet from property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(e)  Livestock. 
(1)  Livestock regulations apply to animals over 12 months of age. 
(2)  Livestock shall only be permitted on a lot containing two or more acres, and there shall be no more than two animals, per fenced acre for horses, llamas, mules, asses, cows or large aviary such as emus; and no more than three animals per fenced acre for sheep or goats. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided herein, any structure used for housing or processing of livestock shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(4)  Dwarf livestock may be kept at up to two per 50 square feet of fenced area, with no minimum lot size, except lots less than 10,000 square feet shall be limited to a total of three dwarf livestock animals. 
(5)  Structures for housing dwarf livestock shall be setback not less than ten feet from any property line. 
(6)  Fenced areas for livestock may not include lot area covered by the principal structure or driveway. 
(7)  A structure providing at least 100 square feet of floor space per animal for housing horses, llamas, mules, ass, cow or large aviary such as emus is required, and at least 25 square feet of floor space per animal is required for housing sheep or goats. A structure housing dwarf livestock shall provide three square feet per animal. 
(8)  Pigs and hogs are prohibited, except pot-bellied pigs. Pot-bellied pigs shall be treated as livestock, and subject to the standards for sheep and goats. 
(9)  Livestock is not permitted to run at large beyond the confines of its owner's property. 
(10)  Parking of livestock trailers and recreation vehicles related to the livestock shall comply with the parking standards in article VI of this chapter. 
(11)  Composted animal waste can be used as fertilizer for the purpose of enriching the property owner's soil. 
(12)  Animals must be kept under sanitary conditions and shall not be a public nuisance. 
(13)  Disposal of dead livestock shall be subject to the county sanitation rules and regulations or requirements. 
(f)  Livestock sales pavilion or abattoirs. Livestock sales pavilions and/or abattoirs shall be operated in accordance with state and county health regulations. All buildings shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line. All animals to be processed shall be fenced at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(g)  Riding stables. Riding stables shall be established on a lot having an area of not less than ten acres. Any structure that houses animals used as part of the riding stable shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line. All animals shall be fenced at least 20 feet from any property line. 
(h)  Temporary or portable sawmill. The time limit for any permit for a temporary or portable sawmill shall not exceed six months. A temporary or portable sawmill may only process timber removed from the property on which the sawmill is located. Operation of a temporary or portable sawmill shall be set back not less than 500 feet from any residential structure other than the owner's. 
(i)  Keeping of chickens, pigeons. 
(1)  The minimum fenced yard area for chickens shall be 25 square feet per hen. 
(2)  Chickens and pigeons must be housed at least 20 feet from any property line, and 50 feet from any residence other than the owner's. 
(3)  Any structure housing chickens and pigeons must be located in the rear yard if a principal building exists. 
(4)  The minimum lot size for the keeping of chickens or pigeons is 10,000 square feet. Fenced area for chickens shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory structures. Chickens and pigeons and associated structures and fencing shall comply with relevant article II of chapter 8, relating to noise and property maintenance. 
(5)  No roosters are allowed. 
(6)  The maximum number of hens shall be one hen per 2,000 square feet of lot size. 
(7)  Each coop shall have at least four square feet of floor space per chicken over four months old. For Bantams, a variety defined as miniature, each coop shall have one square foot of floor area per chicken over four months old. 
(8)  Chickens must be kept securely in an enclosed yard or pen at all times. 
(9)  Chickens are only permitted as pets or for egg production; the chickens cannot be kept for slaughter. 
(10)  Composted animal waste can be used as fertilizer for the purpose of enriching the soil of the owner's property. 
(11)  Animals must be kept under sanitary conditions and shall not be a public nuisance. 
(j)  Beekeeping. 
(1)  No more than two apiary colonies are allowed per one-quarter acre. 
(2)  Apiary colonies must be setback from all property lines a minimum of ten feet. 
(3)  Apiary colonies must be located in the side or rear yard if a principal building exists. 
(4)  Apiary colonies must be maintained responsibly with adequate space and management techniques to prevent overcrowding and swarming. 
(5)  In any instance in which a colony becomes a nuisance, the beekeeper must re-queen the hive. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1151. - Alcohol outlets; retail package liquor store. 
(a)  Package stores and liquor stores, developed as a primary use in a freestanding building, must comply with city ordinances pertaining to licensing requirements for a retail package liquor store. 
(b)  Alcohol outlets in the NS (Neighborhood Shopping) District may only be permitted as an accessory use with a special land use permit (SLUP). 
(c)  Alcohol outlets in the MU (Mixed-Use) districts shall be limited to beer and wine sales with a special land use permit (SLUP). 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1152. - Amateur radio service antenna structure. 
Amateur radio service antenna structures are a permitted accessory use in single-family residential districts, provided that no such antenna structure, including any support upon which it may be constructed, shall exceed a combined height of 70 feet. Amateur radio service antenna structures in single-family residential districts exceeding 70 feet in height shall be permitted only by special land use permit subject to all of the requirements of section 46-1194. Amateur radio service antenna structures shall be located a distance of at least one-half of the height of the tower from all property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1153. - Ambulance, taxi, and limousine services, dispatch, and storage. 
(a)  If not within an enclosed structure, automobiles for ambulance dispatch, taxi, and limousine services shall be parked at least 50 feet from any residential district boundary and setback at least ten feet from any property line. 
(b)  Automobiles for ambulance dispatch, taxi, and limousine services may be parked within 50 feet of a residential district boundary if such vehicles are parked within an enclosed structure or, if the parking area is screened by a fence, wall or evergreen buffer at least six feet in height at planting. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1154. - Animal care facilities. 
(a)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. 
(1)  Any building or enclosed structure used as an animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall be located and the activities associated with the use shall be conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(2)  When located within a shopping center, the use shall be adequately soundproofed and odor proofed so as not to create a nuisance. 
(3)  No boarding shall be allowed unless required in connection with medical treatment. 
(4)  Outside runs or kennels are prohibited. 
(b)  Animal shelter, four or more. 
(1)  Any building or enclosed structure for the housing of animals shall have a minimum setback of at least 100 feet from all property lines and at least 200 from property zoned for residential use. 
(2)  All areas housing animals shall be completely enclosed by walls or fences at least five feet in height. 
(3)  No animal shelter shall be located within 500 feet of a residential district. 
(4)  Outside pens must be located a minimum of 75 feet from any stream. 
(c)  Pet grooming shops. Any building or enclosed structure used as a pet grooming shop shall be located and activities shall be conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(d)  Pet day care. Any building or enclosed structure for the housing of animals associated with a pet day care use shall have a minimum setback of at least 100 feet from all property lines and at least 200 feet from property zoned or used for residential use. All areas housing animals shall be completely enclosed by walls or fences at least five feet in height. 
(e)  Kennels, commercial boarding and breeding kennels. All kennels shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Any building or enclosed structure used for kennels shall be located and related activities shall be conducted at least 100 feet from any property line and at least 200 feet from property zoned for residential use. 
(2)  Kennels shall be located on a site of not less than two acres. 
(3)  Any building or enclosed structure used for kennels shall be constructed and related activities shall be conducted in accordance with applicable law. 
(4)  All outdoor areas used as a dog kennel or outdoor confinement must be surrounded by an opaque fence or wall no less than eight feet in height. 
(5)  The floor of all buildings or structures used as a kennel to which animals have access shall be surfaced with concrete or other impervious material. 
(6)  The portion of the building or structure in which animals are housed shall be adequately soundproofed to meet the minimum requirements of the city's noise ordinance. 
(f)  Household pets. Except as is otherwise herein provided, in any residential district within the city a person may keep not more than three household pets on each lot which is two acres or less in size. On any lot exceeding two acres in size, a person may keep one additional household pet for each additional acre above two acres up to a maximum of ten household pets. Litters of animals of not more than six months of age shall not be counted for the purpose of calculating the total number of household pets on a lot. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1155. - Antennas, satellite dishes, television receivers. 
(a)  Antennas, satellite dishes, or other television transmission receivers located in residential zoning districts may only be located on the roof or in the rear yard of properties. 
(b)  Antennas, satellite dishes, or other television transmission receivers located in a nonresidential zoned district are prohibited in any yard which adjoins a residential zoned district. 
(c)  Any ground mounted antennas, satellite dishes, or other television transmission receivers shall be screened from view from surrounding properties at ground level, and from public streets. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.12), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1156. - Automobile wash service, principal, accessory, detail or mobile. 
(a)  Automobile wash services shall provide a paved area with capacity to store five vehicles waiting to use automatic carwash facilities, and two vehicles per bay for self-service car washes. 
(b)  Wastewater from all automobile wash services shall be pretreated in accordance with watershed management standards prior to being drained into the public sanitary sewer or into any stormwater structure, as may be approved by the county watershed management department. 
(c)  No storage or repair of vehicles shall be allowed on property on which the car washing facility is located. 
(d)  An accessory single-bay automatic (not self-service) car wash completely enclosed except for openings necessary to allow entry and exit of vehicles shall be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)  The car wash structure shall be constructed of building materials consistent with that of the principal building, including the roof. 
(2)  The doors of the car wash building shall be fully closed when the facility is not available for operation. 
(3)  The car wash structure shall be located behind the rear building line of the principal building, 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.13), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1157. - Automotive sales and service; boat, trailer sales and service. 
(a)  Automobile and truck sales. Where a lot is used for automobile or truck and trailer sales, all inventory vehicles parked outdoors shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way. The ten-foot setback from the street right-of-way shall comply with section 46-1337(d)(3). No other unrelated retail use shall be on the same property or in the same building with automobile and truck sales. The automobile and truck sales lot shall be on a lot no less than three acres in area. 
(b)  Automobile repair, major, and paint shops. Major automobile repair and paint shops shall not be permitted on property located within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building, unless in M (Light Industrial) District. Outdoor repair and paint shops in the M (Light Industrial) District require a special land use permit. For purposes of determining whether a building is enclosed, the use of open overhead bay doors that can be closed shall be permitted. Cars awaiting service shall be stored inside an enclosed building or in the side or rear yard. 
(c)  Automobile repair and maintenance establishments, minor. All minor automobile repair and maintenance establishment operations, including the servicing of vehicles, storage of materials and similar activities connected with the use, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. For purposes of determining whether a building is enclosed, the use of open overhead bay doors that can be closed shall be permitted. Cars awaiting service shall be stored inside an enclosed building or in the side or rear yard. 
(d)  Automobile service stations, including gas sales. Unless otherwise permitted within the applicable zoning district, major automobile repair in association with an automobile service station shall not be permitted. Gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall comply with the requirements of section 46-1171. 
(e)  Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rental. Where a lot is used for automobile, truck and trailer lease and rental, all inventory vehicles parked outdoors shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way. The ten-foot setback from the street right-of-way shall comply with section 46-1337(d)(3). All parking areas shall be clearly marked and no automobile, truck or trailer shall be parked outdoors other than within these marked parking areas, except when being serviced. The lot shall be no less than one acre in area. 
(f)  Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rental where accessory to an automobile service station or shopping center. Where the lease and rental of automobiles, trucks and trailers is a use which is an accessory use, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  The lot on which the inventory vehicles are parked shall be no less than one acre in area. 
(2)  Parking areas for inventory vehicles which are available for lease or rental shall be located only in the side or rear yard. 
(g)  Vehicle maintenance. Any work on vehicles conducted outdoors shall only be permitted in the rear yard, but shall be prohibited if the rear yard is adjacent to property zoned or used for a residential purpose. 
(h)  Boat and boat trailer sales. All boats and boat trailers located on property used for boat and boat trailer sales shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way. The ten-foot setback from the street right-of-way shall comply with section 46-1337(d)(3). 
(i)  Retail automobile parts and tire stores. Unless otherwise authorized or permitted within the applicable zoning district, the following limitations apply to the conduct of retail sale of automobile parts and tire stores: 
(1)  There shall be no dismantling of vehicles on the premises to obtain automobile parts. 
(2)  There shall be no automobile parts installation other than the installation of tires and the installation of minor accessory parts. Installation of tires shall be constructed entirely within an enclosed building. For purposes of determining whether a building is enclosed, the use of open overhead bay doors that can be closed shall be permitted. Cars awaiting service shall be stored inside an enclosed building or in the side or rear yard. 
(3)  Major automobile repair shall not be permitted in connection with these uses. 
(4)  Outside display of merchandise shall be within five feet of the building and shall not extend into the parking lot or drive aisle. The display shall not block the safe access of pedestrians, cars, or emergency vehicles. The outdoor display of merchandise shall only be during business hours. 
(5)  Outdoor storage of parts and tires is prohibited. 
(j)  Trailer and RV salesrooms and sales lots. All inventory vehicles located on property used for trailer and RV salesrooms or sales lots shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way. The ten-foot setback from the street right-of-way shall comply with section 46-1337(d)(3). 
(k)  Automobile recovery, storage yards for damaged or confiscated automobiles. The following provisions shall apply to storage yards for damaged or confiscated automobiles: 
(1)  The use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall which is not less than eight feet in height which provides visual screening. 
(2)  No dismantling, repair or other similar activity shall be conducted on the premises. 
(3)  The use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any residential district or use. 
(4)  Automobiles shall not be stored longer than provided by state, county, and city law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.14), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(4.2.14), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1158. - Bed and breakfast inn. 
The following applies to all bed and breakfast establishments: 
(1)  The operator of the establishment shall reside on site. 
(2)  The use shall require a building permit and approval of the fire department. 
(3)  Rooms to be let may not be equipped with cooking facilities. 
(4)  No restaurant use is permitted. Breakfast may be served on the premises only for guests and employees of the bed and breakfast. 
(5)  The bed and breakfast shall not be operated in such a way as to change the residential character of the neighborhood in which it is located and shall comply with the noise ordinance. 
(6)  The structure shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood in terms of height, setbacks and bulk, subject to the approval of the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.15), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1159. - Building and construction office; landscape contractors. 
The following standards shall be required for building and construction offices and landscape contractor offices: 
(1)  Storage of equipment and/or materials shall be located in the rear yard and screened from view from adjoining properties and the public street with a fence a minimum of six feet in height. 
(2)  Parking of vehicles shall be located in the side or rear yard only. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.16), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1160. - Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum, as principal use. 
A cemetery allowed as a principal use on a property must meet the requirements below. Cemeteries that are allowed as an accessory use to a church or other place of worship must comply with provisions in section 46-1186, places of worship. 
(1)  A cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum shall be located on property with a minimum lot size of ten acres. 
(2)  The lot on which a cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum is located shall have a minimum public road frontage of 100 feet. 
(3)  Permanent public ingress/egress shall be provided for the lot on which a cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum is located. 
(4)  Compliance must be maintained with all requirements of the state and the county tax commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.17), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1161. - Check cashing. 
Check cashing establishments designed as a primary use on its own lot or as a part of a retail shopping center shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of an existing check cashing establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.18), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1162. - Child day care facility (up to six children), or child day care center (seven or more children). 
Each child day care facility and child day care center shall be subject to the following requirements. A child day care facility or center may also be a kindergarten or preschool. 
(1)  Each child day care facility and child day care center shall comply with all applicable state day care requirements for standards, licensing and inspection. A city business license is required. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a business license for a child day care facility or child day care center, the necessary licensing from the state shall be obtained, including compliance with all requirements related to minimum area for classrooms, play areas, and fencing. Each child day care facility and child day care center shall provide off-street parking spaces as required by the applicable zoning district. Each child day care center shall provide an adequate turnaround on the site. 
(3)  The exterior appearance of any child day care facility located in a residential district shall be maintained as a residential structure, and no signs other than those otherwise authorized within the applicable zoning district shall be erected (no cut-outs, animal characters, or other graphics shall be affixed to the exterior of the structure or displayed upon the premises). 
(4)  No child day care facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of another child day care facility. 
(5)  See also additional approval criteria in article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.19), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1163. - Coliseum, stadium, amphitheater. 
The following provisions apply to coliseums, stadiums and amphitheaters: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a land-disturbance permit, a traffic study shall be submitted to the department of public works. 
(2)  All structures shall be located and all activities shall take place no less than 100 feet from any property line adjacent to a residential district or use. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.20), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1164. - Commercial recreation and entertainment. 
(a)  Drive-in theaters. The following provisions shall apply to drive-in theaters: 
(1)  The theater screen, projection booth and any other structures associated with the drive-in theater use shall be set back not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Driving and parking areas shall be paved. 
(3)  Ingress and egress from a public street shall be designed and constructed so as to provide for safe traffic movement. 
(4)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(5)  The theater screen shall not be visible from any freeway or thoroughfare. 
(6)  The portion of the property used for drive-in theater purposes shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high screening fence. 
(7)  The property shall have a minimum buffer area ten feet in width surrounding the portion of the property used for drive-in theater purposes. 
(b)  Fairgrounds and amusement parks. The following provisions shall apply to fairgrounds and amusement parks: 
(1)  All buildings and structures associated with such uses shall be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Such uses shall not be permitted within 500 feet of a residential district. 
(3)  Such facilities shall be enclosed by a six foot screening fence. 
(c)  Golf driving ranges and batting cage facilities. The following provisions shall apply to golf driving ranges and batting cage facilities: 
(1)  Such uses shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high screening fence or a 25-foot-wide buffer to screen adjacent property. 
(2)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Lighting shall be directed inward such that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(d)  Miniature golf courses. The following provisions shall apply to miniature golf courses: 
(1)  Such uses shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high screening fence and a buffer ten feet in width to screen adjacent property. 
(2)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Lighting shall be directed inward such that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(e)  Golf courses. The following provisions shall apply to golf courses: 
(1)  Except for emergency purposes, loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Lighting shall be directed inward such that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(f)  Recreation grounds, fishing lakes and other related facilities. The following provisions shall apply to recreation grounds and facilities: 
(1)  Such uses shall be enclosed by a screening fence six feet in height or a 25-foot-wide buffer to screen adjacent property. 
(2)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Lighting shall be directed inward such that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(g)  Tennis centers, clubs and facilities. The following provisions shall apply to tennis centers, clubs and facilities: 
(1)  Such uses shall be enclosed by a screening fence six feet in height or a 25-foot-wide planted buffer to screen adjacent property. 
(2)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Lighting shall be directed inward such that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(h)  Go-cart concessions. The following provisions shall apply to outdoor go-cart concessions: 
(1)  All buildings and structures associated with such use shall be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Such use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the boundary of a residential district. 
(3)  Such use shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high masonry wall. 
(4)  The motor size of any cart used shall not exceed five horsepower. 
(5)  The maximum area occupied by the facility, excluding areas used solely for parking, shall not exceed 40,000 square feet. 
(6)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(i)  Other outdoor recreation. Other outdoor recreation shall meet the standards provided in subsection (g) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.21), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1165. - Crematories. 
Crematory use shall be located at least 100 feet from the property line of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.22), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1166. - Drive-through facility; restaurant. 
Restaurants with drive-through services shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Drive-through facilities shall not be located within 60 feet of a residentially zoned property, as measured from any menu or speaker box to the property line of adjacent residential property. 
(2)  No drive-through facility shall be located on a property less than 10,000 square feet in area. Stacking spaces for queuing of cars shall be provided for the drive-through area as required in article VI of this chapter. 
(3)  Drive-through lanes and service windows shall be located to the side or rear of buildings. If on a corner lot, only the pickup window may be located on the side between the principal structure and a public street. 
(4)  Drive-through canopies and other structures, where present, shall be constructed from the same materials as the primary building and with a similar level of architectural quality and detailing. 
(5)  Speaker boxes shall be pointed away from adjacent residential properties. Speaker boxes shall not play music but shall only be used for communication for placing orders. 
(6)  Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pick-up areas in accordance with the following requirements. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 25 feet long. Stacking spaces shall begin at the last service window for the drive-through lane (typically the "pick-up" window). 
(7)  Financial institutions with drive-through windows, car washes (automated or staffed facilities), drive-through coffee sales facilities, and any other uses with drive-through facilities with the exception of restaurants with drive-through facilities, shall provide three stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility. 
(8)  Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall provide ten stacking spaces per lane for each window or drive-through service facility. 
(9)  The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities: 
a.  Drive-through lanes shall not impede on and off-site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off-street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building. 
b.  Drive-through lanes shall be separated by striping or curbing from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
c.  All drive-through facilities shall include a bypass lane with a minimum width of ten feet, by which traffic may navigate around the drive-through facility without traveling in the drive-through lane. The bypass lane may share space with a parking access aisle. 
(10)  Drive-through lanes must be set back five feet from all lot lines and roadway right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.23), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1167. - Dwellings: cottage, mobile home, townhouse, and condominium. 
(a)  Cottage. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, a cottage development may be subdivided into individual lots that do not meet the minimum street frontage requirements and may be treated as fee-simple or condominium lots. 
(b)  Mobile home or manufactured home. When permitted outside of a mobile home zoning district, mobile homes or manufactured homes may be used to house caretakers or security personnel only, and may not be used for commercial purposes. 
(c)  Townhouse. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, a townhouse development may be subdivided into individual lots that do not meet the minimum street frontage requirements and may be treated as fee simple or condominium lots. 
(d)  Condominium standards. If a condominium form of ownership is proposed for a development, the development shall meet all applicable state laws, including the Georgia Condominium Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.). Proposed bylaws and the articles of incorporation for the condominium association shall be submitted to the community development director with the application for development approval. 
(e)  Multifamily developments. Multifamily residential units up to and including 24 units per acre may be permitted based on the zoning district or overlay district, however, multifamily residential units over 25 units per acre shall require a special land use permit. This subsection shall pertain to all developments with a multifamily component. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.24), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (4.2.24), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(4.2.24), 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 46-1168. - Emission stations. 
Emission stations shall be set back no less than 35 feet from the public right-of-way. A metal building may be used if it has a brick base at least three feet high. No fabric structures may be used. Large planters for landscaping must be installed around any building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.25), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1169. - Extended stay hotels/hotels/motels. 
Extended stay hotels, hotels and motels shall meet the applicable requirements of chapter 10. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.26), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1170. - Farmer's markets, temporary seasonal. 
Temporary or seasonal farmer's markets must obtain a special administrative permit for temporary seasonal sales or event in order to operate and shall adhere to the following requirements: 
(1)  The operator of a farmer's market shall obtain a business license from the city prior to opening the farmer's market. 
(2)  The city shall be provided a list of the names of persons, firms or corporations who shall provide produce or merchandise for sale as part of the public market. The list shall also generally describe the type of item sold by each said person, firm or corporation. The list shall be updated quarterly during the term of the business license. 
(3)  Displayed inventory of the products sold may include: 
a.  Farm products such as fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, herbs, grains, legumes, nuts, shell eggs, honey or other bee products, flowers, nursery stock, livestock food products (including meat, milk, yogurt, cheese and other dairy products), and seafood. 
b.  Value-added farm products such as baked goods, jams and jellies, canned vegetables, dried fruit, syrups, salsas, salad dressings, flours, coffee, smoked or canned meats or fish, sausages, or prepared foods. 
c.  All other items may not be displayed and sold. 
(4)  At least 75 percent of the vendors participating during the market's hours of operation must be either producers (a person or entity that raises farm products on farms the person or entity owns, rents or leases), family members, employees or agents of producers or preparer of said products. 
(5)  If a booth sells farm products or value-added farm products that are not produced by the vendor, said booth must explicitly disclose the producer's name and location in writing with lettering that is at least two inches tall and visible to the consumer. 
(6)  Vending structures may include a temporary, movable booth, stall, table, tent or other structure used for the sale of goods or for display purposes at a farmer's market. 
(7)  Hours of operation. Temporary or seasonal market hours may be between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Temporary or seasonal markets shall not operate more than six hours per day nor more than three days per week. Set-up of market operations shall begin no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and take-down and clean-up shall end no later than 10:00 p.m. 
(8)  Market manager. On-site presence of a market manager is required during all hours of operation. The market manager shall direct the operations of all vendors participating in the market and verify that the requisite number of individual vending structures are operated by producers. 
(9)  Parking. Two parking spaces per vendor shall be provided on site or within 500 feet of the boundary line of the property hosting a temporary or seasonal farmer's market. 
(10)  Access to public toilet facilities shall be provided to customers. 
(11)  Farmer's markets must obtain a special administrative permit for temporary seasonal sales or event to operate in the city. The application shall include: 
a.  Name and current address of the applicant. 
b.  A notarized letter signed by the property owner or authorized property manager or agent, consenting to the placement of the farmer's market on the property. 
c.  A site plan drawn to-scale showing: 
1.  Property lines, street curbs, street names, adjacent sidewalks as applicable. 
2.  Plan layout and dimensions showing the on-site market area including the number, arrangement, and size of the vending structures to be located in the market. 
3.  Location of on-site and off-site parking spaces. 
4.  Any other documents or information requested and deemed by the community development director as applicable to the specific application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.27), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1171. - Fuel pumps, accessory. 
Fuel pumps as accessory uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The primary building (i.e., convenience store or automobile service station) shall conform to all primary building setbacks. 
(2)  Canopies covering gasoline dispensers shall be set back not less than 15 feet from all street rights-of-way. 
(3)  The canopy shall not exceed the height of the principal building, but in no case shall exceed 20 feet in height. 
(4)  The canopy and its columns shall be complementary to the overall color scheme and building materials scheme of the building facade to which the canopy is accessory. 
(5)  Canopy lighting shall not extend beyond the area beneath the canopy and all fixtures shall be recessed, including any fixture or lens. Lighting shall project inward and downward, shall not have any spillover to adjacent properties, and shall cut off no later than 30 minutes after closure of the facility. 
(6)  Automobile service stations with gas sales shall have a capacity to store one car per bay (car area in front of a pump), so as not to interfere with driveway ingress and egress traffic flow. 
(7)  A minimum of 30 feet is required between a property line and the nearest gasoline pump. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.28), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1172. - Heavy industrial uses. 
In addition to the submission requirements of article VII of this chapter, any application for a special land use permit (SLUP) or a rezoning related to a heavy industrial use shall provide the following information as applicable: 
(1)  Submit within the letter of application the following details: 
a.  Specific operations to be performed. 
b.  Hours of operation. 
c.  Whether operations will be indoors or outdoors. 
d.  How long materials will be stored on the property. 
e.  Whether any hazardous wastes will be involved in the operation, including an explanation of how safety measures will ensure that there is no air or water contamination and how the operators will safely dispose of such hazardous materials. 
f.  A description of any solid wastes handled, produced, or disposed of, including whether the operations will require a solid waste handling permit. 
g.  How many employees there will be. 
h.  Whether the operation will be open to the public. 
i.  What types of vehicles will be delivering materials to the property; and, how many and how often, what thoroughfares or major route plan the trucks will take to get to and from the site to minimize any impact on residential area, and whether trucks will be covered to minimize dust/odor impacts on adjacent roadways used to get to the site. 
j.  Whether the proposed use requires the submittal of a Development of Regional Impact (DRI). 
(2)  Copies of any required state and/or federal agency applications, requirements, environmental assessment reports, or related data; or, if none have been submitted, an indication as to whether such documentation is required. 
(3)  Data from reputable industry sources on current industry standards regarding the proposed land use and how the proposed operation will comply with industry standards to ensure that surrounding properties are not adversely impacted. 
(4)  For any of the following uses, certification by an environmental professional that the proposed operation will not have any adverse air or water quality impacts on surrounding properties: 
a.  Any use requiring a solid waste handling permit. 
b.  Any use which utilizes burning, melting, or degasification. 
c.  Any use which involves the emissions of particulate matter. 
d.  Any use which processes or stores hazardous materials. 
e.  Any landfill. 
(5)  Detailed information on proposed methods to minimize any adverse air/water quality impacts based on current industry standards. 
(6)  Detailed information on proposed methods to minimize any noise, odor, dust, and vibration on surrounding properties in light of current industry standards. 
(7)  Detailed information regarding how traffic impacts will be accommodated on the surrounding road network. 
(8)  Any data regarding any monthly, quarterly, or yearly required inspections by any state or federal agency to ensure compliance with any state or federal permits once use has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.29), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1173. - Heliport, general aviation airport. 
Heliports must comply with FAA regulations AC No. 150/5390 for design standards for general aviation, hospital heliports, and rooftop emergency facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.30), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1174. - Home occupations and private educational uses. 
The following provisions apply to home occupations: 
(1)  A home occupation where no customer contact occurs shall be considered a type I home occupation and may be conducted with administrative approval by the community development director. Up to two full-time residents of the premises are allowed to conduct separate home occupations in the same dwelling. In reviewing such a request, the local government may consider the reason, potential residential impact, parking needs, hours of operation and other relevant factors. 
(2)  All home occupations other than type I home occupations shall be considered a type II home occupation and shall require a special land use permit (SLUP). Additional conditions may be placed on the approval of a type II home occupation in order to ensure the home occupation will not be a detriment to the character of the residential neighborhood. 
a.  Customer contact is allowed for type II home occupations. 
b.  Up to two full-time residents of the premises are allowed to conduct separate home occupations in the same dwelling. In reviewing such a request, the local government may consider the reason, potential residential impact, parking needs, hours of operation and other relevant factors. 
(3)  All home occupations shall meet the following standards: 
a.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation. 
b.  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, glare or electrical interference that would be detectable beyond the dwelling unit. 
c.  The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit, and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed at the location of the home occupation. 
d.  No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit and or 500 square feet, whichever is less, may be used for the operation of the home occupation. 
e.  No more than one business vehicle per home occupation is allowed. 
f.  No home occupation shall be operated so as to create or cause a nuisance. 
g.  Home occupation shall not include the use of a dwelling unit for the purpose of operating any automobile repair establishment, or car wash. 
h.  Occupations that are mobile or dispatch-only may be allowed, provided that any business vehicle used for the home occupation complies with this section, and is limited to one business vehicle per occupation. 
(4)  Private educational services shall comply with home occupation standards and no more than three students shall be served at a time. Family members residing in the home are not counted towards the three students allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.31), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1175. - Late-night establishments and night clubs. 
(a)  The regulations that follow regarding late-night establishments and nightclubs are intended to afford protection to residential uses and other uses so as to protect the public health, safety, and welfare while respecting and providing adequate opportunities for nightlife in the city. 
(b)  Late-night establishments and nightclubs shall be subject to all of the following standards: 
(1)  Parking facilities within a lot may be shared in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Valet parking shall not be used to satisfy the requirement to meet applicable parking standards. 
(3)  Methods of traffic circulation, ingress and egress shall be consistent with best management practices as approved by the transportation division of the public works department. 
(4)  Noise from the proposed use shall be contained within the subject retail center units or standalone structures. The facility shall comply with the noise ordinance. 
(c)  No late night establishment or night club boundary line shall be located within 1,500 feet from the boundary line of property zoned for residential use. 
(d)  Every special land use permit application for a late-night establishment or nightclub shall include a scaled drawing of the location of the proposed premises, showing the distance measured in feet from the boundary line of the property proposed to be used as a late-night establishment or nightclub to the boundary line of property zoned for residential use. Such drawing shall be certified by a land surveyor or professional engineer registered in the state. For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in feet as follows: 
(1)  From the property line of the land upon which the late-night establishment or nightclub is located; 
(2)  To the property line of the land which is zoned for a residential use; 
(3)  Along a straight line which describes the shortest distance between the two property lines (i.e., "as the crow flies"). 
(e)  Any late-night establishment or nightclub operating pursuant to a validly issued business and liquor license issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be a legal nonconforming use as defined in article IX of this chapter. No late-night establishment or nightclub currently operating under a valid license issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be required to secure a special land use permit from the mayor and city council in order to continue operation. Such establishments shall be required to comply with the applicable provisions of article IV, division 5 of this chapter regarding cessation, expansion, movement, enlargement or other alteration of the late-night establishment or nightclub. If a licensee is operating a legal nonconforming late-night establishment or nightclub at a particular location pursuant to this zoning ordinance, and such license is revoked, upon revocation, the legal nonconforming status of the licensee at that particular location shall be terminated 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.32), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1176. - Live-work. 
(a)  A live-work unit is a residential unit used as both living accommodations, which includes cooking space and sanitary facility in conformance with applicable building standards and board of health standards, and adequate working space accessible from the living area. If a live-work unit is not constructed to commercial fire safety standards, the commercial portion of the live-work unit may only be operated by one or more persons who reside in the unit. If a live-work unit is constructed to commercial fire safety standards, a resident of the live-work unit may allow the commercial portion of the live-work unit to be operated by a third-party. 
(b)  Live-work units shall meet all of the following standards: 
(1)  Uses shall be compatible with residential uses and shall not produce or create noise, smoke, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors, electrical interference, or fire hazards that would unreasonably interfere with residential uses. 
(2)  If a live-work unit is in a residential district, permitted uses shall be limited to those uses allowed in the Neighborhood Shopping (NS) District. For a live-work unit located in a nonresidential district, permitted uses shall be limited to those uses allowed in that district. 
(3)  Restroom facilities shall be provided to serve the commercial portion of the unit. Individual public restrooms facilities are not required within each live-work unit when disabled accessible public restroom facilities are provided elsewhere on an accessible route within the building or building site. 
(4)  A live-work unit will be subject to all applicable licenses and business taxes. 
(5)  See also article V of this chapter for additional design requirements, including section 46-1419. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.33), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1177. - Mines, mining, quarries, gravel pits, borrow pits, and sand pits. 
The following regulations apply to the use of land as a mine, mining operation, quarry, gravel pit, borrow pit, and sand pit. See also article VII of this chapter for additional approval criteria. 
(1)  The following provisions apply to removal or extraction of dirt, sand and soil: 
a.  Drainage plans and a plan for the redevelopment of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit. 
b.  The use shall not be established within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning district or use nor within 300 feet of any other use. 
c.  This subsection shall not prohibit the removal of earth and rock and filling and grading in any district done for land development purposes, upon issuance of a development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Quarry and mining. The following provisions apply to the use of any parcel of land for a quarry, mine or mining operation: 
a.  All improved and maintained entrances shall be fenced and locked during non-business hours. The property shall be adequately posted as is required by state law, and evidence of such posting shall be filed with the community development director. 
b.  Operators shall comply with state department of natural resources, surface mining land reclamation program rules and regulations, and the mining permit number issued by the state shall be filed with the community development director. 
c.  A blasting limit of two inches per second peak particle velocity, as measured from any of three mutually perpendicular directions in the ground at off-site buildings, shall not be exceeded. 
d.  An air blast limit of 128 decibels (linear-peak), measured at off-site residential buildings, shall not be exceeded. 
e.  Seismographic and noise instrumentation shall be required for a minimum of one blast per three-month period. The records of such instrumentation and records of all blasts, including total charge weight, charge weight per delay, charge depth, date and time, location and meteorological conditions, shall be retained by the operator for a period of not less than two years. All non-instrumented blasts shall be in compliance with the recommended scaled distance, as defined by the United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Mines Bulletin 656, entitled Blasting Vibrations and Their Effects on Structures. 
(3)  Prior to the issuance of any development permit for any mine, quarry, gravel pit, or sand pit, the applicant shall provide to the director of public works a reuse or reclamation plan which meets all requirements of chapter 22. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.34), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1178. - Mini-warehouses. 
(a)  Outside storage for mini-warehouses shall be limited to vehicles such as boats, RVs etc. and shall only be allowed in side and rear yards. Outside storage shall be screened per the standards in section 46-1339. 
(b)  Storage units may not be used for the following uses: the operation of a business or service enterprise; personal activities such as hobbies, arts and crafts, woodworking, repair, restoration or maintenance of machinery or equipment; hazardous or toxic material storage; and/or living or sleeping quarters. 
(c)  Wares, goods and/or personal property stored therein shall not include explosives, paint, flammable chemicals or other materials which might be corrosive or hazardous. 
(d)  Buffer standards in article V of this chapter shall apply. 
(e)  Exterior lighting for a mini-warehouse facility shall project inward and downward, and shall not spillover to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.35), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-10-37, att. (4.2.35), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 46-1179. - Multi-warehouses. 
(a)  No outside storage shall be allowed, including vehicle leasing. 
(b)  All buildings shall have windows or architectural treatments that appear as windows. 
(c)  Multi-warehouses shall be climate-controlled. 
(d)  Storage units may not be used for the following uses: the operation of a business or service enterprise: personal activities such as hobbies, arts and crafts, woodworking, repair, restoration or maintenance of machinery or equipment; hazardous or toxic material storage; and/or living or sleeping quarters. 
(e)  Wares, goods and/or personal property stored therein shall not include explosives, paint, flammable chemicals or other materials which might be corrosive or hazardous. 
(f)  Buffer standards in article V of this chapter shall apply. 
(g)  Exterior lighting for a mini-warehouse facility shall project inward and downward, and shall not spillover to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10-37, att. (4.2.35(1)), 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 46-1180. - Moving buildings, requirements. 
No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be moved within or into the city unless, when relocated, it meets all requirements of chapter 8 article III of this chapter, and this chapter and is first approved by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.36), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1181. - Outdoor display and seating. 
This section applies to the placement of merchandise and/or merchandise vending machines outside the walls of any enclosed building with the intent being to entice potential customers onto the premises through the public display of such merchandise and/or merchandise vending machines. The term "outdoor display" shall not apply to merchandise which is placed outside temporarily for the purpose of sales. See division 3 of this article. Outdoor display shall be permitted in conjunction with permitted uses in the NS, C-1, C-2, MU districts, M, and M-2 zoning districts, provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Areas devoted to outdoor display, as referred to in this section, shall be allowed on public and private sidewalks, provided that all ADA requirements are fulfilled. 
(2)  All outdoor display areas shall be located contiguous to the principal building, subject to all fire safety requirements. 
(3)  No outdoor display shall be permitted to occupy or interfere with traffic circulation, required parking areas or pedestrian access. 
(4)  The type of merchandise permitted in outdoor displays shall be limited to automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, farm equipment, yard and garden accessories, prefabricated storage sheds, nursery and agricultural products, gas pump island beverage shelving, and vending machines. This section shall not be interpreted to include supply yards, salvage yards, or other items or materials considered outdoor storage. 
(5)  Outdoor displays of tires. See section 46-1157(i). 
(6)  Outdoor displays shall be permitted in any yard, but shall not encroach into any public rights-of-way. 
(7)  Outdoor displays shall present a neat and orderly appearance. 
(8)  Outdoor displays shall be permitted only where such display is incidental to and supportive of the principal use of the structure located on the same parcel. 
(9)  Each outdoor display location must be shown on the site plan at time of initial permitting of land development permits and building permits and shall not encroach on any required landscaping and parking areas. 
(10)  These standards shall apply to outdoor seating areas at restaurants, coffee shops, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.37), 7-11-2016; Ord. No 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1182. - Outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment or vehicles. 
The following regulations shall apply to outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment, or vehicles. The term "outdoor storage" does not include outside display of merchandise; outdoor temporary sales or events; auto-dealerships; salvage yards; junkyards; automobile wrecking yards; or storage yards for non-operable, confiscated, or dilapidated vehicles, equipment, or materials. 
(1)  In the O-I, NS, and C-1 districts, accessory outdoor storage associated with the operation of a business is allowed subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The outdoor storage area shall be at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way. 
b.  The outdoor storage area shall be screened so as not to be visible at ground level from any adjoining property or public street. 
c.  The materials stored must be for use by the owner and not displayed for sale to third parties. 
d.  Fleet vehicles associated with the operation of the business are exempt from these requirements. 
(2)  In the C-2, M, and M-2 districts, any outdoor storage areas (primary or accessory) are allowed subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The outdoor storage area shall be at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way. 
b.  The outdoor storage area shall be screened so as not to be visible at ground level from any adjoining property or public street. 
c.  A ten-foot-wide evergreen landscape buffer around the outside perimeter of the screened area shall be provided when adjacent to any property not zoned C-2, M, or M-2. 
d.  Fleet vehicles associated with the operation of a business are exempt from these requirements. 
(3)  In residential districts, outdoor storage is allowed for items such as barbecue grills, lawn furniture, hoses, garden tools, lawn equipment and outdoor play equipment. Outdoor storage of the following are expressly prohibited: 
a.  Indoor appliances, whether or not in use; 
b.  Indoor furniture, whether or not used for outdoor leisure furniture; and 
c.  Items that are no longer used for their intended purpose; for example, a bike missing a tire, broken machinery, old appliances and scrap metal or other scrap materials. 
(4)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to small cell telecommunication structures that are a part of a distributed antennae system, which shall be subject to section 46-1201. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.38), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1183. - Parking, commercial lot. 
Commercial parking lots shall meet all the streetscape, landscaping, buffering and screening requirements provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.39), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1184. - Pawn shops. 
The following provisions shall apply to pawn shops, whether designed as a primary, standalone use or as a primary use tenant of a shopping center: 
(1)  This use shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of an existing pawn shop or check cashing facility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.40), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1185. - Personal care homes and child caring institutions. 
(a)  Personal care homes, general requirements. 
(1)  Each personal care home must obtain all licenses and/or permits required by the state in order to operate. Each personal care home licensed and/or permitted by the state must display its state-issued licenses and/or permits in plain view, visible from the front doorway of the facility. 
(2)  No personal care home may display any exterior signage that violates the sign ordinance in chapter 34 or the sign provisions in the zoning regulations for the underlying zoning district where the personal care home is located. 
(3)  Personal care homes may apply for an FHA Accommodation Variance as provided for in section 46-1639. 
(b)  Personal care home, group (four to six persons). 
(1)  Two copies of complete architectural plans for the subject group personal care home, signed or sealed by a registered architect, shall be submitted to the community development director prior to issuance of a building permit or business license. 
(2)  Each group personal care home must provide at least four parking spaces within a driveway, garage or carport and must comply with any applicable requirements in article VI of this chapter. 
(3)  In order to prevent institutionalizing residential neighborhoods, no group personal care home located in the RE, R-LG, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-50, R-SM, or MR-1 zoning district may be operated within 1,000 feet of any other group personal care home. The 1,000 foot distance requirement is measured by a straight line which is the shortest distance (i.e., "as the crow flies") between the property lines of the two tracts of land on which the group personal care homes are located. 
(c)  Personal care home, community (seven or more persons). 
(1)  Two copies of complete architectural plans for the subject community personal care home, signed or sealed by a registered architect, shall be submitted to the community development director prior to issuance of a building permit or business license. 
(2)  Each community personal care home must provide at least one-half parking spaces for each employee and resident, and must comply with any applicable requirements in article VI of this chapter. 
(d)  Child caring institutions, general requirements. 
(1)  Each child caring institution must obtain all licenses and/or permits required by the state in order to operate. Each child caring institution must display its state-issued licenses and/or permits in plain view, visible from the front doorway of the facility. 
(2)  No child caring institution may display any exterior signage that violates the sign ordinance in chapter 34 or the sign provisions in the zoning regulations for the underlying zoning district where the personal care home is located. 
(e)  Child caring institution, group (four-six children). 
(1)  Two copies of complete architectural plans for the subject group child caring institution, signed or sealed by a registered architect, shall be submitted to the community development director prior to issuance of a building permit or business license. 
(2)  Each group child caring institution must provide at least four parking spaces within a driveway, garage or carport, and must comply with any applicable requirements in article VI of this chapter. 
(f)  Child caring institutions, community (seven or more children). 
(1)  Two copies of the complete architectural plans of the subject community child caring institution, signed and sealed by a registered architect, shall be submitted to the community development director prior to issuance of a building permit or business license. 
(2)  Each community child caring institution must provide at least one-half parking spaces for each employee and resident, and must comply with any applicable requirements in article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.41), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1186. - Places of worship; convents; monasteries; temporary religious meetings. 
The following subsections shall apply to places of worship, convents and monasteries and their related uses, buildings and structures located in a residential district: 
(1)  Any building or structure established in connection with places of worship, monasteries or convents shall be located at least 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. Where the adjoining property is zoned for nonresidential use, the setback for any building or structure shall be no less than 20 feet for a side yard and no less than 30 feet for a rear yard. 
(2)  The required setback from any street right-of-way shall be the front yard setback for the applicable residential district. 
(3)  The parking areas and driveways for any such uses shall be located at least 20 feet from any property line, with a visual screen, provided by a six-foot-high fence or sufficient vegetation established within that area. 
(4)  Places of worship, convents and monasteries shall be located on a minimum lot area of three acres and shall have frontage of at least 100 feet along a public street. 
(5)  Places of worship, convents and monasteries shall be located only on a thoroughfare or arterial. 
(6)  Any uses, buildings or structures operated by a place of worship that are not specifically included within the definition of place of worship must fully comply with the applicable zoning district regulations, including, but not limited to, any requirement for a special land use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.42), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1187. - Private elementary, middle and high school. 
(a)  The minimum lot size for private elementary, middle and high school, for which an application for a special land use permit is filed, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Elementary school: Two acres plus one additional acre for each 100 students based on the designed capacity of the school. 
(2)  Middle school: Three acres plus two acres for each 100 students based on the designed capacity of the school. 
(3)  High school: Five acres plus two acres for each 100 students based on the designed capacity of the school. 
(b)  The minimum public road frontage for a private school is 200 feet. 
(c)  Accessory ball fields shall be located at least 50 feet from a residential district or property used for a residential purpose. 
(d)  A 50-foot undisturbed buffer is required if adjacent to a residential district or property used for a residential purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.43), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1188. - Salvage yard, junkyard. 
The following provisions shall be required for automobile salvage, wrecking yards and junkyards, primary or accessory: 
(1)  The site shall be enclosed by a wall or opaque fence not less than eight feet in height. 
(2)  No activity and no vehicle storage associated with such uses shall be conducted within 100 feet of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(3)  No activity and no vehicle storage associated with such uses, except for deliveries, pickups, and signs, shall be conducted within 50 feet of the street right-of-way. 
(4)  No activity and no vehicle storage associated with such uses shall be conducted within 50 feet of the side and rear property lines, unless the adjacent property is zoned M or M-2. 
(5)  The use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
(6)  The sale of automobile parts removed from vehicles on the site shall be permitted. 
(7)  A ten-foot-wide evergreen landscape buffer around the outside perimeter of the screened area shall be provided when adjacent to any property not zoned C-2, M, or M-2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.44), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1189. - School, specialized and vocational. 
Specialized and vocational schools must meet the applicable requirements of section 46-1187 and, with the exception of facilities located in industrial districts, all activities shall occur within enclosed buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.45), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1190. - Service areas, outdoor, for nonresidential uses. 
All service areas for nonresidential uses shall be established so as not to encroach into any yard requirement and shall be visually screened from adjacent residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.47), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1191. - Shelters for homeless or battered persons and transitional housing facilities. 
(a)  No shelter for homeless or battered persons and no transitional housing facility shall be designed to exceed a capacity of 20 persons, unless accessory to a place of worship. 
(b)  Prior to issuance of any approvals for operation of a shelter for homeless or battered person or transitional housing facility, the applicant for such approval shall disclose, in writing, the capacity and floor plan of the facility. 
(c)  Such shelters shall comply with all applicable building, housing, and fire codes and shall fully comply with O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq. before a certificate of occupancy can be issued. The loss of any state license or permit shall result in an automatic revocation of that county issued permit or license. 
(d)  There shall be no use on the property other than the shelter, unless accessory to place of worship. 
(e)  No new shelter or transitional housing facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of an existing shelter or transitional housing facility. 
(f)  Shelters for homeless or battered persons and transitional housing facilities may apply for an FHA accommodation variance as provided for in section 46-1639 if the residents would constitute disabled persons under the FHA. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.48), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1192. - Solid waste facility regulations. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall not approve any amendment to the zoning maps, the comprehensive land use map or any application for a special land use permit, or any development or building permit related to a landfill if such landfill is not in compliance with the applicable requirements of Georgia's Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall not approve any amendment to the zoning maps, the comprehensive land use map or any application for a special land use permit related to a landfill unless the applicant obtains written verification from the state environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources that the landfill complies with or is not yet required to comply with all the applicable requirements set forth in the Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "landfill" means a disposal facility, a materials recovery facility, a solid waste handling facility, a solid waste landfill, a private industry solid waste disposal facility, a solid waste handling facility, a solid waste thermal treatment technology facility, and a disposal facility for biomedical waste, hazardous and/or toxic materials including radioactive materials as all such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 and as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.49), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1193. - Swimming pool, community. 
Community swimming pools and their customary accessory buildings and structures shall be setback at least 15 feet from all side and rear lot lines and be enclosed by a wall or fence, not less than four feet nor more than six feet in height. Setback is measured from the pool decking except where established elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.50), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1194. - Telecommunications towers and antennas. 
See wireless telecommunications, sections 46-1199 and 46-1200. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.51), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1195. - Tennis court, accessory to residential. 
Tennis courts on individual residential lots shall be located in rear yards and shall be setback at least 15 feet from all side and rear property lines and be enclosed by a fence or freestanding wall at least eight feet high. Lighting for the private tennis court shall not be permitted, except by a special administrative permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.52), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1196. - Transit shelters. 
(a)  Transit shelters may be located within a street right-of-way with permission from the community development director or within an established yard fronting a street, but may not be located so as to obstruct the sight distance triangle per article V of this chapter. 
(b)  A schematic plan of the transit shelter must be submitted and approved by the community development director. The plan must include the following: 
(1)  The location of the proposed shelter relative to street, property lines, and established building yards; 
(2)  The size and design of the shelter, including front, side, and rear elevations, building materials, and any public convenience or safety features such as telephone, lighting, heating, or trash containers. Trash containers shall be provided for all transit shelters. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.53), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1197. - Truck stop. 
The following provisions apply to truck stops whether designed as a primary use or accessory use as part of an industrial development: 
(1)  Truck stops shall be permitted only on parcels of ten acres or more. 
(2)  Entrance drives for truck stop facilities shall not be closer than 300 feet from any point of an interstate highway interchange. 
(3)  Truck stops shall meet all state and federal environmental guidelines and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.54), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1198. - Urban garden or community gardens. 
(a)  If an urban garden or community garden is greater than five acres, a special administrative permit is required. The permit shall expire 24 months from issuance, and such use shall thereafter only operate upon issuance of a new permit in the manner prescribed herein. 
(b)  The following items shall be submitted with the special administrative permit application: 
(1)  Name and current address of the applicant. 
(2)  Address of the garden. 
(3)  Proof of ownership or leasehold interest (for the duration of the special administrative permit) of the lot on which the garden is located; or a notarized letter signed by the property owner, or authorized property manager or agent, consenting to the placement of a garden on the lot. 
(4)  A site plan showing: 
a.  Property lines, street curbs, street names, and adjacent sidewalks as applicable. 
b.  Plan layout and dimensions showing plot layout, structures and compost areas. 
c.  Source of water, including any rain barrel locations. 
(5)  Permit fee. 
(6)  Other documents or information reasonably deemed necessary to determine the compatibility of the use identified in the permit application. 
(c)  Sales of produce from the community garden site is allowed with the approval of a special administrative permit for temporary outdoor seasonal activities, provided the following regulations are met and documentation, where required, is provided with the application: 
(1)  Sales hours. Garden sales and pickups may occur between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Set-up of sales operations shall begin no earlier than 6:00 a.m., and take-down and clean-up shall end no later than 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Management. An individual shall be present on-site during all sales hours to direct the vending operations. 
(d)  The following requirements apply for all urban or community gardens, of any acreage. Gardens accessory to a residence are excluded from these standards. 
(1)  Garden operating rules and regulations. A set of operating rules shall be established to address the governance structure of the garden, hours of operation, maintenance, and security. 
(2)  Fencing. All fences shall comply with all applicable sections in this Code pertaining to the relevant zoning district in which the garden is located. 
(3)  Synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides. Gardens may submit documentation of organic methods. Alternatively, the garden shall be designed and maintained so that synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides will not harm any adjacent property. 
(4)  Waste removal. The garden shall recycle and remove waste in accordance with all applicable sections of this Code. 
(5)  Parking requirements. The garden shall provide a minimum of one parking space per one-half acre of property on which the community garden is located during the hours of operation. The parking requirement may be met by providing either on-site parking or off-site parking within 500 feet of the property line of the property on which the community garden is located. 
(6)  Permitted structures. The following structures are permitted in association with an urban or community garden: 
a.  Greenhouses, hoop houses, cold-frames and similar structures used to extend the growing season. 
b.  Storage buildings limited to tool sheds, shade pavilions, barns, restroom facilities with composting toilets, and planting preparation houses. 
c.  Benches, bike racks, raised and accessible beds, compost bins, picnic tables, seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems, chicken coops, beehives and children's area. 
(7)  Use of machinery. Use of machinery and equipment is allowed, but use of machinery is limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. When not in use, all such machinery and equipment (with the exception of machinery and equipment that is: 
a.  Intended for ordinary household use; 
b.  Borrowed or rented for a period not to exceed seven days; or 
c.  Located in an urban garden in Light Industrial District or Heavy Industrial District). 
Shall be stored so as not to be visible from any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. 
(8)  Buildings. Buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from property lines. 
(9)  A minimum of 20 feet of lot frontage along a public right-of-way, or an access easement not less than ten feet wide to provide vehicular access in case of an emergency is required. 
(10)  Driveways and parking may be surfaced with pervious material, including gravel. 
(11)  The site should be designed and maintained so that water does not cause erosion or allow sedimentation on adjacent property. 
(12)  No fencing shall exceed six feet in height. Fencing along the front shall not exceed four feet. 
(13)  Compost and waste collection bins must be located in the rear yard (if a building exists) and be placed at least ten feet from any property line. 
(14)  One sign located on a community garden site is permitted, provided that it shall not exceed six square feet of sign area, excluding the base, and shall not exceed four feet in height. Garden signs shall not be illuminated. Internally located directional, instructional, educational and labeling signs are allowed without a permit. 
(15)  Hours of operation (other than sales) shall be allowed from dawn until dusk. No lighting is allowed. 
(16)  Community gardens must comply with supplemental regulations regarding livestock, beekeeping, and temporary, seasonal sales or events, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.55), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1999. - Utility structure necessary for transmission or distribution of service. 
Any utility structure necessary for the transmission or distribution of service, whether an authorized use or a permitted use, shall provide security fencing and landscaping to lessen the visual impact of such structures on adjoining property. Noise resulting from temporary construction activity pursuant to a valid development or building permit, that is not a part of the usual and ongoing operation of the use on the site, that occurs between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. Such structures shall be located only within the buildable area of any lot where permitted or authorized by zoning and shall meet all requirements of the district in which such structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.56), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1200. - Wireless telecommunications (cell tower). 
(a)  Purpose and goals. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to ensure that residents, public safety operations, and businesses in the city have reliable access to wireless telecommunications networks and state of the art communication services while also ensuring that this objective is achieved in a manner consistent with the city's planning and zoning standards, to maintain to the extent possible the aesthetic integrity of the community, and in accordance with applicable state law and with federal law, regulations, and guidance, including the Telecommunication Act of 1996 which preserved, with certain limitations, local government land use and zoning authority concerning the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunication facilities. 
(2)  The goals of this section are: 
a.  To ensure the city has sufficient wireless infrastructure to support its public safety communications throughout the city; 
b.  To provide access to reliable wireless telecommunication services by residents, businesses, and visitors throughout all areas of the city; 
c.  To minimize the total number of support structures within the city by promoting and encouraging the joint use of new and existing wireless support structures among wireless service providers; 
d.  To encourage the location of wireless support structures, to the extent possible, in areas where adverse impacts on the community will be minimized; 
e.  To encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; 
f.  To avoid potential damage to property caused by wireless communications facilities by insuring that such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or when determined to be structurally unsound; 
g.  To preserve those areas of scenic or historic significance; 
h.  To facilitate implementation of an existing tower map; 
i.  To promote and encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers; 
j.  To enhance the ability of the providers of wireless communications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently; 
k.  To be consistent with all overlay districts within the city, to the extent practicable and so as to not to conflict with this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means when a tower is not operated for a continuous period of six months. 
Accessory equipment means any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a telecommunications facility or support structure. This equipment includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters or other structures. 
Administrative approval means zoning approval that the community development director is authorized to grant in the form of a special administrative permit. 
Administrative review means evaluation of an application by the community development director in connection with the review of an application for a building permit. 
Antenna means any communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signal used in the provision of all types of wireless communication services including, but not limited to, cellular, paging, personal communications services (PCS) or microwave communications. Such structures and devices include, but are not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whips. The term" antenna" does not apply to broadcast antennas, antennas designed for amateur radio use, or satellite dishes designed for residential or household purposes. 
Application means a formal request submitted to the city to construct, collocate or modify a wireless support structure or a wireless facility. 
Attached wireless telecommunications facility means an antenna or antenna array that is secured to an existing building or structure (except an antenna support structure) with any accompanying pole or device which attaches it to the building or structure, together with transmission cables and an equipment cabinet, which may be located either on the roof or inside/outside of the building or structure, and do not significantly change the profile of the existing structure and are not readily noticeable to the untrained eye. Attached wireless telecommunications facilities may be concealed or contained in an architectural feature and should complement the existing theme and rhythm of the structure. An attached wireless telecommunications facility is considered to be an accessory use to the existing principal use on a site. 
Carrier on wheels or cell on wheels (COW) means a portable self-contained telecommunications facility that can be moved to a location and set up to provide wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. A COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna support structure, though it may use a separate temporary mast for the placement of antennas. 
Collocate or collocation means the placement or installation of new wireless facilities on previously approved and constructed wireless support structures, including monopoles and towers, both self-supporting and guyed, in a manner that negates the need to construct a new freestanding wireless support structure. Such term includes the placement of accessory equipment within an existing equipment compound. 
Distributed antenna systems (DAS) means a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure. 
Equipment compound means an area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless support structure within which accessory equipment is located. 
Existing structure means previously erected support structure or any other structure, including, but not limited to, buildings and water tanks, to which telecommunications facilities may be attached. 
Fall zone means the maximum distance from its base a wireless support structure will collapse in the event of a failure, usually less than the total height of such structure. This distance must be defined by a professional civil or structural engineer licensed in the state. 
Geographic search area (GSA) means a geographic area designated by a wireless provider or operator as the area within which a new telecommunication facility must be located to serve an identified system need, produced in accordance with generally accepted principles of wireless engineering. 
Modification means the improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement of wireless facilities on an existing wireless support structure or within an existing equipment compound and may include: 
(1)  An increase in structure height of a pre-existing tower up to 30 percent so long as such height increase does not trigger FAA lighting requirements; or 
(2)  The removal and replacement of a pre-existing tower with a new tower at the same location that may be up to 30 percent taller so long as any such structure height increase does not trigger FAA lighting requirements. 
Monopole means a single, freestanding pole-type structure supporting one or more antennas. For purposes of this section, a monopole is not a tower. 
Ordinary maintenance means action taken to ensure that telecommunications facilities and support structures are kept in good operating condition. The term "ordinary maintenance" includes inspections, testing and modifications that maintain functional capacity, aesthetic and structural integrity; for example the strengthening of a support structure's foundation, or of the support structure itself. The term "ordinary maintenance" includes replacing antennas of a similar size, weight, shape and color and accessory equipment within an existing telecommunications facility, and relocating the antennas of approved telecommunications facilities to different height levels on an existing monopole or tower upon which they are currently located. The term "ordinary maintenance" does not include modifications. 
Replacement means constructing a new support structure of the same proportions and of equal height, or such other height that would not constitute a modification to a pre-existing support structure, in order to support a telecommunications facility or to accommodate collocation and removing the pre-existing support structure. 
Stealth telecommunications facility means any telecommunications facility that is integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure or any new support structure designed so that the purpose of the facility or support structure for providing wireless services is not readily apparent to a casual observer. The term "stealth communications facility" includes, but is not limited to artificial trees, clock towers, bell steeples, church towers and steeples, light poles, flag poles, monopoles with modified flush mount antennae and similar alternative-design structures that, in the opinion of the community development director or mayor and city council, as may be appropriate based on the requirements for approval in the zoning district in which the telecommunications facility is to be located, are compatible with the natural setting or surrounding structures and effectively camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Support structure (new or existing) means a structure designed to support telecommunications facilities including, but not limited to, monopoles, towers, and other freestanding self-supporting structures. 
Telecommunications facility means any unmanned facility established for the purpose of providing wireless transmission of voice, data, images or other information including, but not limited to, cellular telephone service, personal communications service (PCS), and paging service. A telecommunications facility can consist of one or more antennas and along with accessory equipment located in an equipment compound. 
Tower means a lattice-type structure, guyed or freestanding, that supports one or more antennas or antenna arrays. 
(c)  Approvals required for telecommunications facilities, stealth and new support structures. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, construct, enlarge, move, alter or convert any tower or antenna or cause the same to be done within the city except in accordance with the provisions of this section. In addition, except as otherwise specifically provided herein, all towers and antennas shall also comply with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which said tower or antenna is located and any permits authorizing said tower or antennas. 
(1)  All telecommunications facilities, stealth and new support structures shall require the issuance of a building permit in compliance with the administrative review processes described in this article. The building permit for a telecommunications facilities, stealth and new support structures shall be in addition to either a special administrative permit or a special land use permit if required. 
(2)  Telecommunications facilities, stealth and new support structures permitted pursuant to table 4.1 upon issuance of a special administrative permit by the community development director shall be considered in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. A building permit for a telecommunications facilities, stealth and new support structures may be applied for and considered contemporaneously with an application for a special administrative permit. 
(3)  Telecommunications facilities, stealth and new support structures not permitted by a special administrative permit shall be permitted upon the granting of a special land use permit by the city mayor and city council in accordance with the standards set forth in this article, before submittal for administrative review (building permit). 
(d)  Exempt. Ordinary maintenance of existing telecommunications facilities, stealth and new support structures shall be exempt from zoning and permitting requirements. In addition, the following facilities are not subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Antennas used by residential households solely for broadcast radio and television reception; 
(2)  Satellite antennas used solely for residential or household purposes; 
(3)  Telecommunication facilities, towers, stealth and new support structures, and monopoles located on county or city-owned property; 
(4)  COWs placed for a period of not more than 120 consecutive days at any location within the city after a declaration of an emergency or a disaster; 
(5)  Television and AM/FM radio broadcast towers and associated facilities; and 
(6)  DAS facilities when located within a building or on the exterior of a building. 
(e)  Telecommunications facilities, and modifications permitted by administrative review (building permit). 
(1)  Telecommunications facilities located on existing structures. 
a.  Attached wireless telecommunications facilities are permitted in all zoning districts, except single-family residential, when located on any existing structure (other than a single-family residential structure or a multifamily residential structure less than four stories or 50 feet in height) subject to administrative review in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
b.  Attached wireless telecommunication facilities may exceed the maximum building height limitations within a zoning district, above the roof line of a flat roof or the top of a parapet wall to which they are attached, but shall be camouflaged or screened with an architectural feature compatible with the building. Modifications are permitted to all existing stealth and support structures and associated equipment compounds in accordance with the requirements of this article. Any modification involving increasing the height of an existing tower, either directly or by replacement, shall be permitted only upon a demonstration deemed sufficient to the community development director that increasing structure height will allow collocation on the tower by a wireless service provider and that such collocation will obviate the need for a new telecommunications facility in the same geographic search area (GSA). Approval of a modification involving an increase in the height of an existing tower, either directly or by replacement, shall also authorize a corresponding increase in the size of the associated equipment compound sufficient to accommodate the accessory equipment needed by the wireless service provider collocating on the tower. 
(2)  A monopole or replacement pole that will support utility lines as well as a telecommunications facility shall be permitted within utility easements or rights-of-way, in accordance with the requirements of this article, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The utility easement or right-of-way shall be a minimum of 100 feet in width. 
b.  The easement or right-of-way shall contain overhead utility transmission and/or distribution structures that are 80 feet or greater in height. 
c.  The height of the monopole or replacement pole may not exceed by more than 30 feet the height of existing utility support structures. 
d.  Monopoles and all accessory equipment shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all boundaries of the easement or right-of-way. 
e.  Single carrier monopoles may be used within utility easements and rights-of-way due to the height restriction imposed by subsection (e)(2)c of this section. 
Poles that use the structure of a utility tower for support are permitted. Such poles may extend up to 20 feet above the height of the utility tower. 
(3)  The community development director must issue a written decision approving, approving with conditions, or denying the application for modification or collocation within 90 days of submission of the initial application. 
(f)  Telecommunication facilities and structures permitted by special administrative permit or special land use permit. 
(1)  New support structures and attached wireless. 
a.  New support structures up to 150 feet in height shall be permitted in the NS and OIT zoning districts by special land use permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
b.  New support structures up to 199 feet in height shall be permitted by special administrative permit in the OI, OD, C-1, C-2, M and M-2 zoning districts in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
c.  Only attached wireless telecommunications (AWT) facilities are allowed in single-family residential districts, RE, RLG, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60 and RSM. An AWT shall be located only on property that is used for nonresidential purposes, and attached to nonresidential structures. The height of the facility shall be measured to include the height of the structure. These facilities shall be permitted by special administrative permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
d.  New support structures either up to 150 feet in height, or up to 199 feet in height depending on the zoning district in which the new support structure is located, may be permitted administratively or through the special land use permit process as described in table 4.1. The height of any proposed support structure shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to meet the coverage or capacity objectives of the facility. Stealth design is encouraged. 
(2)  Stealth design telecommunications facilities. 
a.  Any telecommunications facility that otherwise complies with the requirements of this article, including procedural approvals, may be designed as a stealth telecommunication facility. 
b.  Stealth telecommunication facilities are mandatory in medium and high density residential districts and shall not exceed 150 feet in height. All towers in medium and high density residential districts must be approved by a special land use permit. 
c.  Antennas must be enclosed, camouflaged, screened, obscured or otherwise not readily apparent to a casual observer. 
d.  Existing structures utilized to support the antennas must be allowed within the underlying zoning district. Such structures may include, but are not limited to, buildings, flagpoles, bell towers, clock towers, religious crosses, monuments, smoke stacks, parapets, and steeples. 
(3)  Cell on wheels/carrier on wheels (COW) facilities. The use of COWs shall be permitted in any zoning district after special administrative permit approval and administrative review (building permit). COWs may be placed for a period of not more than 120 consecutive days at any location within the city if used during a non-emergency or special event. Placement of a COW for the purpose of providing wireless telecommunication service in connection with a special event, subject to the COW's compliance with all federal requirements, may be up to 45 consecutive days before such special event, for the duration of the event, and for up to 14 consecutive days thereafter. After a declaration of an emergency or disaster by federal or state government, by the county, by the city, or a determination of public necessity by the community development director, COWs are authorized without permitting. 
(4)  General standards, design requirements, and miscellaneous provisions. Unless otherwise specified herein, all telecommunications facilities and support structures permitted by special administrative permit approval are subject to the applicable general standards and design requirements contained herein. 
(5)  Special administrative permit review process. All special administrative permit applications must contain the following: 
a.  The special administrative permit application form signed by the applicant. 
b.  A copy of a lease or letter of authorization from the owner of the property on which the telecommunications facility and support structure are located evidencing the applicant's authority to pursue the application. Such submissions need not disclose the financial lease terms. 
c.  Site plans detailing proposed improvements complying with the city's site plan requirements. Site plans must depict all improvements and satisfaction of all applicable requirements contained in this Code, including property boundaries, setbacks, topography, elevation sketch, landscaping, fencing, and dimensions of improvements. 
d.  In the case of a new support structure: 
1.  A statement indicating why collocation could not meet the applicant's requirements. Such statement may include justifications, including why collocation is either not reasonably available or technologically or structurally feasible, as applicable, to document the reason why collocation is not a viable option. 
2.  The applicant shall provide a list of all the existing structures considered by it as alternatives to the proposed location. The applicant shall provide a written explanation why the alternatives considered were either reasonably unavailable, or technologically or structurally infeasible. 
3.  Applications for new support structures with accompanying telecommunications facilities shall be considered together as one application requiring only a single application fee. 
4.  A list of all towers and support structures in the county in which the applicant has an ownership interest or use agreement. The list shall include the location, the type of structure, the height of the structure, the number of facilities located on the same structure, and the number of facilities for which collocation would be available under existing conditions. 
5.  A color propagation map demonstrating the existing coverage of all telecommunications facilities owned and proposed by the applicant within the GSA. 
6.  Current and proposed coverage map for the proposed tower. 
7.  A structural integrity analysis of a tower shall be included where antennas and equipment will be attached to such existing tower, or to establish the fall zone. Such certification and structural integrity analysis shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
8.  A special administrative permit application fee as listed in the city's published fee schedule. 
(6)  Procedure. 
a.  Within 30 days of receipt of an application for special administrative permit, the community development director shall either: 
1.  Inform the applicant in writing of the specific reasons why the application is incomplete and does not meet the submittal requirements; or 
2.  Deem the application complete. 
b.  If the director informs the applicant that its application is incomplete within 30 days, the overall timeframe for review is suspended until such time that the applicant provides the requested information necessary to complete the application. 
c.  An applicant that receives notice of an incomplete application may submit additional documentation to complete the application. An applicant's failure to complete the application within 60 days after receipt of written notice of incompleteness shall result in the withdrawal of the application without prejudice. An application withdrawn without prejudice may be resubmitted upon the filing of a new application fee. 
d.  The community development director the application within 150 days of the submission of the initial application unless: 
1.  The community development director notified applicant in writing that its application was incomplete within 30 days of filing. If so, the remaining time from the 150 day total review time is suspended until the applicant provides the missing information; or 
2.  An extension of time is agreed to by the applicant in writing. 
e.  After making a decision, the community development director shall have ten calendar days to post a sign on the subject property which reflects the decision of the director and includes the deadline for taking an appeal of the decision. 
f.  An aggrieved person, as such term is defined by state courts, may appeal any decision of the community development director approving, approving with conditions, denying an application, or deeming an application incomplete, within 30 days of such decision to zoning board of appeals in accordance with this article. 
(g)  Special land use permit review process. 
(1)  Requirements in medium to high density residential district. Any telecommunications facility, stealth or new support structure, located in a medium to high density residential district, or NS and OIT (except for an attached wireless telecommunication facility) shall meet the requirements of this article and shall be approved by a special land use permit subject to: 
a.  The submission requirements below; 
b.  The applicable standards below; and 
c.  The requirements of the special land use permit general requirements provided in article VII of this chapter. 
(2)  Submission requirements for special land use permit applications. 
a.  All special land use permit applications for telecommunications facilities, stealth and new support structures, must contain the following: 
1.  The special land use permit application form signed by applicant. 
2.  A copy of a lease or letter of authorization from the property owner evidencing applicant's authority to pursue the special land use permit application. Such submissions need not disclose the financial lease terms. 
3.  A legal description of the parent tract, the leased parcel and any associated easements, as applicable. 
4.  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower or accessory structure to be utilized, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines and residential structures (if located on adjacent property), elevation drawings of the proposed tower, design of the tower and how visible obtrusiveness is reduced, accessory structure and any other structures, topography on site and of surrounding property, existing streams, wetlands and floodplains, and other information deemed necessary by the director of planning to assess compliance with this section. 
5.  A letter of intent providing a detailed narrative regarding the proposed facility, including the needs it is intended to meet, the area to be served, design characteristics, collocation alternatives, nature of uses on adjacent properties, and any other information deemed necessary by the community development director to provide an adequate description of the proposal. 
6.  A radio frequency study including a description of the area of coverage, capacity and radio frequency goals to be served by the proposed facility, and the extent to which such proposed facility is needed for coverage or capacity needs. The study shall include all planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites operated by the applicant in or near the boundaries of and a color propagation study demonstrating the existing coverage of all telecommunications facilities owned and proposed by the applicant within the GSA. The study shall also demonstrate that the proposed height is the minimum necessary to achieve the required coverage. The study shall bear the signature of a qualified radio frequency engineer. 
7.  Certification that the telecommunications facility, the foundation and all attachments are designed and will be constructed to meet all applicable local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable county, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. A structural integrity analysis of an existing tower shall be included where antennas and equipment will be attached to such existing tower. Such certification and structural integrity analysis shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
8.  Line-of-sight diagram or photo simulation, showing the proposed support structure set against the skyline and viewed from at least four directions within the surrounding areas. 
9.  A list of all towers and support structures in the county in which the applicant has an ownership interest or use agreement. The list shall include the location, the type of structure, the height of the structure, the number of facilities located on the same structure, and the number of facilities for which collocation would be available under existing conditions. 
10.  A statement indicating why collocation is not feasible. Such statement shall include: 
(i)  Such technical information and other justifications as are necessary to indicate the reasons why collocation is not a viable option; and 
(ii)  A list of the existing structures considered by the applicant as possible alternatives to the proposed location and a written explanation why the alternatives considered were structurally deficient or otherwise unsuitable. 
11.  A statement certifying that the proposed stealth or new support structure will be made available for collocation to other service providers at commercially reasonable rates. 
12.  Notification to surrounding property owners as required by this article. 
13.  A special land use permit application fee as listed in the city's published fee schedule. 
(3)  Procedure. 
a.  Within 30 days of the receipt of an application for special land use permit, the community development director shall either: 
1.  Inform the applicant in writing of the specific reasons why the application is incomplete and does not meet the submittal requirements; or 
2.  Deem the application complete. 
b.  If the director informs the applicant in writing that its application is incomplete within 30 days, the overall timeframe for review is suspended until such time that the applicant provides the requested information necessary to constitute a complete application. 
c.  If an application is deemed incomplete, the applicant may submit additional materials to complete the application. An applicant's unreasonable failure to complete the application within 60 days after receipt of written notice of incompleteness shall result in the withdrawal of the application without prejudice. An application withdrawn without prejudice may be resubmitted upon the filing of a new application fee. 
d.  A complete application for a special land use permit shall be scheduled for a hearing date as required by the city. 
e.  Applications for stealth and new support structures with accompanying telecommunications facilities shall be considered as one application requiring only a single application fee. 
f.  The posting of the property and public notification of the application shall be accomplished in the same manner required for any special land use permit application under this article. 
g.  The community development director must provide the applicant with a written decision of the mayor and city council approving, approving with conditions, or denying the request within 150 days of the submission of the initial application unless: 
1.  The community development director notified applicant in writing that its application was incomplete within 30 days of filing. If so, the remaining time from the 150 day total review time is suspended until the applicant provides the missing information in writing; or 
2.  An extension of time is agreed to by the applicant. 
(h)  General standards and design requirements. 
(1)  Design. 
a.  Support structures shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Designed to accommodate a minimum number of collocations based upon their height, as follows: 
(i)  Support structures less than 100 feet in height shall be designed to support at least two antenna arrays; 
(ii)  Support structures between 100 and 150 feet shall be designed to support at least three antenna arrays; and 
(iii)  Support structures greater than 150 feet in height shall be designed to support at least four antenna arrays. 
2.  The compound area surrounding the support structure must be a minimum 80 feet by 80 feet in size to accommodate accessory equipment for the appropriate number of collocations. 
3.  Property leased or purchased for the purpose of a telecommunication facility is not required to have minimum road frontage or lot area of the zoning district. However, the applicant must demonstrate access to a public road via an access easement. 
b.  Stealth telecommunications facilities shall be designed to accommodate the collocation of other antennas whenever economically and technically feasible. 
c.  Upon request of the applicant, the community development director may waive the requirement that new support structures accommodate the collocation of other service providers if the community development director determines that collocation at the site is not essential to the public interest and that the construction of a shorter support structure with fewer antennas would minimize adverse impact on the community. Additionally, the director may reduce the required size of the compound area if it can be demonstrated that the proposed compound is of sufficient size to accommodate the required number of collocations. 
(2)  Setbacks. 
a.  Property lines. Unless otherwise stated herein, stealth and new support structures shall be set back from all property lines a distance of the fall zone plus 20 feet, or if adjacent to property zoned residential, the greater of: 
1.  The fall zone plus 20 feet; or 
2.  100 feet. 
b.  Residential dwellings. There shall be no setback requirement from dwellings located on the same parcel as the proposed structure. 
c.  Unless otherwise stated herein, all accessory equipment shall be set back from all property lines in accordance with the minimum setback requirements in the underlying zoning district and any overlay district. Accessory equipment associated with an existing or Replacement utility pole shall not be subject to setback requirements. 
d.  The zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to vary any required setback upon the request of the applicant if: 
1.  The applicant provides a letter stamped by a certified structural engineer licensed in the state documenting that the proposed structure's fall zone is less than the requested setback; and 
2.  The proposed telecommunications facility, stealth or new support structure is consistent with the purposes and intent of this article. 
(3)  Height. 
a.  In nonresidential districts, support structures shall be designed to be the minimum height needed to meet the service objectives of the applicant, but in no event shall exceed 199 feet in height as measured from the base of the structure to its highest point, excluding any appurtenances. 
b.  In medium and high density residential districts, stealth support structures shall not exceed 150 feet. Stealth support structures shall be measured from the base of the structure to the top of the highest point, excluding appurtenances. Any proposed stealth support structure shall be designed to be the minimum height needed to meet the service objectives of the applicant. 
c.  In all zoning districts, the zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to vary the height restrictions listed in this section upon the request of the applicant and a satisfactory showing of need for a greater height. With its variance request the applicant shall submit such technical information or other justifications as are necessary to document the need for the additional height to the satisfaction of the zoning board of appeals. 
(4)  Aesthetics. 
a.  Lighting and marking. Telecommunications facilities or support structures shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
b.  Signage. Signs located at the telecommunications facility shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if required) and any other information as required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited. 
c.  Landscaping. The visual impacts of a tower shall be mitigated by landscaping. Unless located in heavily wooded areas, towers shall be landscaped with a landscape buffer which effectively screens the view of the tower compound from all sides. The use of existing plant material and trees shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for, or in supplement towards, meeting landscaping requirements. 
1.  Landscape buffers shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the tower compound. 
2.  All landscaping shall be of the evergreen variety and shall conform to the city's buffer standards. 
(5)  Accessory equipment, including any buildings, cabinets or shelters. 
a.  Accessory equipment shall be used only to house equipment and other supplies in support of the operation of the on-site telecommunications facility or support structure. 
b.  Any equipment not used in direct support of such on-site operation shall not be stored on the site. 
c.  Accessory equipment must conform to the setback standards of the applicable zoning districts. In the situation of stacked equipment buildings, additional screening/landscaping measures may be required by the community development director in order to accomplish the purposes and goals of this section. 
(i)  Allowable decibels. No sound emanating from the facility generator during normal operations shall be audible above 70 decibel which would allow normal conversation within 15 feet of the compound. 
(j)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)  Fencing. 
a.  Ground-mounted accessory equipment and support structures shall be secured and enclosed with a fence to a height of at least six feet. 
b.  Fencing shall be decorative, including brick or concrete columns. 
c.  The community development director may waive the requirement of subsection (j)(1)(a) of this section if it is deemed that a fence is inappropriate or unnecessary at the proposed location in order to accomplish the purposes and goals of this section. 
(2)  Neighborhood identity. If located in residential area, towers may incorporate features that identify neighborhoods, such as banner arms or monuments. 
(3)  Abandonment and removal. If a support structure is abandoned, the community development director may require that the support structure be removed, provided that the community development director must first provide written notice to the owner of the support structure and give the owner the opportunity to take such action as may be necessary to reclaim the support structure within 60 days of receipt of said written notice. In the event the owner of the support structure fails to reclaim the support structure within the 60-day period, the owner of the support structure shall be required to remove the same within six months thereafter at the owner's expense. The city shall ensure and enforce removal by means of its existing regulatory authority. 
(4)  Multiple uses on a single parcel or lot. Telecommunications facilities and support structures may be located on a parcel containing another principal use on the same site or may be the principal use itself. 
(k)  Telecommunications facilities and support structures in existence on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(1)  Telecommunications facilities and support structures that were legally permitted nonconforming uses on or before the date the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was enacted shall be considered a legal, lawful use, subject to the nonconforming use regulation in this chapter and state law. 
(2)  Ordinary maintenance may be performed on a nonconforming support structure or telecommunications facility. 
(3)  Collocation or modifications of telecommunications facilities on an existing nonconforming support structure shall not be construed as an expansion, enlargement or increase in intensity of a nonconforming structure and/or use and shall be permitted through the administrative approval of a building permit process. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.2.57), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1201. - Wireless telecommunications; small cell structures. 
(a)  Purpose and goals. 
(1)  The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure that residents, public safety operations, and businesses in the city have reliable access to wireless telecommunications networks and state of the art communication services while also ensuring that this objective is achieved in a manner consistent with the city's planning and zoning standards, to maintain to the extent possible the aesthetic integrity of the community, and in accordance with applicable state law and with federal law regulations, and guidance, including the Telecommunication Act of 1996 which preserved, with certain limitations local government land use and zoning authority concerning the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunication facilities (WTFs). 
(2)  Protect the beauty and character of the city, particularly residential districts, historic areas, and scenic vistas and landscapes, while meeting the needs of its citizens to enjoy the benefits of personal wireless services. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Concealed means a wireless telecommunications facility that is disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed structure or placed within an existing or proposed structure to include antennas, ancillary structures, and utilities. 
DAS. See Distributed antennae system (DAS). 
Distributed antennae systems (DAS) consist of a network of smaller, spatially separated antenna nodes and installed on either existing or new structures and connected to a communications network. A DAS network splits the transmitted signal among several smaller antennas to provide coverage and reliability over the same area as a single cell support structure antenna. DAS is a form of combined antennas. 
Small cell installations mean one-carrier units that provide additional capacity for wireless systems and are supplemental to standard WTF installations. Small cell installations may be approved under the provisions of a system master plan. 
(c)  Aesthetics/visibility. To protect the beauty and character of the city, particularly residential districts, and certain scenic vistas and landscapes such as downtown Tucker, all small cell installations shall be screened to the greatest extent possible. Screening shall occur through the use of design, existing buildings and structures, existing and proposed vegetation, and materials and color consistent with the applicable zoning district as well as surrounding buildings and structures. Small cell installations shall be concealed with the following techniques: 
(1)  Feed lines and antennas shall be designed to architecturally match the facade, roof, wall or structure on which they are affixed in order to blend in with the existing structural design, color and texture and in order to provide the least visually obtrusive profile. 
(2)  Freestanding facilities shall blend into their surroundings through design and siting that is appropriate and typical to the proposed location and shall be designed to appear as a structure that would be permitted in the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located. Examples of concealed facilities would be chimneys, steeples, clock towers, light poles and flag poles. Guyed and lattice structure construction is not allowed. 
(3)  Along arterial, minor arterial streets, and local streets with sidewalks, decorative light posts are the preferred design and shall be used where feasible. 
(d)  Equipment compound and/or equipment cabinetry. 
(1)  Equipment related to the operation of a small cell WTF shall be hidden and/or screened from public view by one or more of the following techniques, which shall also be consistent with the aesthetic/visibility standards identified in subsection (c) of this section: 
a.  Ground equipment, including platforms. One or more of the following techniques can be used to hide and/or screen equipment: 
1.  Locate equipment within a building. The building shall be designed to be consistent with the prevailing architectural style of the neighborhood in which it is located, including exterior materials. The enclosure shall not exceed one story, unless location in a floodplain or other drainage concerns requires it to be elevated. 
2.  Locate equipment behind a secured, opaque landscaped perimeter. An evergreen landscape buffer shall surround the perimeter of the wireless telecommunications facility. 
b.  Any equipment not used in direct support of the on-site operation shall not be stored on site and any such buildings shall be used only to house equipment and other supplies in support of the on-site operation. 
(e)  Additional standards. In accordance with the accepted definition of small wireless facilities, all small cell wireless telecommunication facilities subject to this section shall: 
(1)  Be mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height including their antennas; 
(2)  Be mounted on structures no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures: or 
(3)  Not extend existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than ten percent, whichever is greater. 
Small cell wireless facilities that do not comply with any of these requirements shall be regulated as cell towers. 
(f)  Small cell system master development plans. 
(1)  Any entity wishing to deploy a local small cell installation must submit an application to the community development director or his designee and the city engineer. 
(2)  Application for a local small cell system master development plan approval shall include: 
a.  System design review. All applicants shall furnish an overall system design application for review by the community development director or his designee and the city engineer. The system design application shall include the following information: 
1.  A statement of the identity and number of wireless services providers that can utilize the distributed antenna system (DAS); 
2.  A graphic depiction of the conceptual plan (small cell system map) for the proposed total area of service coverage by the system; and 
3.  A proposed buildout timeline and graphic depiction of the buildout phases through completion. 
b.  Equipment design review. All applicants shall furnish an equipment design application for review by the community development director or his designee, and the city engineer. The equipment design application shall include the following information for each proposed design: 
1.  Elevation of the antenna and/or antenna support structures to include the following proposed dimensions: height, width and breadth. Height shall include the base, the antenna support structure, and lightning rod. 
2.  Illustrations consistent with the prevailing design aesthetic in the proposed area of the city indicating architectural design, exterior appearance and materials, including color. All small cells must be concealed and shall blend into its surroundings through design and siting that is appropriate and typical to the context of the proposed location. Such facility shall also be designed to appear as a structure that would be allowed in the zoning district. 
3.  Equipment brochures or drawings shall be provided for antennas, support structures/ mounts, equipment shelters, feed lines and security barriers, if any. 
4.  Photo-simulated post-construction renderings of a sampling of completed proposed facilities, equipment compounds and/or equipment cabinets, ancillary structures, and landscaping, if any, from locations determined at the pre-application conference. The views shall incorporate before and after scenarios, a scaled color image of the proposed type of facility, an aerial map with the location of the selected views, and a description of the technical approach used to create the photo simulations. The simulations shall include a minimum of four vantage points (north, south, east, and west). 
(g)  Application review. 
(1)  Within ten days of receipt of an application for a local small cell system master development plan, the community development director shall either: 
a.  Inform the applicant in writing of the specific reasons why the application is incomplete and does not meet the submittal requirements; or 
b.  Deem the application complete. 
If the community development director informs the applicant that its application is incomplete within ten days, the overall timeframe for review is suspended until such time that the applicant provides the requested information necessary to complete the application. 
(2)  The community development director must provide the applicant with a written decision approving or denying the application within 60 days for collocations of small cell installations using a preexisting structure (collocations) and 90 days for attachments of small cell installations using a new structure. 
(3)  An applicant that receives timely notice of an incomplete application may submit additional documentation to complete the application, and the associated shot clock resets once the applicant submits the supplemental information. For subsequent determinations of incompleteness, the shot clock will toll if the siting authority provides written notice within ten days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. 
(4)  When any application proposed to locate a facility regulated by this section in the public right-of-way or attached to a municipal structure, the community development director may deny such application upon a finding that the facility will Impair or interfere with the use of the right-of-way by the public or the city's use of the right-of-way or structure. The right to access the public right-of-way, or attach to a municipal structure, shall be deemed a license and not a right or easement. Where such an application is granted, the city may thereafter require the facility to be removed or relocated upon finding that the city's use of the right-of-way or structure so requires. 
(h)  Fees. 
(1)  Each applicant and/or provider shall pay certain fees associated with the deployment of local small cell installation. 
(2)  The fee for review of any application for a local small cell system master development plan shall be: 
a.  As provided in the city fee schedule for applications for small cell installations that include up to five small cell installations, with an additional fee as provided in the city fee schedule for each small cell installation beyond five; or 
b.  As provided in the city fee schedule for applications for new structures (i.e., not a collocation) intended to support one or more small cell installations. 
(3)  The recurring fees associated with the continued use of the city's right-of-way for small cell deployment or attachment to municipally-owned structures shall be as provided in the city fee schedule per small wireless facility per year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12-40, § 4.2.59, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1202. - Massage establishment (includes health spas that offer massage services). 
The following regulations apply to massage establishments: 
(1)  The presence of any device used as an early warning system to alert the employees of a massage establishment to the presence of law enforcement officers or city authorities on the premises is prohibited in any massage establishment. 
(2)  If a receptionist is present, the public entrance door of the massage establishment and the doors of all massage rooms or cubicles must remain unlocked during any time the establishment is occupied. In the absence of a receptionist, the public entrance may be locked as long as fire safety requirements are met (panic bar, no deadbolt, etc.). Individual massage therapy rooms shall not be locked. 
(3)  All massage establishments must display the following documents at all times in a clearly visible place: 
a.  State licenses. 
b.  Local business license. 
(4)  Massage businesses may open no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and close no later than 11:00 p.m. Any massage must be completed by 10:00 p.m. 
(5)  The exterior windows of the lobby/reception/entrance area may not be covered by curtains, closed blinds, tints or any other material that obstructs the view into the premises. No signs may cover more than 30 percent of any windowpane. 
(Ord. No. O2017-09-76, exh. A(4.2.58), 10-9-2017) 
Secs. 46-1203—46-1222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-1223. - Temporary outdoor uses; general requirements. 
(a)  Temporary outdoor uses shall not be held, unless the necessary special administrative permit is obtained from the community development department, subject to the provisions of article VII of this chapter, and any other applicable agency which may require review prior to issuance of permits. 
(b)  Any applicant for a permit for temporary outdoor use shall have the written authorization of the owner of the property to use the property for the specific event for which the application was submitted. 
(c)  All applicants for a permit for temporary outdoor use shall obtain a business license, if applicable. 
(d)  All approvals, permits, or licenses granted under this division must be displayed in a conspicuous manner on the premises at all times for inspection by the city. 
(e)  No temporary outdoor use may be located within or encroach upon any drainage easement, public sidewalk or right-of-way, fire lanes, designated loading areas, driveways, maneuvering aisles, or ADA minimum four-foot sidewalk width within private sidewalks or other areas intended for pedestrian movement. 
(f)  Temporary signage is permitted subject to the size and height standards in accordance with chapter 34. 
(g)  No operator, employee, or representative of the operator of a temporary outdoor use shall solicit directly from the motoring public. 
(h)  Any temporary outdoor uses which have not complied with this division shall be a violation of this section. Any person or entity found to be in violation of this section may be punished as provided for in article VII of this chapter. 
(i)  No temporary outdoor use shall be conducted within any public right-of-way unless permitted by public entity. 
(j)  Merchandise shall only be displayed in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation or flow of traffic. 
(k)  Merchandise shall only be displayed in an area not wider than 50 percent of the total linear frontage of the building occupied by the merchant. 
(l)  The premises for a temporary outdoor use shall be restored to a sanitary condition, i.e., cleaned and cleared of all litter, trash and debris; and all equipment, materials, signs, temporary power poles, etc., associated with the temporary outdoor use shall be removed from the property within two days of the last day specified for such use, except for yard sales. All unsold yard sale merchandise remaining at the conclusion of the sale must be removed immediately. Purchased yard sale merchandise must be removed within 24 hours of conclusion of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.3.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1224. - Duration, frequency and hours of operation of temporary outdoor uses. 
The maximum duration, frequency and hours of operation for temporary outdoor uses shall be limited as shown in table 4.3: 
Table 4.3. Temporary Outdoor Uses Operational Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.3.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1225. - Temporary outdoor seasonal activities. 
Temporary outdoor seasonal activities include the sale of retail merchandise associated only with recognized seasonal and federal holidays, the sale of farm produce, Mother's Day, Easter, and Valentine's Day, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Use regulations. 
a.  A special administrative permit shall be required, for all temporary outdoor seasonal activities. 
b.  Events or sales of retail merchandise not customarily associated with seasonal or federal holidays or farm produce is prohibited. 
c.  Produce stands in residential areas shall only be located on property of nonresidential uses such as churches, schools, or recreational areas. 
(2)  Lot and parcel restrictions. 
a.  A temporary outdoor seasonal activity may be held on a vacant parcel if within a nonresidential zoning district. 
b.  A temporary outdoor seasonal activity may be held on parcels where the temporary outdoor seasonal activity is not associated with the principal use of the property. 
c.  Temporary outdoor seasonal activities shall be permitted only on property where such activities shall not disrupt controlled vehicular ingress and egress. 
d.  All exterior lighting utilized in conjunction with temporary outdoor seasonal activities shall be directed downward to minimize glare on adjacent properties. 
e.  Spotlights and high-temperature process lighting for temporary outdoor seasonal activities are prohibited. 
(3)  Setback and structure requirements. 
a.  All temporary outdoor seasonal activities, including installation or erection of associated temporary display and sales structures, shall not be within any public right-of-way, and no display or sales area shall be located within 25 feet of the street. 
b.  Tents over 200 square feet and canopies over 400 square feet shall require issuance of a building permit and approval by the fire marshal. 
c.  A sign may be erected on the property in accordance with chapter 34, for the duration approved by the administrative permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.3.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1226. - Temporary outdoor retail sales displays. 
Temporary outdoor retail sales displays and related outdoor storage activities include the exhibition or representation of goods, merchandise, materials, or other items sold or bought at a retail establishment in which the items are displayed or sold outside the confines of a wholly enclosed building, and which are associated with the principal use of an existing business. Temporary outdoor retail sales displays shall not include events for which no business license is required (e.g., cookie sales). Temporary outdoor retail sales displays shall be subject to the following regulations. 
(1)  Use regulations. 
a.  A special administrative permit must be approved in accordance with the provisions of article VII of this chapter. 
b.  Temporary outdoor retail sales displays shall include the display and sale of retail merchandise associated only with the principal use of the primary business on the property for a limited period of time. 
c.  Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service or event, shall also be considered part of the temporary outdoor retail sales display. 
d.  Sales transactions associated with the temporary outdoor retail sales display shall be conducted by employees of the principal use, and goods shall be owned by the owner or tenant of the principal use, not a consignment operation or temporary arrangement with a transient merchant/vendor. 
e.  Sales transactions associated with the temporary outdoor retail sales display must be consummated inside the building housing the principal use located on the site. 
(2)  Lot and parcel restrictions. 
a.  Goods and merchandise may be displayed on public sidewalks only when a sidewalk abuts the store or building. Displays on public or private sidewalks shall not interfere with pedestrian travel, and the minimum ADA-required sidewalk width clearance shall be maintained. 
b.  Temporary outdoor retail sales display activities are prohibited on a vacant parcel. 
c.  Temporary outdoor retail sales display activities shall be conducted only on a paved surface, unless approved by the director. 
d.  Temporary outdoor retail sales display activities shall be permitted only on property where such activities shall not disrupt controlled vehicular ingress and egress and are not permitted within areas required, set aside or designated for loading and maneuvering areas, emergency access ways, driving aisles and driveways. 
e.  Property zoned M (light industrial) and M2 (heavy industrial) are exempt from subsections (2)a and (2)b of this section and the duration limits (table 4.3). An administrative use permit is required, and duration of use is subject to the approval of the director. 
(3)  Setback and display requirements. 
a.  All temporary outdoor retail sales display activities, including installation or erection of associated temporary display and sales structures, and stand-alone merchandise, display tables, or display racks, must be set back at least ten feet from a city, county or state right-of-way. 
b.  A temporary shade structure, tent, tilt-up, umbrella or covering may be erected as a part of the temporary outdoor retail sales display activity. Mobile buildings are prohibited. Tents over 100 square feet shall require issuance of a building permit. 
c.  Display tables, racks or shelves may be used as part of a temporary outdoor retail sales display activity. 
d.  Temporary outdoor retail sales display items, excluding shade structures, tents, tilt-ups, umbrellas or coverings, shall not exceed six feet above grade. 
e.  A sign may be erected on the property in accordance with chapter 34, for the duration approved by the administrative permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.3.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1227. - Temporary outdoor events. 
Temporary outdoor events may include temporary art shows, carnival rides, special outdoor social or religious event, entertainment, athletic events, rodeos, horseshows, and other events of community interest. 
(1)  Use regulations. Temporary outdoor events shall be governed by the following regulations: 
a.  Site conditions. 
1.  Employees shall be uniformed and identified. 
2.  Security or off-duty police officers shall be on-site during operating hours. 
3.  Portable toilets or access to bathrooms shall be provided. 
b.  If the temporary outdoor event involves structures that require issuance of a building permit, a site plan of the event shall be included with the building permit application. The site plan submittal required by article VII of this chapter shall indicate compliance with all requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Lot and parcel restrictions. Temporary outdoor event activities shall be set back at least 100 feet from any residential district or use. 
(3)  Temporary sites for worship. The establishment of sites and tents for temporary worship conducted on a site not designated as a place of worship requires the grant of a special administrative permit by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.3.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1228. - Yard sales. 
(a)  Yard sales may be conducted without a permit on private property, but shall not be conducted within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Goods sold at yard sales must originate as the legal property of the home owner, other persons participating in the sale, or members of a participating organization. Goods shall not include any items purchased for resale at the yard sale. 
(1)  Two temporary signs are permitted during the yard sale, provided that such signs shall be on private property with permission of the owner, not within the public right-of-way or attached to a utility pole. Signs must be removed immediately following the conclusion of the sale. 
(2)  All unsold yard sale merchandise remaining at the conclusion of the sale must be removed immediately. Purchased yard sale merchandise must be removed within 24 hours of conclusion of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.3.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1229. - Temporary buildings, use and construction of. 
Except where herein otherwise specifically permitted, temporary buildings, such as a mobile home or trailer, shall not be allowed in any district except: 
(1)  For caretaker's residence in the industrial districts; 
(2)  To serve as a home sales office for a subdivision only during such time as a subdivision is under development; or 
(3)  In conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building for a period concurrent with approved land-disturbance and building permits. Such temporary buildings shall be sited and permitted in any district upon approval of the community development director through a special administrative permit. Such temporary buildings shall be removed when the construction has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (4.3.7), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1230—46-1246. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SITE DESIGN AND BUILDING FORM STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-1247. - Compliance with block and lot requirements. 
All development shall comply with this article's site, design, and building form standards, in addition to the requirements in article II of this chapter and chapter 22. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (art. 5, intro. ¶), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1248. - Blocks. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to have the lengths, widths and shapes of blocks in residential subdivisions designed with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of building sites suitable to the special needs of: 
a.  The building form contemplated; 
b.  The conservation of open space; and/or 
c.  Existing historic features. 
(2)  Zoning requirements for lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access by pedestrians and bicyclists to public transit, nearby schools, and commercial districts, vehicular circulation at safe speeds and adequate access for emergency vehicles; 
(4)  Limitations of, and opportunities for, topography to minimize land-disturbance and erosion; and 
(5)  Connectivity standards in section 46-1307. 
(b)  Block length. 
(1)  When blocks are subdivided by new streets or created as part of a new development, including mixed-use, the minimum length of resulting new blocks shall be 200 to 300 linear feet. 
(2)  The maximum block length for new subdivisions in the suburban character area is 600 linear feet. 
(3)  The maximum block length for new subdivisions in the activity center character area is 500 linear feet. 
(c)  Blocks and pedestrian access. If a new development provides for a path with an easement through a block: 
(1)  An easement for pedestrian use only shall be at least five feet wide. 
(2)  An easement for pedestrian and bicycle use shall be at least ten feet wide. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1249. - Lots. 
All lots shall conform to the minimum requirements for the zoning district in which such lot is located, to all applicable requirements of this article, and the requirements of chapter 22. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and chapter 22 with respect to regulation of lots, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1250. - Lots, access. 
Each lot shall have vehicular access to a public or approved private street, or, in the case of townhouses, fee simple condominiums or cottage lots, to an alley or private internal drive, provided the overall townhouse or cottage development site provides access to a public street. In new subdivisions with three or more single-family detached or single-family attached units, lots on minor or major thoroughfares with lot frontages less than 100 feet shall have driveway access via shared driveways. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1251. - Lots, corner. 
(a)  Front yard building setback. On corner lots, the lot frontage with the shortest distance to a public right-of-way shall be designated as the front yard, and development shall comply with front yard building setback requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Side corner yard. Once the front of a corner lot is determined pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the remaining side adjacent to a street is the side corner yard. 
(c)  Side corner yard building setback. The minimum side corner yard building setback on corner lots shall be as designated by the zoning district regulations in article II of this chapter. Unless otherwise restricted, buildings may face either the front or side corner. 
(d)  Lot width. The minimum width of corner lots with residential uses shall be increased by 15 feet above the minimum width required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(e)  Side corner yard for nonconforming residential. The side corner yard building setback in residential districts may be reduced to 60 percent of the minimum front yard building setback in the zoning district if: 
(1)  The lot is a legal nonconforming lot; and 
(2)  The lot does not abut a thoroughfare. 
Corner Lot 

(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1252. - Lots, double frontage. 
(a)  Lots which adjoin public streets in both the front and rear shall provide the minimum required front yard setback on each street. 
(b)  For purposes of front yard regulations, there shall be only one front yard designated, depending on which street the front of the house is built to face. 
(c)  Driveway access on double frontage lots shall be limited to one street only. A ten-foot no-access easement shall be provided along the frontage of the street not used for a driveway. 
Double Frontage Lot 

(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1253. - Every use must be upon a lot of record. 
No building or structure shall be erected and no use shall be established unless upon a lot of record. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1254. - Buildings on single-family and duplex lots. 
On all single-family detached and two-family residential lots, only one principal building, together with its permitted accessory structures and uses, shall occupy each lot. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1255. - Multiple principal buildings on a lot. 
Multiple principal buildings with nonresidential uses, mixed-uses and mixed attached or multifamily residential uses (townhouse, condominium and apartment) may be established on a single unified lot, provided that all other provisions of article V of this chapter and this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1256. - Minimum lot size and minimum lot width. 
(a)  No lot shall be created that fails to meet the minimum lot size and minimum lot width for the zoning district in which the lot is located as established in article II of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in article VIII of this chapter. 
(b)  Flag lots are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1257. - Maximum lot coverage. 
No lot shall be developed to exceed the maximum allowable coverage by buildings, structures, driveways or parking areas, or any other impervious surface specified for the zoning district in which the lot is located. In addition to the maximum impervious surface amount, pervious materials may be added up to a maximum amount of 15 percent of the total lot area for non-vehicular uses only, such as walkways, patios and pool decks. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1258. - Street frontage for lots. 
All lots shall meet the minimum street frontage requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1259. - Lots served by wells and septic tanks; sewer and water connections. 
(a)  Any lot that is to be served by an individual well or septic tank shall have an area of not less than that required by state and county health regulations. The site location on the lot of the facility shall be approved by the county board of health in accordance with applicable board of health regulations. 
(b)  Sewer and water facilities and connections shall be approved by the county department of watershed management. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.1.12), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1260—46-1276. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL YARD AND MEASUREMENT PROVISIONS 

Sec. 46-1277. - Minimum required yards and building setbacks. 
(a)  Projections into yards. 
(1)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, awnings, chimneys, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features, provided that these features do not project more than three feet into any required yard and do not encroach on other lots or rights-of-way. 
(2)  An open, unenclosed porch, balcony or hard-surfaced terrace, steps, stoops and similar fixtures of a building may project into a required front yard or rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet, and into a side yard to a point not closer than five feet from any lot line. 
(3)  Enclosed porches may encroach for a distance of up to eight feet into the front or rear yard, but shall be no closer than five feet from the side property line. 
(b)  Spacing between buildings. For single-family attached buildings and multifamily buildings: 
Projections into Yards 

(1)  Building shall be separated a distance as required by the International Codes Council (ICC). 
(2)  Except when located in a MU-1, MU-2, MU-3, MU-4 or MU-5 zoning district and except when located in a town or regional center character area, the minimum spacing between high-rise multifamily buildings on a single site shall be a distance equal to one-fourth (0.25) of the height of the taller building. 
High-Rise Multifamily Spacing 

(c)  Setback averaging. When a vacant lot located in a zoning district authorized for single-family detached dwellings is proposed for development, and is located where at least 60 percent of the other lots on the same block face are occupied by single-family detached dwellings, then setback averaging shall apply. Where setback averaging applies, the minimum front setback for the vacant lot to be developed shall be the average of the actual front setback of the existing dwelling adjacent to the vacant lot and on the same block face. Where application of setback averaging would require that the proposed dwelling be located closer to the street than the otherwise applicable minimum front setback for the zoning district where the vacant lot is located, then setback averaging shall not be applied. Where application of setback averaging would make it impossible for the proposed dwelling to comply with the applicable zoning district's rear yard setback requirement, then the proposed dwelling may be constructed closer to the street, up to the minimum front setback required in the subject zoning district, only to the extent necessary to satisfy the minimum rear yard setback requirement. If the actual front setback of the existing dwelling on the adjacent lot on the same block face as the vacant lot differ from each other by more than 30 feet, then the minimum front setback for the vacant lot shall be the actual front setback of the dwelling closest to the street. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.2.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1278. - Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
(a)  No new dwelling unit shall have less than the minimum floor area of the applicable zoning district specified in article II of this chapter. 
(b)  No existing dwelling unit shall be reduced in size so that its floor area is less than the minimum floor area for a dwelling unit established by the applicable zoning district specified in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.2.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1279. - Compatibility of new and existing subdivisions. 
(a)  Lot size variability. Lots created as part of a new or redeveloped single-family detached subdivision, containing 20 or more lots, shall be compatible with existing developed single-family lots to which they are adjacent as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Compatibility of new lots with adjacent lots. Compatibility of new lots with adjacent lots shall be demonstrated by at least two of the following: 
(1)  The lot width of the new lot is at least 80 percent of the lot width of an adjacent existing subdivision lot; 
(2)  The lot size of the new lot is at least 80 percent of the lot size of an adjacent existing subdivision lot or eight-tenths acre, whichever is less; 
(3)  The new lot provides a minimum transitional buffer of 20 feet; 
(4)  The lot depth of the new lot is at least 20 feet deeper than the depth of the adjacent existing lot. 
(c)  Calculations for measuring compatibility. Only lots with existing residential structures adjacent to the proposed development will be used in the calculation. 
Perimeter Lot Diagram 

(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.2.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1280. - Transitional height plane. 
(a)  A transitional height plane shall apply to commercial or multifamily buildings that is either: 
(1)  Adjacent to; or 
(2)  Separated by a street with a width of 50 feet or less from any property zoned RE, RLG, R-60, R-75, R-85, R-100, MHP, RNC or RSM. 
(b)  No portion of a commercial or multifamily structure shall protrude into a transitional height plane. The transitional height plane shall begin at a point 35 feet above any setback or transitional buffer line, whichever is furthest from the property line, and then extend at an upward angle of 45 degrees over the lot of the commercial or multifamily building. 
Transitional Height Plane Diagram 

(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.2.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1281. - Height measurement requirements and thresholds. 
(a)  Building height of all structures other than single-family detached dwellings shall be measured from average finished grade (determined by averaging the elevations of finished grade around the entire footprint of the structure) to the top of the highest roof beams on a flat roof, to the deck level on a mansard roof, and to the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip, shed and gambrel roofs. 
(b)  Building height for single-family detached dwellings shall be measured from the front-door threshold of the structure to the highest point of the roof of the structure. The term "threshold" means the top of the subfloor in the opening that is designated as the front door of a dwelling. 
(c)  Building height for buildings located within residential infill overlay districts shall meet the standards established in the overlay district regulations of article III of this chapter. 
(d)  Elevation of single-family detached dwelling thresholds. The following standards shall apply to single-family detached dwellings that are not located in a residential infill overlay district: 
(1)  Replacement of a single-family detached dwelling. If new construction of a single-family detached dwelling would require alteration or eradication of the threshold of a previously existing residential structure, the proposed front door threshold elevation for the new single-family detached dwelling shall not be more than two feet higher than the front door threshold elevation of the previously existing residential structure, which shall be measured and certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. 
(2)  Construction on vacant or undeveloped lot. If no dwelling previously existed on the lot, the threshold shall be no higher than the average elevation of the existing natural grade at the front building line. 
(3)  Sewer conditions. If the existing residence or lot is not connected to county sewer and if an applicant for a building permit establishes that the minimum threshold height prevents gravity flow connections to county sewer, the community development director, upon the recommendation of the watershed management director or designee, may grant an administrative variance to allow the threshold height to be up to five feet above the threshold of the previously existing residence in order to allow for gravity flow into the existing sewer tap. Should a greater increase in threshold height be required, a variance from the zoning board of appeals must be obtained in accordance with the process set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
(4)  Topographical conditions. If exceptional topographical restrictions exist on the subject lot that were not created by the owner or applicant, then the community development director may grant an administrative variance to allow the threshold to be up to three feet above the threshold of the previously existing house. 
Building Height Measurement 

(e)  Height requirements. 
(1)  The maximum height of a new single-family detached dwelling shall comply with the requirements of table 2.2. 
(2)  The height limitations established in this division shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Barns, silos or other similar structures when located on farms; belfries, steeples, cupolas and domes; chimneys; and flagpoles. 
b.  Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, rooftop mechanical equipment, water tanks and scenery lofts and similar structures, provided that these structures shall not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which the structures are located. 
c.  Telecommunications towers and antennas otherwise permitted by this division by special administrative permit or permitted by special land use permit by the mayor and city council pursuant to section 46-1200. 
d.  Any single-family detached dwelling that exceeds the building height limitations set forth in subsection (a) of this section and has been damaged by fire or other act of nature may be reconstructed to its verifiable original height. 
e.  When an undeveloped single-family lot is located within a platted subdivision in which at least 60 percent of the lots have had certificates of occupancy issued for single-family detached homes that exceed the building height limitations set forth in subsection (e)(1) of this section, a single-family detached residential structure built on the undeveloped single-family lot may be built to a maximum height equal to the average building height of the existing single-family detached homes within the same block in which the undeveloped single-family lot is located. 
f.  Rooftop mechanical equipment, vent pipes, lightning rods, solar panels, and/or wind vanes that are less than six feet in height measured from top of roof adjacent to such structure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.2.5), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1282—46-1305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SUPPLEMENTAL STREET REGULATIONS AND TRAFFIC IMPACT 

Sec. 46-1306. - Design standards by street type. 
Public and private streets shall be designed according to standards for street classification established in section 22-273 except as otherwise provided in section 46-1418. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.3.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1307. - Street connectivity. 
(a)  Connectivity measures. New streets shall be designed to create an interconnected system of grid-patterned roads, modified only to accommodate topographic conditions. Each new street shall connect to the existing street grid. 
(b)  Pedestrian connectivity. Common areas shall be connected by pedestrian pathways in accordance with section 45-1248(c). 
(c)  Small area transportation plan conformity. New streets shall demonstrate conformance with the intent of any and all city or county adopted transportation plans, thoroughfare plans and subarea plans. 
(d)  Waivers. The requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be waived by the community development director in accordance with article VII of this chapter and as provided below: 
(1)  Waivers may only be granted for hardships resulting from unusual topography or when access constraints or other requirements imposed by city or county departments impede compliance. 
(2)  As part of the waiver request, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site plan, drawn to scale and showing the existing public and private street network, and shall provide an explanation as to how the proposed street plan supports the intent of this section to design an interconnected system of grid-patterned roads. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.3.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1308. - Sight visibility triangles. 
(a)  No structure, fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting, or any similar improvement will be permitted to obstruct the sight lines or visibility of motorists and/or pedestrians at any intersection of public or private streets or at any driveway intersection with a public or private street. All intersecting streets and driveways must meet the intersection and stopping sight distance requirements as outlined in the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Official's (AASHTO's) A Policy of Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, current edition. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, obstructions shall be prohibited if any part thereof is more than 30 inches and less than eight feet above local streets and driveways, or more than 30 inches and less than 12 feet above any street classified as collector or higher. 
(c)  Properties requiring GDOT approvals shall also comply with GDOT standards for sight visibility triangles and sight distances. 
Sight Triangles 

(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.3.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1309. - Traffic impact study. 
A traffic impact study, the scope of which shall be determined by the transportation division of the department of public works as necessary to establish the impact of a development project on the surrounding roads and what improvements may be available to mitigate such impacts, is required for any rezoning, special land use permit, sketch plat, and land-disturbance or building permit applications for projects reasonably expected to meet any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Multifamily development with over 300 new units at build-out; 
(2)  Single-family developments with over 200 new lots or units at build-out; 
(3)  Retail developments with over 125,000 gross square feet (GSF); 
(4)  Office developments with over 200,000 GSF; 
(5)  Medical office developments with over 55,000 GSF; 
(6)  Industrial/warehouse developments with over 280,000 GSF, employing more than 650 workers, or covering more than 200 acres; 
(7)  Any mixed-use development which could reasonably expect to generate 2,000 or more gross daily trips; or 
(8)  Special traffic generating uses, including truck stops, quarries, landfills, stadiums, etc., which would require development of regional impact review. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.3.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1310. - Traffic calming features. 
New subdivisions may provide a traffic calming structure for every 500 feet of road length. Traffic calming structures, curves and other traffic calming features are subject to the approval of the transportation division of the department of public works, which approval shall be given where the proposed traffic calming structure or traffic calming feature is designed in such a way as to reduce traffic speeds to a reasonably safe speed for the location. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.3.5), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1311—46-1333. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STREETSCAPE AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 46-1334. - Purpose and intent. 
The requirements and regulations for landscaping in the city are a critical public concern that are necessary in order to preserve and enhance property values, the aesthetic beauty of the county, and the safety and general welfare of its residents. The intent of landscape regulations is to: 
(1)  Provide buffering between non-compatible land uses. 
(2)  Protect, preserve, and promote aesthetic appeal and scenic beauty. 
(3)  Reduce noise pollution and air pollution. 
(4)  Reduce stormwater run-off, erosion and degradation of water quality. 
(5)  Filter and reduce glare from artificial light sources. 
(6)  Provide shaded areas along streets and in parking areas. 
(7)  Reduce solar heat islands. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.4.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1335. - Applicability. 
(a)  New developments, principal building or use. The requirements and regulations for streetscape and landscaping apply to principal buildings, new developments or open uses of land constructed or established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Change of use, expansions or reconstruction. Where a change of use, expansion to, or reconstruction of an existing building or site improvements (such as parking lots) impact streetscape and/or landscape improvements, the landscaping requirements shall apply only to the area disturbed in the development process. 
(c)  Publicly owned buildings. To the extent allowed by law, the requirements and regulations for streetscape and landscaping apply to improvements to land owned by public agencies except utility rights-of way or easements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.4.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1336. - Streetscape elements and dimensions. 
All development shall comply with the streetscape element requirements described below and in table 5.1. Topping of canopy trees within this section is prohibited. 
(1)  Streetscape dimensions and placement. 
a.  New streets. 
1.  Applicability. New streets shall be constructed with continuous streetscape zones on both sides of the street, beginning from back of curb. 
2.  Streetscape zone elements for new streets. The streetscape zone on new streets shall consist of a landscape strip, a sidewalk, and, when required per table 5.1, a supplemental zone. 
3.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided between the landscape strip and the supplemental zone, as required in table 5.1 and the figures following the table. 
4.  Landscape strips. 
(i)  Landscape strips shall be located between the curb and the sidewalk. 
(ii)  Landscape strips shall be designed with street trees and pedestrian scale streetlights as required in table 5.1 and the figures following the table. 
(iii)  See subsection (3) of this section for planting and materials requirements. 
(iv)  Large scale retail has additional landscape standards adjacent to streets as provided in section 46-1420. 
5.  Supplemental zone. New streetscape zones in nonresidential areas shall provide a supplemental zone outside the right-of-way on a private easement. Private easement agreements shall be submitted to the community development director. See subsection (4) of this section. 
b.  Improvements on existing streets. 
1.  Applicability. New development and redevelopment occurring on existing streets shall provide a streetscape zone on the side of the street where the development takes its access. 
2.  Streetscape zone elements for existing streets. 
(i)  The streetscape zone for existing streets shall consist of a minimum of 11 feet along the existing shoulder, as indicated in table 5.1. 
(ii)  The streetscape zone for existing streets shall consist of a landscape strip and a sidewalk, as shown in table 5.1 and the figures following the table. 
3.  Sidewalk and landscape strip dimensions. The width and location of sidewalks and landscape strips shall be determined by the director of public works based on GDOT standards, if applicable, and compatibility with existing sidewalks and utilities. 
4.  Landscape strips. 
(i)  Landscape strips shall be located between the curb and sidewalk, and/or between the sidewalk and the property line. The required total width of the landscape strip may be distributed on either side of the sidewalk so as to accommodate existing infrastructure. 
(ii)  Landscape strips shall be designed with street trees and pedestrian scale streetlights as shown in table 5.1 and the figures following the table. 
(iii)  See subsection (3) of this section for planting and materials requirements. 
(iv)  Large-scale retail has additional landscape standards as provided in section 46-1420. 
5.  Programmed road improvement projects. If the city, county or GDOT has a programmed road improvement project along the frontage to be developed, then the streetscape shall be constructed consistent with the design standards for such road improvements plans. 
6.  Administrative variance. The community development director shall have the power to grant administrative variances for streetscape requirements on existing streets upon written request by the property owner and compliance with article VII of this chapter based on a finding that the requirement of the subsection (1)b of this section would have a significant adverse effect on the historic pattern or cannot be met due to circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, including, but not limited to: 
(i)  Inadequate right-of-way; 
(ii)  Conflicting standards between this section and GDOT design standards; 
(iii)  Unique topographic or subsurface conditions; 
(iv)  Need to relocate existing utilities. 
(2)  Sidewalks and interior walks. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be paved in concrete and paver accents approved by the community development director and kept clear and unobstructed for the safe and convenient use of pedestrians. 
b.  Sidewalks shall adhere to ADA guidelines. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be continued across intervening driveways by continuation of the sidewalk paving materials or other methods of differentiation. 
d.  Where newly constructed sidewalks abut existing sidewalks, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide safe transition of pedestrian traffic flow to the adjacent sidewalks. Development that disturbs existing sidewalks on another property shall replace disturbed areas to their pre-disturbance state and condition. 
e.  For uses other than single-family residential, safe and convenient paved pedestrian pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including pedestrian access routes to parking decks and through parking lots and between adjacent buildings, transit stops, street crossings within the same development. All such pathways shall have a minimum width of three feet. 
(3)  Landscape strip materials and maintenance. 
a.  Required mix of materials. Landscape strips in the streetscape zone shall be planted with a variety of deciduous, overstory and understory trees. Species of shrubs, flowering plants, grass and other ground covers, which are well adapted to the local climate, may be included in the landscape strip. 
b.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be paved in concrete and paver accents approved by the community development director and kept clear and unobstructed for the safe and convenient use of pedestrians. 
c.  Pedestrian crossings. Landscape strips may include brick, concrete, or granite pavers where on-street parking is provided or regular pedestrian crossing of the landscape strip is reasonably anticipated to occur. 
d.  Maintenance. Required landscape strips shall be established and maintained by the owner. Topping of canopy trees is prohibited. 
e.  Permanent structures. Permanent structures such as buildings, driveways that are not perpendicular to the landscape strip, parking spaces, dumpsters, drainage structures and detention facilities shall be prohibited in required landscape strips. The prohibition of this subsection shall not include crossings perpendicular to the strip, necessary retaining walls four feet or lower, bike racks, benches, trash receptacles, signs, mailboxes, and drainage swales. 
f.  Planting specification; all trees. 
1.  Planting areas for trees shall contain a minimum depth of 12 inches of screened topsoil. Below 12 inches the soil shall be un-compacted to a depth sufficient to allow proper drainage and root growth. 
2.  Use of root barriers such as U.B.36 or an equivalent is required at the back of the sidewalk or back of the curb if no sidewalk exists. 
3.  Trees shall meet the standard for American Nursery Stock ANSI Z60.1. 
g.  Street trees. 
1.  Street trees shall be overstory trees unless site constraints prohibit the use of large maturing trees, subject to the approval of the community development director. 
2.  Street trees shall be provided with spacing as depicted in table 5.1. 
3.  Street trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet from the curb line of intersecting streets and not closer than ten feet from intersecting lines of alleys or private drives. 
4.  Street trees shall not be planted closer than 12 feet from light standards. No new light standard location shall be positioned closer than ten feet to any existing street tree. 
5.  Street trees shall not be planted closer than 2.5 feet from the back of the curb. 
6.  Where there are overhead power lines, street tree species are to be chosen from a list provided by the arborist that will not interfere with those lines. 
7.  Street trees, as they grow, shall be pruned to provide at least eight feet of clearance above sidewalks and 12 feet above driveways and roadway surfaces. 
8.  Street trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper measured at six feet above ground level at the time of planting and shall have a mature height of at least 25 feet. 
9.  Street trees shall be planted in a mulched area of at least 25 square feet. 
(4)  Supplemental zone. 
a.  In supplemental zones in commercial areas where building setbacks are 15 feet or less, the supplemental zone must contain hardscape and street furniture such as trash receptacles, bike racks, and benches. 
b.  For additional requirements for supplemental zones abutting parking lots, see section 46-1337. 
(5)  Street lighting. Street lighting shall be accomplished with pedestrian scale lighting and street lights. Street lights shall be placed on property lot lines abutting the street. Lighting plans must be approved by the department of public works. Lighting shall be installed by local power company employees or contractors. 
(6)  Administrative variance. An administrative variance to streetscape standards may be granted by the community development director for adaptive reuse and redevelopment projects as specified in this section or to preserve historic patterns. In addition to other required materials, an applicant for an administrative variance to the streetscape standards shall include a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the existing right-of-way and specific conditions of the lot. 
Table 5.1. Required Streetscape Dimensions 

 
*Location of street trees is subject to infrastructure and utility locations and approval by the county arborist and GDOT if state roads. 
Streetscape Figure: Local Streets, Single-Family Residential Districts 

Streetscape Figure: Local Streets, all Other Districts 

Streetscape Figure: Arterial and Collector Streets 

(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.4.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1337. - Site and parking area landscaping. 
(a)  Single-family residential lots. Each single-family residential lot on which new development occurs shall be planted with a minimum of three new trees. Street trees along the lot frontage shall count towards this requirement. The species and specifications for the trees to be planted in compliance with this requirement shall meet the requirements of a list approved by the arborist. 
(b)  Interior strips. Interior to nonresidential, mixed-use and multifamily developments, three-foot-wide planted landscape strips shall be required along all interior drives and pedestrian paths. 
(c)  Property perimeter landscape strip. Along nonresidential, mixed-use and multifamily development perimeter lot lines, a perimeter landscape strip shall be required, as follows: 
(1)  A five-foot-wide continuous perimeter landscape strip is required along all property lines that are not subject to streetscape requirements. This applies to individual tenant sites interior to a master planned project, even in instances where individual tenant sites do not have separately platted lot lines. 
(2)  A perimeter landscape strip shall include one overstory deciduous shade tree, or three understory or three evergreen trees, for every 50 linear feet at a minimum size of two-inch caliper for deciduous trees and eight foot height for evergreen trees. 
(3)  A perimeter landscape strip is not required where a transitional buffer is also required. 
(d)  Parking area landscaping. All surface parking lots that contain a total of 15 or more parking spaces that are constructed or redeveloped subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A minimum of ten percent of the total lot area of the parking lot shall be landscaped. 
(2)  Non-continuous barrier curbs shall be installed around the perimeter of the parking lot and around landscaped areas that are required herein, except where the perimeter abuts an adjacent building or structure and except at points of ingress and egress into the facility, so as to prevent encroachment of vehicles onto adjacent property, rights-of-way, sidewalks and landscaped areas. Barrier curbs shall be a minimum of six inches in height and six inches in width, shall be concrete or stone, shall be securely installed, and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(3)  A continuous hedge, berm, or short wall with landscaping thereon, not to exceed three feet in height shall be required between surface parking and an adjacent public street right-of-way. 
(4)  Tree and island quantity. A minimum of one tree per eight parking spaces, and one island per ten parking spaces, shall be provided. 
(5)  Landscape islands. All trees planted in a parking lot shall be planted in a landscape island, which island shall be a minimum of 250 square feet. 
(6)  In addition to trees, ground cover shall also be provided in order to protect tree roots and to prevent erosion. Ground cover shall consist of shrubs, ivy, liriope, pine bark mulch, or other similar landscaping material. 
(7)  Ground cover shrubs in parking area landscaping shall be maintained at a maximum height of 30 inches, except where such shrubs are screening the parking surface from an adjacent residential area. 
(8)  Newly planted trees in parking area landscaping shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper as measured at a height of six inches above ground level, shall be a minimum of ten feet in height at planting, shall have a 30-foot minimum mature height, and shall be drought tolerant. Trees shall be planted at least 30 inches from any barrier curb, so as to prevent injury to trees from vehicle bumpers. A minimum of 75 percent of the trees planted pursuant to these requirements shall be deciduous hardwood shade trees. 
(9)  All landscaped areas shall be properly maintained in accordance with landscape plans approved as part of the land-disturbance permit. In the event that a tree or any plant material dies, it shall be replaced within 12 months so as to meet all requirements of this section and to allow for planting in the appropriate planting season. 
(10)  All trees planted pursuant to the requirements of this section shall be counted for the purpose of meeting the tree planting and tree replacement requirements required by section 22-34. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.4.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1338. - Transitional buffers. 
(a)  Intent. Transitional buffers are intended to create a visual screen in order to diminish the potential negative impacts of nonresidential and mixed land uses on adjacent residential land uses. Similarly, transitional buffers diminish the potential negative impacts of higher intensity residential development on adjacent single-family residential land uses. 
(b)  General requirements. Natural or planted transitional buffers required by this division shall be established and permanently maintained by the property owner as follows: 
(1)  The required transitional buffer shall be depicted in detail on each site plan or plat prior to final approval. Type and location of natural and planted vegetation shall be included. 
(2)  Within the transitional buffer, the natural topography of the land shall be preserved and existing growth shall not be disturbed except where necessary to remove dead or diseased trees and undergrowth or to enhance the buffer with additional landscaping in order to provide a screen so as to prevent view of the higher density development from the lower density development. 
(3)  Grading or construction adjacent to the transitional buffer zone shall not disturb or encroach upon the transitional buffer zone. 
(4)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(3) of this section, if grading is required in the transitional buffer in order to prevent or control erosion, the area of such grading shall cover no more than 20 percent of the required transitional buffer, shall be immediately replanted upon completion of easement improvements and shall avoid disturbance of the soil within the dripline of trees within the transitional buffer. 
(5)  Any approved utility crossings shall be perpendicular to the transitional buffer. 
(6)  A pedestrian walkway, a maximum width of five feet, may be located in the buffer to provide pedestrian access to the adjoining property. Where a pedestrian walkway is provided, a gate shall be installed in the required screening fence. 
(7)  If existing vegetation in a buffer area does not meet the transitional buffer standards, a five foot high, landscaped berm may be installed subject to the approval of the city arborist. Grading to construct the berm shall not remove significant plants designated by the city arborist as part of the approval of the landscaped berm. 
(c)  Buffer planting and materials. When the conditions of the existing natural topography and vegetation are insufficient to achieve the visual screening required by this section, a landscape planting plan to enhance the transitional buffer shall be prepared and implemented to supplement existing natural growth or to provide new plant materials of such growth characteristics as will provide a screen meeting the standards below: 
(1)  Planting height. Proposed planting as part of an enhanced transitional buffer shall have a height of at least six feet at the time of planting and planted in a minimum of two rows, with staggered on center spacing such that a continuous opaque screen is created within two years of planting. 
(2)  Plant types. Plant species in an enhanced transitional buffer shall be evergreen, native, naturalized or other species well-adapted to the local climate and rainfall patterns, disease and pest-free, healthy and vigorous, and meet standard for American Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1. 
(3)  Plant functions. Plants shall be approved from a list made available from the community development department, but shall not be exclusive of other plants which may be suitable, provided they can provide a continuous opaque screen. 
(4)  Fences. Fences are required with transitional buffers and shall meet the requirements of section 46-1340. 
(5)  Wall and fence finishes. Walls and fences shall be constructed with the finished or decorative side facing outward from the property. 
(d)  Buffer dimensions and specifications. Table 5.2(a) identifies the transitional buffer class required for each zoning district based on the zoning district to which it is adjacent. Table 5.2(b) summarizes the minimum width of the required transitional buffer for each transitional buffer class (A-E). 
Table 5.2(a). Transitional Buffer Class by District 

 
*R= RE, RLG, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60 (except when R-60 use is single-family attached). 
**Where the Mixed Residential District has single-family units along an adjacent residential (R) boundary, then a transitional buffer is not required. 
Table 5.2(b). Transitional Buffer Minimum by Buffer Class 

 
Transitional Buffers Figure 

(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.4.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1339. - Screening. 
Trash and recycling areas, loading areas, mechanical and utility equipment, parking decks, detention facilities, and outdoor storage shall be surrounded by opaque fences, walls, or vegetation. Vegetative screening shall be at least 75 percent evergreen, with a minimum of two rows of plants, and shall grow to a height of six feet in two years. 
(1)  Loading areas. All loading areas must be screened from view so as not to be visible from any public street or adjacent property. 
(2)  Trash and recycling areas. All dumpsters must be screened from view on all four sides so as not to be visible from adjacent properties and the public street. The screen may incorporate access to the dumpster by using a wood fence or other opaque device to serve as a gate. 
(3)  Parking decks. All parking decks and aboveground parking structures shall have a six foot wide landscape strip immediately contiguous to the facade of the parking deck or structure, unless otherwise screened from view by an intervening building. 
(4)  Mechanical and utility equipment. All mechanical and utility equipment must be screened from view so as not to be visible from any public street. 
(5)  Detention facilities. In addition to fencing requirements set forth in chapter 22, detention facilities shall be planted with evergreen plant material consistent with buffer standards in section 46-1338(c). No trees shall be allowed in the ten foot maintenance shelf. However, detention facilities "designed as open space amenities" may be approved by the community development director and in compliance with division 5 of this article. A detention facility located in an historic district that is subject to architectural design review shall require a certificate of appropriateness, for appearance only, from the county historic preservation commission. 
(6)  Outdoor storage. See section 46-1182 for screening regulations for outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment or vehicles regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.4.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1340. - Walls, fences, and retaining walls. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  When this chapter requires a wall or fence to be constructed, the wall or fence shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal structure. 
(2)  No wall or fence shall be constructed in any public right-of-way. 
(3)  See table 5.3 for additional requirements. 
(b)  Single-family residential standards. 
(1)  Fences or free-standing walls constructed in a front yard shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(2)  No freestanding wall or fence, other than a retaining wall, shall be more than eight feet high from finished grade. 
(3)  Subdivision or project identification monuments at the entrance to a subdivision or residential development that incorporates a wall or fence shall only be located in a common area or private easement and shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(4)  Retaining walls on lots developed with single-family dwellings shall abide by the following: 
a.  The entire wall structure, including footer, shall not encroach on adjacent property; 
b.  Drainage shall be properly conveyed on both sides of the wall in conformance with state, county, and city codes; and 
c.  A construction/maintenance easement shall be obtained from the adjoining property owner, if applicable. Newly constructed retaining walls shall not be higher than four feet; however, existing retaining walls may be repaired and replaced so long as the height of the repaired or replaced wall is no greater than the original height of the wall. 
1.  If exceptional topographical restrictions exist that were not created by the owner or his agent on a lot, and it is established to the reasonable satisfaction of the community development director that no practical alternative design of such wall is feasible, then the community development director may, upon application therefor, grant an administrative variance allowing up to two additional feet in the applicable retaining wall maximum height limitation set forth in this subsection (b)(4) of this section. An applicant for a retaining wall administrative variance shall include with the application a certified field-run site plan or a topographical map certified by an engineer or landscape architect. 
2.  If exceptional topographical restrictions exist that were not created by the owner or his agent on the lot, and it is established to the satisfaction of the zoning board of appeals that no practical alternative design of such wall is feasible, the zoning board of appeals may, upon application therefor, grant a variance allowing newly constructed retaining walls to be greater than six feet. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, no variance may be granted to allow the height of a retaining wall above eight feet. In addition to the materials otherwise required for a variance in division 5 of article VII of this chapter, an applicant for a retaining wall variance shall provide a certified field-run site plan or a topographical map certified by an engineer or landscape architect with the application for the variance. 
(c)  Height. The height of a wall or fence is measured along the adjacent finished grade. However, if located within 15 feet of any street, and if the street grade is above the adjacent finished grade, the fence or wall height may be measured from the street grade. 
(d)  Material composition. 
(1)  No freestanding walls, retaining walls or fences may be composed of exposed common concrete block, tires, junk, pallets, railroad ties, loose stone, vinyl and other discarded materials. 
(2)  With the exception of M and M-2 zoning districts, fences, freestanding walls or retaining walls erected within the front yard shall be constructed of brick, stone, wood, wrought iron, or aluminum that looks like wrought iron. Any other material, including, but not limited to, chainlink and other wire fences are prohibited in the front yards of all districts, with the exception of M and M-2 zoning districts. 
(e)  Security gates. Entrance gates for vehicles shall be located at least 50 feet from the property line in order to ensure safe queuing, and ingress to and egress from the property. 
(f)  Fencing. Temporary fencing may be erected during construction for security and public safety purposes. 
(g)  Exemptions. Fences and walls in the M and M-2 zoning districts are exempt from regulations governing the height and materials of fences and walls. 
(h)  Freestanding wall height. No freestanding wall or fence in a multifamily, nonresidential or mixed-use zoning district may be more than ten feet in height. 
Table 5.3. Fence and Wall Standards 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.4.7), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1341—46-1363. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPEN SPACE STANDARDS 

Sec. 46-1364. - Applicability. 
(a)  All development that is required to have open space shall, upon application for a land-disturbance permit, identify all open space by a functional category established pursuant to the requirements of this division. Further, in commercial and mixed-use developments, open space requirements of individual parcels may be met by open spaces that are owned, maintained, and held in common for use by multiple properties that are subject to legal agreement for maintenance and association approved by the community development director. 
(b)  The open space requirements in this division do not apply to residential subdivisions with less than five acres or less than 36 residences. 
(c)  The minimum quantity of open space for approved developments is established by zoning district and controlled by table 5.4. 
(d)  Open space shall be maintained as open space until such time that the entire existing development is proposed for redevelopment and shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stones, rocks or other landscaping materials. 
(e)  Open space may include hardscape elements depending on functional type as described in table 5.6. If serving a conservation function, open space may be preserved in a natural state without enhancements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.5.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1365. - Maintenance, management and ownership. 
(a)  Ownership and management of open space. Open space shall be owned by one of the following entities, which shall be responsible for maintenance and management as described herein: 
(1)  City. 
a.  Open space agreements may be made with the city to deed the required open space to the city. The city is under no obligation to accept any proposed dedication of open space used to meet the requirements of this division. 
b.  Public access easement agreements may be made with the city for open space so dedicated by the owner for city trails, parks or other public recreational amenities, as agreed to by the city and whereby maintenance agreements shall be executed between the owner and city. 
(2)  Land conservancy or land trust. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon may be transferred to a land conservancy or land trust, subject to prior approval by the city. 
(3)  Homeowners' or property owners' association. A homeowners or property owners' association representing residents or property owners of the subdivision may own and be responsible for maintenance and management of open space. Membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners or property owners, and their successors. The homeowners'/property owners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The homeowners' or property owners' association organizational documents must first be submitted to the community development director for review to ensure compliance with this subsection. The homeowners or property owners' association shall be formed and maintained in compliance with all applicable state law. 
(4)  Recording of open space. Open space shall be shown on the final approved plat as a conservation easement, permanent restrictive covenant or equivalent legal document in a form approved by the city, which shall include a provision rendering the covenant or document void when a property is being redeveloped or redesigned, in which case applicable zoning standards shall apply to ensure consistency with this division. At no time shall the development provide less than the required open space. 
(b)  Maintenance of open space. 
(1)  Undeveloped open space used to satisfy the requirements of this division shall be preserved in a natural state except for the removal of litter, dead trees, invasive species and plant materials that obstruct pedestrian movement, as well as other maintenance necessary to preserve the natural state of the open space as approved by the director of planning. Natural water courses and stream channels shall be kept free of litter and obstructions and shall be maintained so as to not alter floodplain levels, and as required by stream buffer regulations in chapter 22. 
(2)  Open space shall be maintained so that there exist no hazards, nuisances or unhealthy conditions. 
(3)  Permitted elements as described in table 5.6 shall be maintained in good repair. 
(4)  New landscaping in required open space shall be maintained such that planted materials that die within one year of the installation, shall be replaced within six months or the next appropriate planting season as determined by the city arborist. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.5.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1366. - Standards and design. 
(a)  Required space. Required open space shall meet the standards of table 5.4. 
(b)  Deeded space. All deeded open space created shall be platted and provide a public access easement in a form approved by the city. 
(c)  Permits. Prior to issuance of a land-disturbance permit or building permit: 
Open Space and Enhanced Open Space Calculations 

(1)  For development projects with residential uses requiring enhanced open space, no lot or multifamily building shall be more than one-quarter mile distance from a designated enhanced open space. If site constraints limit access to the enhanced open space, the distance may exceed the minimum setback requirement of this subsection, subject to the approval of the community development director. Measurement of distance shall be based on the distance of road and/or pathway providing connectivity to the enhanced open space. 
(2)  A development project with residential uses not within one-half mile distance to a public park or recreation facility that is required to provide enhanced open space shall incorporate at least one enhanced open space type identified as clubhouse/pool amenity, neighborhood park with active recreation, and/or playground. 
(3)  For development projects with residential uses within one-half mile of an existing or programmed public school, park, trail or library, the applicant for a land-disturbance permit shall provide for pedestrian access to the school, park, trail or library. If an existing or future pedestrian network and/or multi-use trail is identified by the city or county, the applicant may be required to provide a future reservation for such a connection. Where a programmed facility has no current concept design for potential alignment, an applicant for a land-disturbance permit requiring connection to a park shall meet with the parks and recreation department to determine whether any reasonable spur connection would be possible. 
a.  For measurement of distance to a qualifying public amenity, measurement shall be taken along an improved walkway or sidewalk to the entrance of the public amenity. 
b.  For measurement to nearby existing or proposed public trail or greenway, measurement shall be taken from a point along the exterior boundary of the development directly to the nearest point of the trail or greenway. 
(d)  Enhanced open space. Enhanced open space shall be required as set forth in table 5.4. Standards for enhanced open space are found in tables 5.5 and 5.6. In addition, each function may be designated as either public (subject to the approval of and acceptance by the city) or private ownership. 
(e)  Open space and enhanced open space standards. 
(1)  Required open space shall conform to the zoning district requirements in article II of this chapter. Where table 5.4 conflicts with article II of this chapter, article II of this chapter shall prevail. Open space and enhanced open space design within an historic district that is subject to architectural design review shall require a certificate of appropriateness from the county historic preservation commission. 
(2)  Lakes or ponds may be included as part of the open space requirements in a development, provided they are incorporated as part of enhanced open space design, subject to limitations of the riparian buffer as set forth in chapter 22. 
(3)  Dry detention basins shall be designed by a professional engineer and may not count toward open space area requirements unless designed as an amenity or aesthetic feature. 
(4)  Enhanced open space may include hard space surface areas in accordance with the permitted elements identified in table 5.6. 
(5)  Below ground utilities or facilities may be located in the open space area. 
(6)  Designated wetlands and dedicated conservation areas for native species and/or vegetation may count toward open space requirements in accordance with table 5.5. 
(7)  Open space adjacent to existing buildings that have historical or cultural significance may be counted toward the minimum required open space if made accessible for the common usage of the development. However, the enclosed building area may not be included in the minimum required open space requirement. 
(8)  Stormwater facilities may be located within open space if the stormwater facility is designed and approved as an amenity and/or low impact stormwater management technique, and is in compliance with applicable regulation of chapter 22, including approved best management practices. Such facilities may be exempt from fencing, provided that the public health safety and welfare is not jeopardized by the lack of fencing as determined by the director of planning. 
(f)  Open space requirements. No residential lots shall be allowed to extend into the required open space nor shall individual residential yards count toward open space requirements. 
Table 5.4. Enhanced Open Space: Minimum Requirements 

 
(g)  Enhanced open space standards and types. 
(1)  Enhanced open space areas are areas readily accessible, practical, and generally acceptable for active or passive recreation uses. If able to meet these characteristics, enhanced open space areas may not include required setback areas, drainage easements required by the director of public works, dedications with existing aboveground facilities, or contain structures not intended for landscape or recreational purposes. 
(2)  Maintenance of such areas is not the responsibility of the city unless formally established and approved by the city through legal agreements. Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner or homeowners association in a form approved by the city. 
(3)  Total enhanced open space may be distributed throughout the project, but each individual enhanced open space type shall meet the enhanced open space dimensional standards of table 5.5. 
(4)  Elements shown under the permitted elements column in table 5.6 are allowed for the various enhanced open space types. Other elements that are not listed may be allowed by the community development director if they are consistent with the enhanced open space type. 
(5)  Table 5.5 establishes enhanced open space types and minimum dimensional standards. The minimum size for any enhanced open space type shown in table 5.5 may be reduced below the minimum amount if another enhanced open space type in the same development is increased by a corresponding amount above the minimum size shown in table 5.5. Table 5.5 is supplemented further by table 5.6 which provides design requirements for each type. 
(6)  Table 5.6 establishes the requirements for each enhanced open space type and its associated design requirements. Elements may be required by specific development types according to table 5.6. 
Table 5.5. Enhanced Open Space Types with Minimum Size 

 
Table 5.6. Enhanced Open Space Types and Requirements 

 
(h)  Phasing provisions. If a project's required open space is developed in phases, the amount of open space shall be computed separately for each phase, but may be combined with existing open space in earlier phases: 
(1)  The first phase of development shall contain, at a minimum, its pro rata share of the total amount of required open space based on the size and type of the development; and 
(2)  The total amount of open space set aside in each phase shall meet the open space standard as applied to the total area of the phase and previously approved phases. 
(i)  Conservation or water quality. 
(1)  No more than 50 percent of required open space may consist of floodplain, wetlands, steep slopes, streams and buffers. 
(2)  Green roofs may contribute to open space minimum area requirements with documentation from a licensed professional that such feature serves a water quality or alternative stormwater function. 
(j)  Prohibited uses of open space. The following shall not be considered when calculating open space: 
(1)  Individual wastewater disposal systems, such as septic tanks, septic fields, etc. 
(2)  Private yards that are not subject to an open space or conservation easement. 
(3)  Public street rights-of-way or private street easements, including streetscapes located within those rights-of-way or easements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.5.3), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 4, 3-27-2017) 
Secs. 46-1367—46-1385. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SUPPLEMENTAL SITE IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 46-1386. - Outdoor lighting. 
Lighting must provide adequate vehicular and pedestrian visibility and security of on-site areas such as building entrances, parking, service delivery and pedestrian walkways. A professional outdoor lighting plan shall be required for all non-single-family residential developments of three acres or more and for community recreation that proposes to use outdoor lighting 
(1)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Lighting established by a governmental authority within public rights-of-way. 
b.  Lighting activated by motion sensor. 
c.  Construction or emergency lighting provided it is temporary and is discontinued immediately upon construction completion or emergency cessation. 
d.  Security lighting less than two average footcandles. 
e.  Sites requiring fewer than five lighting fixtures. 
f.  In subsections (1)a through (1)e of this section lighting in all zoning districts shall be established in such a way that no direct light is cast upon or adversely affects adjacent properties and roadways. 
(2)  All lighting fixtures. 
a.  Lighting in all zoning districts shall be established in such a way that no direct light is cast upon or adversely affects adjacent properties and roadways. 
b.  Light fixtures shall include glare shields to limit direct rays onto adjacent residential properties. 
c.  All lighting fixtures (luminaries) shall be cutoff luminaries whose source is completely concealed with an opaque housing. Fixtures shall be recessed in the opaque housing. Drop dish refractors are prohibited. 
d.  Light source shall be light emitting diodes (LED), metal halide, or color corrected high-pressure Sodium not exceeding an average of 4.5 footcandles of light output throughout the parking area. A single light source type shall be used for any one site. Fixtures must be mounted in such a manner that the cone of the light is not directed at any property line of site. 
e.  The minimum mounting height for a pole is 12 feet. The maximum mounting height for a pole is 25 feet excluding a three-foot base. 
(3)  Lighting. Lighting plans shall include the following: 
a.  The location and mounting information for each light. 
b.  Illumination calculations showing light levels in footcandles at points located on a ten foot center grid, including an illustration of the areas masked out per the requirements regarding points of measurements. 
c.  A schedule listing the fixture design, type of lamp, distribution and wattage of each fixture, and the number of lumens. 
d.  Manufacturer's photometric data for each type of light fixture, including initial lumens and mean depreciation values. 
e.  An illumination summary including the minimum average and maximum footcandle calculation (array values) and the total number of array points (points used on the ten-foot grid calculations). 
f.  Points of measure shall not include the area of the building or areas which do not lend themselves to pedestrian traffic. 
g.  Average level of illumination shall not exceed the calculated value, as derived using only the area of the site included to receive illumination. 
h.  An outdoor lighting plan required within a locally designated historical district that is subject to architectural design review shall require a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission. 
(4)  Prohibited. Any linear lighting around windows, rooflines, doors, signs or building structures is prohibited. Linear lighting may include, but is not limited to neon tubes, rope lighting, and other similar lighting devices. Linear lighting devices that form letters or words shall be considered sign. 
Table 5.7. Lighting Level Standards by Footcandle 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.6.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2017-09-76, exh. A(5.6.1), 10-9-2017) 
Sec. 46-1387. - Stormwater detention facilities. 
Stormwater detention facilities shall be located on an individual parcel of land not meant for other improvements. A detention facility for a subdivision of fee simple single-family residences shall not be located on the same lot with a single-family home. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.6.2), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1388—46-1412. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - BUILDING FORM AND CONFIGURATION STANDARDS 

Sec. 46-1413. - Application of standards. 
(a)  This division establishes standards for the form and configuration for the following building types: 
(1)  Detached and attached houses; 
(2)  Multifamily; 
(3)  Live/work; and 
(4)  Nonresidential except industrial use buildings. 
(b)  Compliance review. Review of proposed development to ensure compliance with the standards of this division shall occur concurrent with any zoning compliance review conducted during the process of approving a rezoning, use permit, variance or modification of conditions, a sketch plat, a land-disturbance permit, a development permit, or any other applicable permit or license. 
(c)  These standards apply to new buildings as well as to the substantial redevelopment and renovation of such buildings, as applicable per article VIII of this chapter regarding nonconformities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.7.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1414. - Exemptions and variances. 
(a)  Historic structures and structures in historic districts that are subject to architectural design review and structures that are individually designated historic are exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(b)  New residential infill. 
(1)  Modification of building form. Article VII of this chapter provides for an administrative procedure that allows an applicant to request a waiver from the building form or materials standards on a case-by-case basis during the compliance review process. 
(2)  Where the architectural style of existing residential development building types on the same block as the proposed project conflicts with the building form standards herein, a land-disturbance permit applicant may apply to the community development director for an administrative waiver from the building form standards in accordance with article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.7.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1415. - Conflict with other standards and review. 
(a)  Conflict with overlay standards. In the event the standards of this division conflict with the overlay district standards in article III of this chapter, as determined by the community development director, the standards in article III of this chapter shall prevail. 
(b)  Conflict with other provisions in the zoning code. In the event the standards of this division conflict with any other provision of this chapter, the more restrictive provision, as determined by the community development director, shall prevail. 
(c)  Conflict with other city standards. In the event the standards in this division conflict with any city ordinance not included within this chapter, as determined by the community development director, this division shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.7.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1416. - Materials. 
(a)  Exterior building materials. 
(1)  Except for exempted buildings described in subsection (a)(5) of this section, exterior wall materials of primary buildings shall consist of any of the following types: 
a.  Brick masonry; 
b.  Stone masonry; 
c.  Cement wood or fiber cement siding, including simulated half-timbering; 
d.  Hard coat stucco; 
e.  Cedar shingles or fiber cement; 
f.  Textured face concrete block; 
g.  Architectural concrete; 
h.  Precast or tilt-up panel (for industrial buildings only); 
i.  Glass; 
j.  Material not listed in this section, which shall contribute to innovative design or green construction as determined by the community development director on a case by case basis; and/or 
k.  Architectural accent materials as approved by the community development director. 
(2)  Exterior building material requirements do not preclude solar panel installation on building roofs. 
(3)  The following materials may be used as secondary building material or siding, up to 40 percent of total facing: 
a.  Standing seam or corrugated metal siding; 
b.  Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS). If within three feet of grade or within six feet of grade adjoining a public right-of-way or a parking area, the EIFS shall have ultra-high impact resistance in accordance with ASTM E2468. EIFS is prohibited for use on single-family, two-family, and three-family dwellings. 
c.  Vinyl siding and other polymeric siding, provided the siding shall: 
1.  Be installed by a certified installer or an individual certified as trained through the VSI certified installer program sponsored by the Vinyl Siding Institute, Inc. (VSI) or an approved equivalent program; 
2.  Be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D3679 standard specifications for rigid poly (vinyl chloride) (pvc) siding by an approved quality control agency: 
3.  Have a minimum thickness of 0.046 inches; 
4.  Have panel projections of no less than five-eighths inch for clapboard and dutchlap styles; 
5.  Have double (rolled over) nail hem, up to 0.92 inches nominal thickness strength; 
6.  Meet or exceed the color retention requirement of ASTM D6864, 3679 or D7251; 
7.  Be installed in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions and in accordance with ASTM D4756. Polypropylene siding shall be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D7254 standard specification for polypropylene (PP) siding by an approved quality control agency. Insulated vinyl siding shall be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D7793 standard specification for insulated vinyl siding by an approved quality control agency. 
(4)  The following exterior building materials shall be prohibited on all buildings: 
a.  Plywood; 
b.  Common concrete block; 
c.  Oriented strand board (OSB). 
(5)  Universities, and structures located in M or M-2 zoned districts shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(3) of this section, provided: 
a.  Such structures are located interior to the site with an intervening building facing the street. 
b.  If materials in subsection (a)(3) of this section are used as primary exterior building materials, at least 30 percent of total facade area shall be brick or stone masonry. 
(b)  Arrangement of materials. 
(1)  Where two or more materials are proposed to be combined on a facade, the heavier and more massive material shall be located below the lighter material. 
(2)  Material changes on a facade shall occur along a continuous horizontal line or where two building forms meet. Secondary building materials may be used as trim, around windows, doors, cornices, at corners, or as a repetitive pattern within a wall covered in a primary building material. 
(3)  Primary facade materials shall wrap around at outside building corners for at least four feet. 
(c)  Roof and accessory structure materials. 
(1)  Sloped roofs on primary buildings shall be clad in wood shingles, standing seam metal, clay or concrete tile, stone coated metal tile, painted metal tile, recycled rubber tile, slate, asphalt shingles or similar material or combination of materials. This regulation does not prohibit the application of solar panels, which shall not be considered an architectural material for purposes of building form regulations. 
(2)  The exterior of accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials that are similar to those used on the principal structures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.7.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1417. - Detached houses. 
(a)  House types. This section shall apply to the following housing types: 
(1)  Conventional single-family detached. A development with one dwelling unit per lot of record with private yards on all four sides. 
(2)  Single-family cottage. A development with one or 1.5 story small detached dwelling units arranged clustering around a commonly shared open space and each dwelling unit is located on a separate lot with private rear, side, and front yards. 
(b)  Dimensional and use requirements. Minimum lot size, width, and setbacks shall meet the dimensional requirements set forth for the applicable base zoning district in article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Orientation. 
(1)  Lots along the perimeter of a development of single-family detached residences shall be oriented so that dwellings front internal local streets instead of a thoroughfare. Lots with rear yards abutting a thoroughfare shall provide a ten foot no access easement and: a 20-foot landscape strip, a six-foot-high decorative fence, or a five foot high landscaped berm to screen the rear view of houses from the thoroughfare. 
(2)  Single-family cottage lots shall be oriented toward the enhanced open space. 
(3)  Street frontage requirements in section 22-376 shall not apply to individual lots within a cottage development provided the overall site complies with minimum street frontage requirements and an alley or private drive provides access directly to a public street. 
Cottage Housing Orientation (color) 

(d)  Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be metered for water individually. 
(e)  Easement. An easement for water and sewer shall be required and subject to the approval of the watershed division of the public works department. 
(f)  Access driveway, internal private drive and alley standards. 
(1)  Single-family cottage residences shall have vehicular access from the rear of the property from an alley or similar private drive, or may have an off-street parking area located on the side or rear of the development. Such parking area may not occupy more than 30 feet of frontage and be located no more than 200 feet from the unit's entrance. The alley shall be at least 20 feet in width and meet the standards of International Fire Code (IFC) 503, unless another width is approved by the director for one-way direction only. 
(2)  Single-family detached residences may share a driveway serving two lots, provided that the width of the driveway at the street shall not exceed the width requirements established in chapter 22, and that the driveway width not increase for the first ten feet of drive. 
(g)  Driveways. Driveways shall be at least 20 feet between the garage door and sidewalk, where sidewalk is required. If sidewalks are exempt, per chapter 22, driveways shall be at least 20 feet between the garage door and the back of curb. 
(h)  Maximum size. 
(1)  Conventional single-family detached residences shall follow the requirements set forth in article II of this chapter. 
(2)  Single-family cottages shall not exceed a building footprint of 800 square feet and gross floor area of 1,200 square feet. 
(i)  Architectural variability. 
(1)  Residential subdivisions of three or more lots intended for conventional single-family detached residences shall include distinctly different front facade designs within each phase of the development. The term "distinctly different" means that each front facade must differ from adjacent buildings' front facades in at least four of the following six ways: 
a.  The use of different primary exterior materials; 
b.  Variation in the width or height of the front facade by four feet or more; 
c.  Variation of the type, placement or size of windows and doors on the front facades; 
d.  Variations in rooflines, including the use of dormers and changes in the orientation of rooflines; 
e.  Variation in the location and proportion of front porches; and 
f.  Variation in the location or proportion of garages and garage doors. 
(2)  No conventional single-family detached residence shall be of the same front facade design as any other conventional single-family detached residence along the same block face within eight lots of the subject residence. Mirror images of the same configuration are not permitted on the same block face. 
(3)  No single front facade design may be used for more than 25 percent of the total units of any single phase of a conventional single-family detached residence subdivision. 
(j)  Porches and stoops. Any porch shall have minimum dimensions of four feet by eight feet for porches, and any stop shall have minimum dimensions of and four feet by four feet. Porches and stoops shall be no closer than two feet from a utility easement. 
(k)  Facades. Any conventional single-family detached residence with a front facade width of 40 feet or more shall incorporate wall offsets in the form of projections or recesses in the front facade plane. Wall offsets shall have a minimum depth or projection of two feet so that no single wall plane exceeds 25 feet in width. 
(l)  Roof and overhangs. Conventional single-family detached residences shall incorporate the following standards: 
(1)  Roofs covering the main body of the structure shall be symmetrical gables, hip-style, or mono-pitch (shed) style. 
(2)  Mono-pitch roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12, and all other roofs covering the main body of a detached house shall have a minimum roof pitch of 6:12. 
(3)  Overhanging eaves shall extend at least 12 inches beyond the exterior wall. 
(4)  To the maximum extent practicable, all roof vents, pipes, antennas, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment (except chimneys) shall be located on the rear facades or configured to have a minimal visual impact as seen from an adjacent street. 
(m)  Garages. The following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Street-facing garage facades shall not comprise more than 45 percent of the total width of the conventional single-family detached residence's front facade. Street-facing garages shall be at least two feet behind the primary front facade plane of a conventional single-family detached residence. 
Acceptable Garage Configurations 

(n)  Enhanced open space. 
(1)  Clubhouse/pool amenity areas, greens, playgrounds, pocket parks, neighborhood parks, or detention facilities designed to serve as amenities shall meet dimensional requirements in the base zoning district (article II of this chapter) and the standards of article 5, division 5 of this chapter. 
(2)  Cottage residential development enhanced open space. 
a.  Single-family cottages shall be clustered around an enhanced open space green that is a minimum of 3,000 square feet or 400 square feet per cottage served by the enhanced open space, whichever is greater. 
b.  The enhanced open space green shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet on each side. 
c.  At least two sides of the enhanced open space green shall have cottages along its perimeter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.7.5), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(5.7.5), 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 46-1418. - Single-family attached buildings. 
Single-family attached residential buildings are buildings in which dwelling units are attached to one another in a variety of ways, each with its own external entrance. Fee simple condominiums share similar configurations to townhouse developments, and they have lot lines that coincide with the building footprint. This section applies to the following development types: 
(1)  Single-family attached, two- or three-family attached (also called duplex or triplex). A house with two or three attached principal dwelling units located on a single lot. The units may be located on separate floors or side-by-side. A side-by-side, single-family attached duplex may also be permitted to be located on two lots, whereby each unit is located on its own lot. 
(2)  Fee simple condominium. One or more single-family attached buildings where the owner has fee simple title to the building and the land beneath the building. The building may or may not have a small yard in front of or behind the building. The remaining land is under common ownership. 
(3)  Single-family attached, and townhouse developments. Single-family attached, and townhouse developments shall meet the following standards: 
a.  The overall tract of land for townhouse or fee simple condominium development shall have frontage on a public or private street. 
b.  The overall tract of land for townhouse or fee simple condominium development must meet the dimensional requirements of the zoning district. 
Single-Family Attached Housing on Two Lots (color) 

Traditional Townhouse Lot (color) 

1.  Traditional townhouse lot. 
2.  Townhomes may be placed on individual lots which include yards on the individual property. 
c.  Private drives shall meet the requirements of chapter 22. 
d.  The development shall incorporate a pedestrian circulation plan that separates pedestrians from automobiles by providing rear access to the units or designing an alternative location for pedestrian paths or sidewalks. 
e.  Sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall provide a continuous network that connects each dwelling unit with adjacent public streets and all on-site amenities designed for use by residents of the development. 
f.  Sidewalks may go to back of curb when adjoining on-street parking space. 
g.  Street trees shall be planted on both sides of the street 50 feet on center or every other unit, whichever distance is less. 
h.  Buildings shall be no more than 200 feet in length. 
i.  Spacing of buildings shall be consistent with International Codes Council (ICC). 
j.  Alleys. 
1.  Alleys shall be at least 12 feet wide, subject to the standards of IFC 503. 
2.  Dead-end alleys over 150 feet in length are prohibited. 
k.  Ownership. 
1.  There shall be a mandatory property owners' association clearly stating the residents' responsibility to share in the ownership and maintenance of common areas including roadways, alleys, parking, utilities, landscaping, and stormwater management facilities subject to section 22-270. The city shall have no ownership or maintenance responsibility of any common areas unless expressly agreed otherwise. 
2.  Individual ownership of the units shall comply with the Georgia Condominium Act or shall require membership in a property owners' association in accordance with state law. 
3.  Upon approval of the development plans, a final plat shall be recorded before any units are sold. 
l.  Driveways shall be at least 20 feet between the garage door and sidewalk, where sidewalk is required. If sidewalks are exempt, per chapter 22, driveways shall be at least 20 feet between the garage door and the back of curb. 
(4)  Building orientation. The primary entrance and front facade of individual buildings within a townhouse development may be oriented toward streets, private drives or enhanced open space, and shall not be oriented toward off-street parking lots, garages, or carports. 
(5)  Meters. Each dwelling unit shall be metered for water individually. 
(6)  Water and sewer easement. An easement for water and sewer shall be required with the location subject to approval of the watershed division of the county's public works department. 
(7)  Roofs. Roofs of attached residential buildings shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Roofs shall be symmetrical gables, flat with parapet, hip-style, or mono-pitch (shed) style, but alternative roof forms or pitches may be used over porches, entryways, and similar features. Overhangs allowed on principal structures shall be no less than 12 inches. 
b.  Mono-pitch roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12. 
c.  Gable and hip-style roofs shall have a minimum roof pitch of 6:12. 
d.  Roof forms shall be designed to shelter building entrances. 
(8)  Roof penetrations and equipment. To the maximum extent practicable, roof vents, pipes, antennas, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment (except chimneys) shall be located on the rear facades or screened from view so as to have a minimal visual exposure as seen from an adjacent street. 
(9)  Facades. For the purposes of this subsection, a building facade shall be considered the entire wall surface on a building side from grade level to underneath an overhanging eave or to the top of a cornice. All single-family attached buildings shall comply with the following facade standards: 
a.  Facades facing a street shall provide doors, porches, balconies, or windows in the following ratios: 
1.  A minimum of 60 percent of front facade; and 
2.  A minimum of 30 percent of side and rear building facades. 
b.  All front facades shall provide a minimum of three of the following design features for each residential unit: 
1.  Projections or recesses in the facade plane that contrast with an adjoining unit, with a minimum depth or projection of one foot; 
2.  Exterior building materials or colors different from the materials or colors of the other units; 
3.  Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g., shingles, wainscoting, window box, and similar ornamental features); 
4.  A dormer window, cupola, turret, tower, or canopy; 
5.  A recessed entrance; 
6.  A covered porch or balcony; 
7.  Pillars, posts, or pilasters; 
8.  A box or bay window with a minimum 12-inch projection from the facade plane; 
9.  Eaves with either exposed rafters or a cornice projecting a minimum 12 inches from the facade plane; or 
10.  A parapet wall with an articulated design that varies in height. 
c.  Front facades should be varied to avoid long, flat building fronts so that no more than 20 percent of the front facades of the units in the same building are substantially the same, unless designed as brick row houses. 
(10)  Garages. 
a.  Garages for dwelling units shall not face public streets, and shall be accessed by alleys or private drives. Garages that face private drives must comply with subsection (3)c of this section pedestrian and vehicle separation plan. 
b.  Parking spaces for dwelling units shall be located behind buildings, within individual units, on designated on-street spaces or off-street parking lots as provided in subsection (11) of this section. 
(11)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Off-street surface parking lots (including access and travel ways) located on the side of an attached residential building shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the primary street frontage for the attached residential building. 
Off-Street Parking on the Side of Attached Residential Buildings 

b.  Off-street parking required for each attached residential unit is not required on the same lot as the dwelling unit, but the edge of the off-street parking lot shall be no more than 200 feet from the unit's entrance. 
(12)  Architectural features. The architectural features of a parking deck or structure shall be compatible with the primary building. 
(13)  Streetscape design. Single-family attached residential developments shall comply with the streetscape design standards in division 4 of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.7.6), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(5.7.6), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 46-1419. - Multifamily, nonresidential, live/work and mixed-use buildings. 
(a)  Multifamily residential building and nonresidential buildings include the following building types: multifamily low rise (three stories and fewer); multifamily high rise (four stories and greater); live/work buildings; and large-scale retail. 
(1)  Multifamily residential buildings contain four or more residential dwelling units consolidated into a single structure. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units, and units share common walls. Structures appearing as townhouses but with internal units that are located one below the other (also known as "stacked townhouses") are also considered multifamily residential buildings. 
(2)  Large-scale retail refers to freestanding buildings containing single-tenant retail sales uses that exceed 60,000 square feet in size. 
(3)  Live/work units incorporate both living and working space in a single unit. A kitchen and a bathroom must be included in each unit. The residential portion may not be less than 33 percent of the unit's total floor area. Within two-story live/work buildings, nonresidential uses shall be located on the ground floor only. Within single story units, the nonresidential use shall be located in the front, with street access. Living space within the live/work unit shall have direct and internal access to work space. Each live/work unit may have a primary entrance from the sidewalk, enhanced open spaces, arcades or public spaces. See also section 46-1176 for additional live/work use requirements. Multifamily residential orientation shall comply with section 46-1418. 
(b)  All development types other than single-family, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Dimensional and use requirements. Lot size, width, and setbacks shall meet the dimensional requirements set forth for the applicable base zoning district in article II of this chapter. 
(2)  Building plane and scale. 
a.  Building facades shall not exceed 40 feet in length without projections, recesses or other architectural features. 
b.  Windows and doorways. Structures built to the edge of the street right-of-way or located within mixed-use and nonresidential districts shall have windows and/or doorways that occupy at least 25 percent of the width of the first floor street-level front facade. 
Windows and Doorways at Street Level: Minimum 25 Percent of Total Facade Width 

c.  All buildings regulated by section 46-1420 that are four stories or greater shall: 
1.  Clearly articulate the building base, middle and top through materials, architecture details and/or changes in the plane of the wall (projections and recessions). 
Building Articulation: Clearly Defined Base, Middle and Top 

2.  Provide side step-backs at the fourth story when adjacent to the side of another building four stories or greater and along a private or public street. 
Side Step-Backs between Mid-and High Rise Buildings 

(c)  Roofs. 
(1)  Multifamily low-rise buildings regulated by section 46-1420 shall have roof design and features that comply with section 46-1418(7). 
(2)  Multifamily buildings adjacent to a courtyard may be designed with a flat roof. 
(3)  Rooflines of large-scale retail buildings shall be varied to add interest and variety to the large building form through the use of parapets, hips, gables, eaves, dormers or other similar features. These features shall be incorporated along a minimum of 50 percent of the length of the roofline facing a public street. 
(4)  Flat roofs shall provide parapets to screen mechanical equipment from street view and from the primary drive facing the front facade. 
(d)  Parking configuration. Nonresidential and mixed-use buildings located in activity center character areas, as identified in the comprehensive plan, shall: 
(1)  Have no more than one double row of parking within the front yard where there is no intervening building between parking and the street; and 
(2)  Be allowed to locate parking along the side or rear or as on-street parking dedicated as right-of-way by the applicant for a land-disturbance permit or building permit. 
(e)  Multifamily developments shall meet the building separation requirements provided in section 46-1277(b). 
(f)  Off-street surface parking lots (including access and travel ways) consisting of five or more spaces shall be located on the side or to the rear of a multifamily structure or development. 
(g)  Multifamily housing developments shall provide and maintain outdoor play and recreation areas with a minimum area of five percent of the total area of the lot or 4,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 
(h)  Low-rise multifamily building types. The following low-rise multifamily buildings shall be allowed, provided they meet the requirements set forth herein: 
(1)  Mansion. The mansion style low-rise multifamily building shall have four to eight units within the structure, which shall be distinguished as a building designed to appear as a typical single-family detached home. 
(2)  Courtyard. The courtyard building shall be oriented such that the courtyard faces the street or roadway and has buildings facing along the other three sides. 
a.  Minimum width of the courtyard is 30 feet and depth is 15 feet. 
b.  Building walls facing a courtyard may be separated by more than the maximum building separation requirements. 
(3)  All other. To reduce massing and promote livability, all other low-rise multifamily building types shall provide: 
a.  Functional balconies for all exterior units; 
b.  Landscaping around each building within ten feet of building and along both sides of all internal sidewalks. 
(i)  Multi-building nonresidential development, excluding industrial. Buildings in a nonresidential development composed of multiple buildings totaling 100,000 square feet or more for the whole development shall: 
(1)  Be configured to break up the site into a series of smaller blocks defined by streets with pedestrian walkways forming an interconnected circulation route; 
(2)  Face the corner of an existing street intersection or entry point to the development; 
(3)  Frame and enclose: 
a.  A main street pedestrian or vehicle access corridor entering the development site; 
b.  At least three sides of parking areas, public spaces, or other site amenities; and 
c.  Provide outdoor gathering spaces for pedestrians between buildings. 
(j)  Outparcel development. 
(1)  Outparcels and their buildings shall be aligned in order to define continuous street edges with well-defined entry points. 
(2)  Spaces between buildings shall be improved to provide landscaped pedestrian amenities such as plazas, seating areas, arcades, pedestrian connections, and gathering spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.7.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1420. - Large-scale retail; additional standards. 
(a)  Entrances. 
(1)  The primary entryway into a large-scale retail building shall be clearly articulated by greater architectural detail, incorporating no fewer than three of the following elements: 
a.  Projecting or recessed, covered entrance; 
b.  Distinct roof form above entrance shall include at least one of the following: 
1.  Roof overhangs; 
2.  Awnings, canopies or porticos; 
3.  Raised corniced parapets; 
4.  Gabled or peaked roof form; 
5.  Arches. 
c.  Display windows directly adjacent to the entrance; 
d.  Architectural details and ornamentation emphasizing the building entrance; 
e.  Arcades connecting the entrance to adjacent pedestrian attractions; 
f.  Outdoor plaza with a minimum depth of 20 feet adjacent to the entrance and having seating and a water feature or landscaping; or 
g.  Landscape areas or seating areas. 
(b)  Off-street parking. 
(1)  Parking for large-scale retail development shall be distributed around the principal structure on at least two sides. 
(2)  No more than 50 percent of parking may be located between the principal structure and primary street. If located within an activity node, no parking shall be allowed between the principal structure and the primary street, except required parking spaces. 
(c)  Pedestrian circulation. 
(1)  Continuous internal sidewalks and pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect the public sidewalk or right-of-way with the principal building entrance of all principal buildings on the site. Such sidewalks shall also connect key pedestrian focal points such as transit stops, street crosswalks, and building entry points. 
(2)  Internal pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall be at least five feet in width. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be provided along all sides of the lot adjacent to a public street. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be provided for the principal building along any facade featuring a public entrance and along any facade leading to a public parking area. 
(5)  Internal pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall be differentiated from vehicular driveways and parking spaces through the application of colors and durable surface materials such as pavers, brick, or scored concrete, in order to enhance pedestrian safety and appearance of the pedestrian walkway or sidewalk. 
(d)  Landscaping. In addition to the landscape and screening requirements of division 4 of this article, the following requirements shall also apply: 
(1)  Building frontage. Beginning 15 feet from the principal customer entrance, along the building facade, a landscape area with trees shall be required for the entire length of the building. Each of the trees required herein shall be at least 4.5-inch caliper and eight feet tall at installation. Trees required herein shall be spaced no more than 100 feet apart. 
(2)  Landscape strip. A landscape strip at least 15 feet wide shall be required along any property line adjacent to a public street. When parking lot landscape strip requirements coincide with this location, the 15 feet shall not be required in addition to the parking lot landscaping, but shall serve as the parking lot dimensional requirement and planted according to parking lot landscaping standards in division 4 of this article. 
(3)  Walkways. Pedestrian walkways connecting a public street adjacent to the lot on which the principal building is located and parking aisles shall be provided approximately every 120 feet perpendicular to street frontages. 
(e)  Open space and enhanced open space areas. 
(1)  An outdoor gathering space (plaza or square) shall be developed with requirements by open space functional category and enhanced open space types as specified in division 5 of this article. 
(2)  Sites containing one or more large-scale retail building shall include an outdoor gathering space equal to at least three percent of the total square footage of the building. 
(3)  Outdoor gathering spaces shall be connected to the sidewalk and pedestrian walkway network, and shall provide at least three of the following features per space: 
a.  Lighted bollards; 
b.  Tables and chairs; 
c.  Fountains or other water features; 
d.  Benches; 
e.  Seat walls and/or raised landscape planters; 
f.  Shade trees lining the gathering space; 
g.  Pots or hanging baskets filled with seasonal plant material; 
h.  Information kiosks; 
i.  Sculptures or other public art features; or 
j.  Other features as approved by the community development director if the feature enhances the visual impact of the outdoor gathering space. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (5.7.8), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1421—46-1448. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING 

Sec. 46-1449. - Introduction. 
This article establishes the standards for the number, location, and development of motor vehicle parking facilities, standards for on-site loading areas, and standards for bicycle parking. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1450. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Fractions. Where a fractional space results during the calculation of required parking, the required number of parking spaces shall be the next lowest whole number. 
(b)  Parking space requirement not specified. Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not described in table 6.2, and where no similar use is listed, the community development director shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, the number of employees on the largest shift, total square footage, potential customer use, or other expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. If the community development director reasonably determines that a parking generation study should be prepared by a qualified professional, the community development director may require submission of such a study to aid the community development director in making a determination with respect to the number of required parking spaces. 
(c)  Computations for multiple floor uses within a building. In cases where a building contains some combination of residential use, office space, retail or wholesale sales area, or bulk storage area, the community development director may determine on a proportional basis the parking and loading requirements based on separate computations for each use. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1451. - Parking regulations, off-street parking spaces. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for a development permit or building permit, other than for a detached single-family residence, shall be accompanied by a parking plan showing all required off-street parking spaces, driveways, and the internal circulation system for each such parking lot. 
(2)  All parking lots and spaces shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  All vehicles shall be parked on a paved surface that is connected to and has continuous paved access to a public or private street, except as otherwise allowed in this section. 
b.  Each parking space, except those located on a single-family residential lot, shall comply with the minimum dimensions established in table 6.1. Each parking lot shall have adequate space for each car to park and exit every parking space and space for internal circulation within said parking lot. 
c.  Each parking lot, except those parking spaces located on property used for single-family residential purposes, shall comply with section 46-1337, site and parking area landscaping. 
d.  All parking lots and parking spaces, except those located on property used for single-family residential purposes, shall conform to the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers. 
e.  Parking and loading shall not be permitted within the front yard in any MR, HR, O-I, or O-I-T zoning district, except for required handicapped parking. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, parking and loading shall be permitted within the front yard where provision of adequate parking spaces within the rear is impractical and upon issuance of a variance pursuant to article VII of this chapter. 
f.  Parking shall not be permitted within the front yard of any property used for single-family residential purposes, except within a driveway, or in a roofed carport or enclosed garage. Within any single-family residential district, not more than 35 percent of the total area between the street right-of-way line and the front of the principal building shall be paved. 
g.  No parking space, driveway or parking lot shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing, or long-term storage of any vehicle or equipment, unless located within a zoning district which otherwise permits such use. 
h.  The parking of business vehicles on private property located within residential zoning districts is prohibited. This section shall not prohibit: 
1.  Typical passenger vehicles, with or without logos, including automobiles, pickup trucks, passenger vans, and dually trucks; 
2.  Vehicles engaged in active farming, construction activities or contractor services on the private property, or the temporary parking (12 hours or less) of vehicles for the purpose of loading/unloading within residential zoning districts; nor 
3.  The parking of vehicles on property located in residential zoning districts, where such property is used for an authorized nonresidential use such as a church; 
4.  Vehicles used in law enforcement are exempt from the restrictions of this subsection. 
i.  All parking lots shall conform to the requirements of section 46-1455. 
Table 6.1. Minimum Parking Space Dimensions 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1452. - Off-street parking ratios. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Minimum on-site parking requirements may be reduced through use of shared parking, in accordance with section 46-1453. 
(b)  Garage space. In residential districts in which garage space is provided, the garage space may count for no more than one required space per 200 square feet of garage space. 
(c)  Tandem parking. Tandem parking is permitted in association with all single-family detached and single-family attached housing types. 
(d)  Minimum and maximum parking ratios. Unless otherwise regulated elsewhere in this chapter, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for all uses listed are specified in table 6.2. Unless otherwise noted, the parking requirement shall be based on the gross square footage of the building or buildings devoted to the particular use specified. Maximum parking standards shall not apply to existing uses so long as the building or parking lot is not expanded. 
(e)  Phased development. Where a project is intended to be developed in phases, the community development director may approve phased development of a parking lot intended to serve current and future development. 
(f)  Reduction of minimum parking requirements. The minimum number of required spaces described in table 6.2 for a particular use may be reduced by ten percent by the community development director pursuant to an administrative variance in compliance with article VII of this chapter. If the use is within 1,000 feet of a designated heavy rail, streetcar/light rail or bus rapid transit station, the minimum number of required spaces may be reduced by 25 percent in accordance with article VII of this chapter. 
(g)  Carpool/vanpool parking. For office, industrial, and institutional uses where there are more than 20 parking spaces on the site, the following standards shall be met: 
(1)  At least five percent of the parking spaces on site must be reserved for carpool use. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, parking lots shall be designed so as to provide the most convenient access to building entrances by persons arriving by vanpools and carpools. In the event of a conflict between the priority described in this section and section 46-1464, this section shall prevail. 
(3)  Signs shall be posted identifying spaces reserved for carpool use. 
Table 6.2. Off-Street Parking Ratios 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.4), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 5, 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 46-1453. - Off-street parking reduction for shared parking. 
(a)  Parking spaces for any existing or new mixed-use development may be based upon a shared parking formula as set forth in table 6.3. 
(b)  Shared parking may be utilized for any of the combinations of uses shown in table 6.3. If shared parking is to be used to satisfy the requirements of this article, an application shall be submitted to the community development director seeking approval of a shared parking plan. The applicant must submit a scaled site plan for each site that will participate in the shared parking showing zoning, use, and existing parking facilities. Shared parking agreements approved by the community development director shall be executed prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the development. 
(c)  In any shared parking agreement, at least 50 percent of shared parking spaces must lie within 700 feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which the parking is provided, and all shared parking spaces must lie within 1,000 feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which the parking is provided. Shared spaces shall not be separated from the site by a roadway with more than four through-travel lanes, unless there is a well-marked, safe pedestrian crossing such as a pedestrian hybrid beacon, a signalized crosswalk, or a refuge median. 
(d)  Any change in the use of a building, shop or leased area that relies on a shared parking agreement to meet its parking requirements shall require compliance with the parking standards in this article based on the new use in order to obtain a certificate of occupancy. No right to shared parking shall vest in a property where the use of the property changes. In the event that property on which the shared parking is located has a different owner than the owner of the principal development, a written shared parking agreement between all relevant property owners, approved by the community development director and filed on the deed records in the office of the clerk of superior court for the county, shall be provided prior to approval of a certificate of occupancy for the principal development. Expiration for any reason of a shared parking agreement, on which compliance with this article is based, shall automatically terminate the related certificates of occupancy and place the property owner in violation of this zoning ordinance. 
(e)  The steps for determining parking requirements in a mixed-use development are: 
(1)  Determine the minimum amount of parking required for each separate use (table 6.2). 
(2)  Multiply each parking requirement by the corresponding percentage for each of the time periods given below. 
(3)  Calculate the column total parking requirement for each time period. 
(4)  The largest column total is the shared parking requirement. 
(5)  Example of shared parking calculation: 
(f)  If the following uses were proposed with the following example number of parking spaces in accordance with the individual use: 
(1)  Office: 400 spaces, retail: 300 spaces, and restaurant uses: 100 spaces. 
(2)  Total parking for individual use on site: 800 spaces. 
Then these same land uses under the provisions for shared parking would require the number of parking spaces shown in the example table 6.4 (by applying the percent reduction in table 6.3). 
Table 6.3. Shared Parking Reduction Table 

 
Table 6.4. Example of Shared Parking Reduction Calculation 

 
As shown in the Weekdays 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. column, 630 parking spaces would be needed for this example development. This is a reduction of 170 required spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1454. - Shared driveways and inter-parcel access. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all new office, commercial, institutional, mixed-use, and industrial developments and any building renovations and repaving projects of office, commercial, institutional, or industrial developments for which a land-disturbance permit is required. 
(b)  Shared driveways. Shared driveways between two parcels along a common property line may be required by the planning commission during subdivision plat review or by the community development director during the land-disturbance permitting process. In such cases, each property owner shall grant an access easement to facilitate the movement of motor vehicles and pedestrians across the site. The property owner's obligation to comply with this requirement shall be limited to the extent legal permission to construct and utilize the required shared drive can be obtained from the neighboring property owner. 
(c)  Inter-parcel access requirements. Inter-parcel access for vehicles between abutting and nearby properties shall be provided so that access to individual properties can be achieved between abutting and nearby developments as an alternative to forcing all movement onto highways and public roads, unless the community development director during the land-disturbance permitting process determines that it is unnecessary to provide inter-parcel access due to the unlikelihood of patrons traveling among abutting or nearby sites, or due to inability after reasonable efforts by the property owner to obtain legal permission from the abutting property owners for such inter-parcel access. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1455. - Number of handicapped parking spaces required. 
The minimum number of and dimensions for handicapped parking spaces shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (Public Law 101-136), the state building code, and the American National Standards Institute, and any other applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1456. - On-street parking. 
On-street parking spaces located immediately abutting the subject property, entirely within the extension of the side lot lines into the roadway and not within any required clear sight triangle, may be counted toward meeting the required parking ratios for all uses occurring on such abutting lots facing a local street or minor collector street. Where streets have been designated "No Parking" by the city or county, no credit for on-street parking shall be available. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1457. - Parking structures. 
The following requirements shall apply for parking structures: 
(1)  Minimum setbacks. Parking structures shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory structures established for the zoning district in which they are located. 
(2)  Maximum height. Parking structures shall comply with the maximum height requirements established in the zoning district in which they are located. 
(3)  Architectural features and facades. 
a.  Parking structures shall utilize materials such as brick, glass, stone, cast stone, poured-in-place concrete, hard coat stucco or precast concrete with the appearance of brick or stone on facades facing public rights-of-way. 
b.  Architectural features and facades for parking structures shall be compatible with abutting structures. 
(4)  Orientation. Parking structures shall be oriented to the interior of the parcel by adhering to the following: 
a.  Residential dwelling units, retail storefronts or office facades shall line the parking structure along all first floor facades adjacent to a street, excluding alleys and driveways. 
b.  Parking structures, when added to an existing residential development, shall not be located between the building front and the street. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1458. - Parking area landscaping. 
See parking area landscaping requirements in section 46-1337. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1459. - Paving surfaces. 
(a)  Typical paving surfaces. The paving surface of required minimum on-site and off-site parking areas shall be a dust-free, all-weather material (e.g., asphalt, concrete, or pavers). The paving surface shall have the parking stalls, loading and unloading zones, fire lanes and any other applicable designations delineated in white or yellow paint. 
(b)  Alternative paving surfaces may be used for the number of spaces that exceed 105 percent of the minimum required spaces subject to the confirmation by the community development director of the pervious nature of the alternative paving material and the numerical calculations. 
(1)  Alternative paving surfaces may include living turf grass or similar ground cover, pervious pavers or concrete, stabilized grass lawn, or other pervious parking surfaces. 
(2)  Driveways, access aisles and parking spaces (excluding handicapped) may be surfaced with grass lawn or other pervious parking surface serving: 
a.  Uses within 50 feet of environmentally sensitive areas identified in the comprehensive plan; 
b.  Uses which require parking for less than five days per week during a typical month; and 
c.  Parks, playgrounds, and other similar outdoor recreation areas with less than 200 parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1460. - Stacking spaces. 
All driveway entrances, including stacking lane entrances, must be at least 50 feet from an intersection. The distance is measured along the street from the junction of the two street curb lines to the nearest edge of the entrance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.12), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1461. - Valet parking requirements. 
All valet parking services shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Valet parking services shall only use off-street parking to park customer vehicles. 
(2)  A valet parking service shall be allowed only where the business establishment being served possesses the minimum required parking spaces either on-site or through a shared off-site parking agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.13), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1462. - Off-street loading requirements. 
(a)  Off-street loading spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as indicated in table 6.5. 
Table 6.5. Off-Street Loading Space Requirements 

 
(b)  Design and arrangement of off-street loading areas. The following standards shall apply to off-street loading areas, which shall be comprised of loading spaces and maneuvering areas: 
(1)  A loading space shall measure no less than 12 feet by 35 feet and have no less than 14 feet of vertical clearance. 
(2)  For any use required to furnish three or more loading spaces, at least one in every three shall measure no less than 12 feet by 55 feet. 
(3)  For manufacturing and warehousing uses, all loading spaces shall measure no less than 12 feet by 55 feet. 
(4)  Maneuvering areas shall not include required parking spaces or any portion of a public right-of-way. No off-street maneuvering area shall require vehicles to back in from or out to a public street. 
(c)  Off-street loading and maneuvering location limitations. Off-street loading spaces and maneuvering areas shall be located only in those portions of a lot where off-street parking areas are allowed with the following additional limitations: industrial zoning districts. If the off-street loading spaces and maneuvering areas are across from, or adjacent to, any non-industrial zoning district, a 50-foot landscaped strip shall be established between the non-industrial zoning district and the off-street loading spaces and maneuvering area. 
(d)  Screening of loading areas. Loading areas shall be paved with impervious materials and shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public plaza, ground-level or sidewalk-level outdoor dining area, public sidewalk, public right-of-way, private street or any adjacent residential use. 
(e)  Enclosure of dumpsters and trash compactors. All external dumpsters and loading areas shall be enclosed with opaque fence or walls at least six feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.14), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1463. - Parking of trailers in residential districts. 
(a)  In a residential zoning district, no trailer or recreational vehicle shall be parked in front of the principal structure; within the side yard setback or ten feet from side property line, whichever is less; or within ten feet of the rear lot line. 
(b)  No recreational vehicle or trailer may be occupied for human habitation for more than 14 consecutive days while parked within a residential zoning district. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles and trailers may be parked, for the limited purpose of storage between travel, on unpaved surfaces, including gravel or a similar material that prevents the vehicle's or trailer's tires from making direct contact with the earth, soil, sod or mud, so long as the unpaved surface prevents tracking of earth, soil, sod or mud onto public streets when the vehicle or trailer is moved from the property. 
(d)  Within any residential zoning district, no recreational vehicle, trailer or storage container may be parked on a lot that does not contain a permanent dwelling unit or other structure intended for permanent human habitation as its principal use. 
(e)  No portable storage container may be parked or stored in a residential zoning district for a period of a time exceeding 15 consecutive days, or a total of 30 days during any calendar year. A container used during active construction under a valid permit may remain for the duration of the active construction, counting toward the time restrictions of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.15), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1464. - Alternative fuel vehicles parking. 
(a)  Where required. Preferential parking for alternative fuel vehicles shall be provided for all new nonresidential parking areas containing 100 or more parking spaces, and for new parking areas of mixed-use projects where the nonresidential portion of the project requires 100 or more parking spaces. The parking spaces shall be striped with green paint to distinguish the spaces as preferential parking spaces, and in accordance with the state department of transportation requirements. 
(b)  Required number of spaces. At least two percent of all parking spaces in parking lots identified in subsection (a) of this section shall be designated for preferential parking for alternative fuel vehicles. 
(c)  Location of parking spaces. The required alternative fuel preferential parking spaces shall be located as close as possible to the primary entrance without conflicting with the Americans with Disability Act requirements, or other state or federal law. In the event the priority described in this subsection shall conflict with the priority described in section 46-1452, section 46-1452 shall prevail. 
(d)  Signage required. Each alternative fuel preferential parking space shall be provided with a sign that identifies the parking space as designated for use by alternative fuel vehicles. The sign shall be in compliance with chapter 34. 
(e)  Existing vehicle recharging stations. Existing parking spaces with vehicle recharging stations may be used to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.16), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1465. - Bicycle/moped parking requirements. 
(a)  A building, commercial establishment, recreation area, or other property, whether privately or publicly-owned or -operated, that is required to provide automobile parking facilities, whether free of charge or for a fee, to any employees, tenants, customers, clients, patrons, residents, or other members of the public shall provide at least one bicycle/moped parking space for every 20 required automobile parking spaces. No such building, commercial establishment or other property subject to the provisions of this section shall have fewer than three, nor be required to have more than 50 bicycle/moped parking spaces. The requirements of this section shall not apply to properties being operated primarily as commercial parking facilities, residences, or churches. 
(b)  All bicycle/moped spaces shall be located within 250 feet of a regularly used building entrance and shall not interfere with pedestrian traffic. Each space shall include a metal anchor that will secure the frame and both wheels of a bicycle or moped in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. If bicycle/moped parking is not visible to the general visiting public, then a sign no larger than ten inches by 15 inches shall be displayed that directs cyclists to the bicycle/moped parking. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall apply to property owners, persons occupying the property pursuant to a leasehold interest, or other managers or operators of buildings, commercial establishments and property subject to the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall apply to any building, commercial establishment or property for which a permit for new construction is issued following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and to the alteration of existing buildings in all cases where sufficient space exists to provide such parking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (6.1.17), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1466—46-1493. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-1494. - Purpose and intent; compliance with law. 
(a)  This article is intended to provide certain procedures to govern: 
(1)  Processing of various applications for rezoning, variances, comprehensive plan text amendments, comprehensive plan map amendments, special land use permits, administrative variances, and major and minor modifications to conditions of zoning. 
(2)  The calling and conducting of public hearings pertaining to said applications. 
(3)  Establishing criteria for making decisions on such applications. 
(b)  The mayor and city council, planning commission, zoning board of appeals, and community councils shall comply with all applicable provisions of state law, now and as they may be amended hereafter, including, but not limited to, state law concerning open records, open meetings and records retention. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.1.1), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 6(A), 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 46-1495. - Governing bodies. 
(a)  Community development director. The provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be administered by the community development director, in conjunction with the planning commission, the zoning board of appeals and the mayor and city council as set forth herein. The specific duties of the community development director shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Accepting and processing applications for zoning map amendments (rezonings), special land use permits, zoning certifications, continuances of nonconforming uses, text amendments to the zoning ordinance, modifications of zoning conditions, variances, residential lot divisions, amendments to the map and text of the comprehensive plan, or any other such business as may be scheduled for public hearing by the planning commission, zoning board of appeals, or mayor and city council. 
(2)  Researching facts and preparing reports and recommendations for the planning commission and the mayor and city council for such applications. Such reports shall be in writing and shall be made a part of the public record. 
(3)  Researching facts and preparing reports and recommendations regarding variances and appeals of error, or any other business as may be scheduled for public hearing by the zoning board of appeals. 
(4)  Maintenance of permanent records concerning the administration of this zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan, including all maps, amendments, records of public hearings, and any other business of the planning commission and zoning board of appeals. 
(5)  Review of applications for permits and licensing to ensure conformity with the requirements of this zoning ordinance and other relevant ordinances. 
(6)  Upon written request by the property owner or owner's authorized agent and payment of a fee established by the mayor and city council, the community development director may issue a certificate verifying the current zoning of a parcel of land, or a letter confirming a legal nonconforming status. 
(7)  Administratively correct the official zoning map after a graphic or scrivener error has been identified. 
(8)  Other duties as authorized in this zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, the rendering of administrative decisions authorized by division 6 of this article. 
(b)  Community council. 
(1)  There is hereby established a volunteer community council. The community council shall consist of nine members, three from each of the cities three districts whom shall be a resident of the district represented. 
(2)  Members of the community council shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council making the appointment or until their successor is appointed and qualified, unless such term ends sooner in a manner set forth herein. Community councilmembers may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. Any vacancy in the membership of the community council shall be filled in the same manner as the initial appointment. If a community councilmember moves outside the district for which the community council is established, that action shall constitute an immediate resignation from the council, effective immediately. 
(3)  The community council is created to review applications for rezonings, land use plan amendments, special land use permits and text amendments, and to report their recommendations to the planning commission. A community council may consider such ordinances and applications in relation to the applicable standards and criteria contained in this article, the adopted comprehensive plan and any of the community's quality of life issues. 
(c)  Planning commission. 
(1)  Established. There is hereby established a planning commission which shall consist of five members, all shall be residents of the city. 
(2)  Removal. A planning commissioner may be removed at any time for failure to attend three consecutive meetings or for failure to attend 75 percent or more of the meetings within any calendar year or by the mayor and city council for any other good cause related to performance of duties. It shall be the duty of the secretary of the planning commission to keep a record of the attendance of members and to notify both the planning commissioner and the mayor and city council when any planning commissioner is removed pursuant to the failure to attend meetings requirement of this section. No hearing before the mayor and city council is allowed for a removal for a violation of the failure to attend meetings requirement. Such removal shall be effective ten days following notification by the secretary of the planning commission to the mayor and city council. Upon request of the planning commissioner proposed for removal for cause other than for a failure to attend meetings, the mayor and city council shall hold a hearing on the removal before it becomes effective. A removal for cause other than for a failure to attend meetings shall require a majority vote of the mayor and city council. Planning commissioners may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. Any vacancy in the membership of the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members of the planning commission shall hold no other city office or city compensated position. If a planning commission member moves outside the city that action shall constitute a resignation from the planning commission, effective immediately. 
(3)  Compensation. The governing authority shall determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the planning commission. 
(4)  Planning commission to hold public hearing and make recommendation on all proposed amendments. No amendment to the text of this article, the official zoning map, or the comprehensive plan text or maps shall become effective unless the subject matter of the amendment has been submitted to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(5)  Planning commission to adopt rules of procedure. The planning commission shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the procedures contained in this article. The planning commission shall further adopt rules of procedure governing the conduct of its meetings; which rules shall be supplemental to and not conflict with this article. In any case where the rules do not address a procedural issue which arises before the planning commission, the most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern. The planning commission may from time to time amend its rules by majority vote. A copy of the adopted rules of procedure and any subsequent amendment thereto shall be filed by the secretary of the planning commission and the mayor and city council, and copies of the rules shall be made available to the public by the secretary of the planning commission. 
(6)  Quorum, voting, and actions by board. A quorum of the planning commission shall consist of at least three members of the commission; but no official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least three members of the planning commission. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. If there is not a quorum present, all items shall be rescheduled and re-advertised for the next regular meeting. 
(7)  Annual organizational meeting. At its first regular meeting of each year, the planning commission shall, by majority vote of its membership elect one of its members to serve as chairperson to preside over the commission's meetings and one member to serve as vice-chairperson. The persons so elected shall serve in these capacities for terms of the calendar year or until a replacement is elected. Vacancies may be filled for the unexpired terms only by majority vote of the planning commission membership. The chairperson and vice-chairperson may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues. The chairperson and the vice-chairperson may each be elected to successive terms without limitation. 
(8)  Secretary of planning commission; staff support. The community development director or his designee shall serve as secretary of the planning commission. The community development department staff shall provide support to the planning commission as reasonable and necessary to accomplish said commission's duties. The community development department staff shall provide the members of the planning commission with all information submitted to, or generated by, city staff on each proposed amendment the planning commission considers, including, but not limited to, a copy of the application and the proposed amendment. The community development department staff shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the planning commission, showing the vote of each member upon each item, or, if a member is absent or fails to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of the planning commission official actions and evidence submitted, all of which shall be filed in the office of the community development department and shall be a public record. 
(d)  Zoning board of appeals. 
(1)  Established. There is hereby established a zoning board of appeals which shall consist of five members, each of whom shall be a resident of the city. A member of the zoning board of appeals may be removed at any time for failure to attend three consecutive meetings or for failure to attend 75 percent or more of the meetings within any calendar year or by the mayor and city council for any other good cause related to performance of duties. It shall be the duty of the secretary of the zoning board of appeals to keep a record of the attendance of members and to notify both the zoning board of appeals member and the mayor and city council when any zoning board of appeals member is removed pursuant to the failure to attend meetings requirement of this section. No hearing before the mayor and city council is allowed for a removal for a violation of the failure to attend meetings requirement. Such removal shall be effective ten days following notification by the secretary of the zoning board of appeals to the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council shall have the authority to remove zoning board of appeals appointee for cause, other than for failure to attend meetings, by providing written notice to the secretary and the zoning board of appeals member proposed to be removed. Upon request of the zoning board of appeals member proposed for removal for cause other than for a failure to attend meetings, the mayor and city council shall hold a hearing on the removal before it becomes effective. Members of the zoning board of appeals may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. Any vacancy in the membership of the zoning board of appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members of the zoning board of appeals shall hold no other city office or city compensated position. If a member of the zoning board of appeals moves outside the city, that action shall constitute a resignation from the zoning board of appeals, effective immediately. 
(2)  Compensation. The governing authority shall determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  Meetings of the zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall meet at a standard day and time to be determined by the board. The chairperson may, when necessary, call for special meetings of the board. A meeting may be canceled by the chairperson if there are no matters to be acted upon by the board. 
(4)  Rules of procedure. The zoning board of appeals shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the procedures contained in this article. The board shall further adopt rules of procedure governing the conduct of its meetings, which rules shall be supplemental to and not conflict with this article. In any case where the rules do not address a procedural issue which arises before the board, the most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern. The board may from time to time amend its rules by majority vote. A copy of the adopted rules of procedure and any subsequent amendment thereto shall be filed by the secretary of the zoning board of appeals with the clerk to the mayor and city council, and copies of the rules shall be made available to the public by the secretary of the zoning board of appeals and the clerk to the mayor and city council. 
(5)  Hearings open to public. All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the public, and the agenda for each board meeting shall be made available to the public prior to any meeting of the board. Notice of all meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be given in accordance with section 46-1526. 
(6)  Quorum, voting, and actions by board. A quorum of the zoning board of appeals shall consist of at least three members of the board; but no official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least three members of the zoning board of appeals. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. If there is not a quorum present, all items shall be rescheduled and re-advertised for the next regular meeting. 
(7)  Annual organizational meeting. At its first regular meeting of each year, the zoning board of appeals shall, by majority vote of its membership elect one of its members to serve as chairperson to preside over the board's meetings and one member to serve as vice-chairperson. The persons so elected shall serve in these capacities for terms of the calendar year or until a replacement is elected. Vacancies may be filled for the unexpired terms only by majority vote of the board membership. The chairperson and vice-chairperson may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues. The chairperson and the vice-chairperson may each be elected to successive terms without limitation. 
(8)  Staff support. The community development director or his designee shall serve as secretary to the zoning board of appeals. The community development department staff shall make audio or video recordings and keep minutes of the proceedings of the board, showing the vote of each member upon each item, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its official actions and evidence submitted, all of which shall be filed in the office of the community development department and shall be a public record. 
(9)  Staff analysis, findings of fact, and recommendation on each application for a variance. The staff of the community development department shall conduct a site inspection of and shall prepare an analysis of each application for a variance applying the applicable criteria and standards set forth in this article to each such application. Staff shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the zoning board of appeals prior to the public hearing thereon. Notwithstanding staff's obligations to present its findings and a recommendation, the failure to timely do so shall not nullify the board's action on the item, constitute a ground for denial, or constitute grounds for appeal of a decision by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.1.2), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 6(A)—(C), 3-27-2017; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(7.1.2), 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 46-1496—46-1523. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 46-1524. - Applications and public hearing. 
This division establishes procedures that apply to all application submittals and procedures for public hearings required by this zoning ordinance. Prior to the processing of any application for an amendment to the official zoning map, commonly referred to as a rezoning, variance, comprehensive plan text amendment, comprehensive plan map amendment, special land use permit, or modification to conditions of zoning, the applicant shall be required to file documentation and follow certain procedures as set forth in this division. Additional regulations that apply to specific application types may be found in subsequent sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.2.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1525. - Applications. 
(a)  Public hearing required. Applications for city action that require a public hearing shall be filed with the community development director, along with a fee as set by the mayor and city council. Applications and procedures shall be made available to the public in the offices of the community development department. 
(b)  Application processing. The processing of said applications shall be based upon an annual calendar. This calendar shall be made available to the public in the offices of the community development department. 
(1)  The community development director shall be authorized to establish application submittal requirements necessary to obtain sufficient information to allow for a compliance review of the application as well as forms and instructions for each application type or petition. No application shall be processed by the community development director unless it complies with the procedural requirements of this division and is found to be a complete application. 
(2)  Any application that is found to be incomplete during the review for completeness shall be rejected from processing and returned to the applicant. Return of the rejected application shall constitute notice of the rejection to the applicant. 
(3)  No major change to an application may be accepted later than the required deadline for advertising in the legal organ or a newspaper of general circulation within the city. There shall be no refund of application fees after the community development department has accepted an application. 
(4)  The following shall constitute a major change to an application that shall result in deferral and/or re-advertising of the application: 
a.  The movement of any building or structure adjacent to an exterior boundary line, closer to the boundary line of the property; 
b.  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or any increase in the total amount of floor space of any nonresidential building; 
c.  Any decrease in the size of residential units; 
d.  Any increase in the number of curb cuts; 
e.  Any decrease in the buffer requirements; 
f.  Any increase in the height of any building or structure; 
g.  Any change in the proportion of floor space devoted to different authorized uses; 
h.  Any change in the zoning classification requested; or 
i.  Any change in the land use plan classification that increases the density of the proposed use. 
(5)  A change to a site plan or proposed condition of zoning associated with an application, which change has been accepted and allowed to be part of the application, may be deferred by the mayor and city council for a full-cycle review if the mayor and city council determines such review is reasonably necessary as a result of the change. The amended application shall be treated as if it were a new application, for the purposes of publication, review, notice and hearings, as required under this division, including review by the community council and planning commission. An amendment to an application shall not change the original filing date of that application. An amended application shall not require a new application fee. However, in the case of a deferral requested by the applicant, the applicant shall pay a required re-advertising fee. 
(c)  Application fees. The application fees for special land use permits, amendments to the official zoning map and comprehensive plan map amendments shall be as established by the mayor and city council. 
(d)  Site plan preparation. The community development director shall publish a checklist of requirements for site plans submitted pursuant to this zoning ordinance. All site plans submitted pursuant to this zoning ordinance shall be submitted with the applications to which they apply and shall comply with the checklist requirements. 
(e)  Notice of applications filed. The secretary of the planning commission shall, no later than 21 days following each closing date for receipt of applications, provide the mayor and city council with a list of all applications and amendments filed. The listing of applications shall be reasonably made available to the public. 
(f)  Withdrawal of application by applicant. Applications may not be withdrawn without permission after they have been filed for advertising for public hearing, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(g)  Final actions. The clerk to the mayor and city council shall provide a signed copy of final actions taken by the mayor and city council to community development director to be noted on official zoning maps. The clerk to the mayor and city council shall, after any final action taken by the mayor and city council, provide to the community development director a signed, certified copy of each such action. The community development director shall cause all relevant documents to be amended accordingly to reflect the final action approved by the mayor and city council. 
(h)  Resubmittal of rejected or denied applications. 
(1)  Rezoning. 
a.  If an application for rezoning is denied or assigned a zoning classification other than the classification requested in the application, then no portion of the same property may again be considered for rezoning for a period of 24 months from the date of the mayor and city councils' final decision. 
b.  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the mayor and city council may by resolution reduce the 24-month time restriction between applications to a period no less than the minimum required by the O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., as it now exists and may be amended hereafter, which currently is six months as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
c.  An applicant may request that the mayor and city council allow withdrawal of an application without prejudice, in which case, if approved, no minimum time period need expire before a subsequent application for rezoning of the property may be accepted by the community development director. 
(2)  Variance. 
a.  An application for a variance affecting all or a portion of the same property for which an application for variance for the same regulation was denied shall not be submitted before 24 months have passed from the date of final decision by the zoning board of appeals on the previous variance. 
b.  The zoning board of appeals may reduce this 24-month time restriction by resolution, provided that the time restriction between the date of said denial and any subsequent application affecting the same property shall be no less than six months. 
(3)  Special land use permit. 
a.  An application for a special land use permit affecting all or a portion of the same property for which an application for the same special land use was denied shall not be submitted before 24 months have passed from the date of final decision by the mayor and city council on the previous special land use permit. 
b.  Notwithstanding subsection (h)(3)a of this section, the mayor and city council may by resolution reduce the 24-month time restriction between applications to a period no less than the minimum required by the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., which is six months as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.2.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1526. - Public hearings. 
(a)  Zoning decisions. The term "zoning decision" is defined in article IX of this chapter by reference to the definition of "zoning decision" set forth in state law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-3, as it now exists and may be amended hereafter. 
(b)  Zoning decisions initiated by the city. For any zoning decision initiated by the city at least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing before the mayor and city council, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city, a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
(c)  Zoning decisions, appeals to the zoning board of appeals, variances, extensions of special land use permits, and major modifications of conditions initiated by a party other than the city. For any zoning decision, appeal to the zoning board of appeals, variance, extension of special land use permits, or major modification of conditions initiated by a party other than the city, notice of the public hearing shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Written notice of each public hearing shall state the nature of the proposed change, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before either the planning commission, zoning board of appeals or the mayor and city council and shall be mailed by first class mail by the community development director to all owners of property within 500 feet of the boundaries adjoining the subject property, as such property owners are listed on the records of the county tax commissioner, at least 15 days prior to said public hearing. 
(2)  Signs shall be posted on the subject property at least 15 days prior to the public hearing before the mayor and city council, the planning commission or the zoning board of appeals. The required information on each sign shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., as it now exists and may be amended hereafter. At least one sign shall be posted on each street on which the subject property has frontage in a conspicuous location within ten feet of the right-of-way. One additional sign shall be posted for each additional 500 feet of frontage or fraction thereof in excess of 500 feet of frontage on each street on which the subject property has frontage. The applicant shall pay a sign fee, in an amount to be established by the mayor and city council, to the community development department. 
(3)  One notice sign may serve both the application for an amendment to the official zoning map and/or the application for a special land use permit, as long as the sign states the relevant information for all hearings relating to those actions. 
(4)  A dated photograph of each sign shall be submitted by the applicant to the community development director as evidence of its proper posting. 
(5)  The city shall cause a notice of each public hearing regarding a proposed zoning decision to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall include the date, time and place of the hearing before the planning commission, the mayor and city council, and/or the zoning board of appeals, the address of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, the proposed zoning classification of the property, the nature of the variance sought, and the proposed special land use, as applicable. 
(d)  Written recommendations. Staff's analysis and written recommendations shall be available in the community development department and on the departmental website prior to any public meeting held by the zoning board of appeals, the planning commission or the mayor and city council. 
(e)  Presentation. After the public meeting is opened, staff shall make a presentation of the item, after which the chair of the meeting may ask questions of the staff or other city representative providing the report or recommendations. 
(1)  After presentation by staff, the applicant or those in support of the item shall receive a time period, up to the entire allotment of ten-minutes to present their case. If a large number of people wish to speak, it may be advisable to designate a spokesperson to make the presentation. Any member of the council/commission/board, upon recognition by the chair, may ask questions of the person. The period of questions shall not be deducted from the ten-minutes period. The city shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minute period if it is not elected to use that much time. 
(2)  Next, the chair shall call for a show of hands of those persons who wish to appear in opposition. Opposition shall be granted a time period of ten minutes at the public hearing to present data. Evidence and opinions. If a large number of people wish to speak, it may be advisable to designate a spokesperson to make the presentation. The city shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minute period to the opponents if they elect not to use that much time. Any member of the council/commission/board, upon recognition by the chair, may ask questions of any person giving public comment. The period of questions shall not be deducted from the ten-minute period. 
(3)  After completion of the procedure, the chair will indicate that the public hearing is closed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.2.4), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (7.2.4), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-10-37, att. (7.2.4), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 6(D), 3-27-2017) 
Secs. 46-1527—46-1555. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 46-1556. - Initiation of proposals for text and map amendments. 
A proposed amendment to the text of this chapter, the official zoning map, or the comprehensive plan may be introduced by the community development director, one or more members of the mayor and city council or by the planning commission. In addition, amendments to the official zoning map (rezoning) and the comprehensive plan may be initiated upon application by the owner of the subject property or the authorized agent of the owner. Before enacting any amendment to this ordinance, the official zoning map, or the comprehensive plan maps, the mayor and city council shall provide for the public notice and public hearings required by section 46-1526. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1557. - Consistency with comprehensive plan character areas. 
Any applicant seeking to rezone property to a classification that is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan maps, as established in article I of this chapter, must first obtain approval of an amendment to the comprehensive plan maps from the mayor and city council. The comprehensive plan maps shall be amended according to a schedule approved by the mayor and city council. However, exceptions may be granted by the mayor and city council in between the regular review cycle in cases of demonstrated hardship, or in cases of large-scale developments that may provide special economic benefits to the community. Requests for exceptions shall be subject to approval by the mayor and city council during a mayor and city council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1558. - Staff analysis, findings of fact, and recommendations. 
(a)  The staff of the community development department shall conduct a site inspection on all applications for zoning map and comprehensive plan map amendments and shall investigate and prepare an analysis of each proposed text amendment to this chapter or to the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The findings and recommendations of the community development department staff shall be made based on each of the standards and factors contained in section 46-1559 or 46-1560, as applicable. In an application for rezoning, the community development staff may recommend the imposition of conditions in accordance with section 46-1564. The staff shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the planning commission and the mayor and city council. Copies of the written findings and recommendations of the staff shall be reasonably made available to the public. 
(c)  Within a reasonable amount of time after acceptance of a complete application, the community development director shall submit the application for review by various departments and external agencies, as may be appropriate. Such departments may include, but not be limited to, land development, watershed management, fire and rescue, transportation, and public works. External agencies may include, but are not limited to, the county school board, the state regional transportation authority, the state department of transportation, Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA), and the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC), and any municipality that abuts the property that is the subject of the application. Any written comments received prior to submittal of the report shall be submitted to the review bodies for consideration and such comments shall become an official public record. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1559. - Standards and factors governing review of proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan map. 
The following standards and factors are found to be relevant for evaluating applications for amendments to the comprehensive plan map and shall govern the review of all proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan map: 
(1)  Whether the proposed land use change will permit uses that are suitable in consideration of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property or properties. 
(2)  Whether the proposed land use change will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property or properties. 
(3)  Whether the proposed land use change will result in uses which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
(4)  Whether the amendment is consistent with the written policies in the comprehensive plan text and any applicable small areas studies. 
(5)  Whether there are potential impacts on property or properties in an adjoining governmental jurisdiction, in cases of proposed changes near county or municipal boundary lines. 
(6)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the affected land areas which support either approval or denial of the proposed land use change. 
(7)  Whether there will be an impact on historic buildings, sites, districts or archaeological resources resulting from the proposed change. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1560. - Standards and factors governing review of proposed amendments to the official zoning map. 
The following standards and factors are found to be relevant to the exercise of the city's zoning powers and shall govern the review of all proposed amendments to the official zoning map: 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property or properties. 
(3)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
(4)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property or properties. 
(5)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(6)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect historic buildings, sites, districts, or archaeological resources. 
(7)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
(8)  Whether the zoning proposal adversely impacts the environment or surrounding natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1561. - Community council review of proposed amendments. 
(a)  Following the monthly closing date for the introduction or filing of an application to amend the official zoning map, to amend the text of this division, to amend the comprehensive plan land use maps, for a special land use permit, or for a major modification to zoning conditions, a copy of all such applications shall be made available by the community development director to the appropriate community council for consideration. This requirement does not apply to the initial adoption by the city of the official zoning map, the text of this division, and the comprehensive plan land use maps. 
(b)  Applicants are required to attend community council meetings to present their applications. The presentation shall take place prior to the formulation of any final written recommendations by the community development director. At the discretion of community development department staff, the applicant may be required to make a formal presentation to explain the application, but at a minimum the applicant shall be available to answer questions about the application. Community councils shall consider such applications in relation to the applicable standards and criteria contained in this division, the adopted comprehensive plan, and any of the community's quality of life issues. 
(c)  The recommendation of the community council shall be presented at the subsequent planning commission meeting where the application is considered. The failure of any community council to timely comply with the provisions of this subsection shall not constitute grounds for deferral or denial of any proposed amendment by the planning commission or the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1562. - Action by the planning commission. 
The secretary of the planning commission shall provide the members of the planning commission complete information on each proposed application requiring a public hearing by the planning commission, including a copy of the application and all supporting materials. The planning commission, after conducting a public hearing with prior public notice as required by this division, shall consider the proposal and vote on its recommendation to the mayor and city council. Deferral of an application by the planning commission shall not be binding on the mayor and city council. The planning commission may recommend approval of the application, approval to a less intense zoning district or land use category than that requested by the applicant, approval of the application with conditions, denial of the application, deferral of the application, or, upon request of the applicant, withdrawal of the application without prejudice. In its recommendation of any application, the planning commission may recommend the imposition of conditions in accordance with section 46-1564. All findings and recommendations of the planning commission relating to amendments to the official zoning map shall be made based on each of the standards and factors contained in section 46-1560. All recommendations of the planning commission relating to amendments to the comprehensive plan maps shall be made based on each of the standards and factors contained in section 46-1559. The secretary of the planning commission shall make and maintain a written record of the planning commission's consideration and recommendations, which shall be public record. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1563. - Action by the mayor and city council. 
At the next scheduled mayor and city council meeting pursuant to the applicant zoning calendar following appearance of the matter on the planning commission agenda, the mayor and city council, after conduct of a public hearing with public notice as required by this article, may vote to approve the proposed amendment pursuant to this division, approve with conditions, approve to a less intense zoning district or land use category than that requested by the applicant, deny the proposed amendment, defer the proposed amendment, or, upon request of the applicant, permit withdrawal without prejudice. Voting shall be consistent with the procedures provided by the city's Charter for the adoption of ordinances. In the approval of any proposed amendment to the official zoning map, the mayor and city council may impose conditions in accordance with section 46-1564. For each proposed zoning decision, the analysis submitted by the applicant, if any, the analysis prepared by the community development department, and the record prepared by the planning commission shall be presented in written form to each member of the mayor and city council. A limited supply of said findings shall be available at the public hearing and available upon request to the public. All decisions of the mayor and city council relating to each proposed amendment to the official zoning map shall be made based on each of the standards and factors contained in section 46-1560 and any other applicable standards within this ordinance. All decisions of the mayor and city council relating to amendments to the comprehensive plan maps shall be made based on each of the standards and factors contained in section 46-1559. Any proposed amendment or any proposed substitute ordinance considered by the mayor and city council shall be presented in written form prior to being voted on by the mayor and city council, or made a part of the motion. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.8), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 6(E), 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 46-1564. - Conditions of zoning. 
Conditions of zoning may be requested by an applicant, recommended by the community development department or planning commission, or imposed by the mayor and city council, as a part of any proposed change to the official zoning map, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Conditions of zoning may be imposed so as to ameliorate the effects of the proposed developmental change for the protection or benefit of neighboring persons or properties consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning districts involved, and the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and state law. No condition shall be imposed which reduces the requirements of the zoning districts involved, except as stipulated in section 46-1742. All conditions shall be of sufficient specificity to allow lawful and consistent application and enforcement. All conditions shall be supported by a record that evidences the relationship between the condition and the impact of the developmental change. No condition in the form of a development exaction for other than a project improvement shall be imposed within the meaning of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, as amended. 
(2)  Once imposed, conditions of zoning shall become an integral part of the approved amendment and shall be enforced as such. Changes to approved conditions shall be authorized only pursuant to section 46-1565. 
(3)  Site plans referenced in the conditions of zoning are conceptual only unless specific aspects of the site plan or the site plan itself are approved as a separate zoning condition. Development shall meet or exceed the imposed zoning conditions and all other applicable law, standards and regulations of the city. Compliance with the conditions of zoning shall be demonstrated prior to the issuance of a land-disturbance permit or building permit and conditional improvements shall be in place prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1565. - Modifications and changes to approved conditions of zoning. 
The community development director shall have sole authority to approve minor changes to conditions attached to an approved zoning amendment. Minor changes are those that implement only slight alterations to the approved conditions made necessary by actual field conditions at the time of development, and that do not alter the impact of the development on nearby properties nor the intent or integrity of the conditions as originally imposed. Any request for minor changes to conditions shall be filed with the community development director or his designee on a written form which shall include a full description of the documents and/or information necessary for the application to be considered complete. At a minimum, if an approved site plan exists, the request for minor changes shall be accompanied by four copies of the proposed revised site plan. The community development director shall decide whether to grant or deny the request for minor changes to conditions within 30 calendar days of receipt of a complete application for such minor changes. If the community development director does not decide within 30 days the request for minor changes shall be deemed denied as of the 31st day after receipt of a complete application. After making a decision, the community development director shall have ten calendar days to post a sign on the subject property which reflects the decision of the director and includes the deadline for taking an appeal of the decision. Persons identified in section 46-1632(b) shall have 15 calendar days from the posting of the sign to appeal the community development director's decision by filing an application for appeal with the secretary of the zoning board of appeals. Any major changes to conditions attached to an approved zoning amendment shall require an application and public hearings before the planning commission and the mayor and city council, as required in section 46-1526 for amendments to the official zoning map without limiting the meaning of the phrase, the following shall be deemed to constitute major changes: 
(1)  The movement of any building or structure adjacent to an exterior boundary line, closer to the boundary line of the property; 
(2)  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or any increase in the total amount of floor space of any nonresidential building; 
(3)  Any decrease in the size of residential units imposed in the original conditional zoning amendment; 
(4)  Any change in any buffer requirement imposed in the original conditional zoning amendment; 
(5)  Any increase in the height of any building or structure; 
(6)  Any change in the proportion of floor space devoted to different authorized uses; or 
(7)  Any change to conditions, except minor changes, as defined in this section, imposed by the city council when approving any change to the official zoning map, commonly referred to as a rezoning or a zoning amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.3.10), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1566—46-1588. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL LAND USE PERMITS 

Sec. 46-1589. - Generally. 
(a)  A special land use permit is a means by which the mayor and city council gives special consideration, pursuant to a clear set of standards and criteria, to those types of uses which may or may not be compatible with uses and structures authorized as a matter of right within a particular zoning district. Special land use permits are required for uses that have operational characteristics and/or impacts that are significantly different from the zoning district's principal authorized uses and therefore require individual review pursuant to the standards and criteria set forth in this division and article. 
(b)  Special land use permit applications shall be authorized only for those uses specifically listed in the applicable zoning district regulations, as permitted by special land use permit, and in compliance with any applicable supplemental regulations, according to article IV of this chapter or section 46-1595. 
(c)  An applicant desiring to apply for a special land use permit authorized within a zoning district described in this chapter shall file an application with the community development department in accordance with this division. The mayor and city council, following consideration by the planning commission, shall determine whether the proposed use, in the particular location contemplated, meets the standards and criteria set forth in this division and article. 
(d)  Such uses may further require, and the mayor and city council shall be authorized to impose, special conditions in order to ensure their compatibility with surrounding uses and to minimize adverse impacts on the use of surrounding property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1590. - Initiation of applications and public hearing requirements. 
(a)  Procedures for applications shall comply with section 46-1525. 
(b)  Applications for special land use permits require a public hearing, as provided for in section 46-1526. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1591. - Initiation of ordinance for application for special land use permit. 
Upon receipt of a complete application for a special land use permit, the secretary of the planning commission shall prepare a proposed ordinance to grant the proposed special land use permit, and said proposed ordinance shall be referred to the planning commission for public hearing and consideration pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and presented to the mayor and city council at their next scheduled zoning meeting after appearance on the planning commission agenda. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1592. - Community council review of proposed applications. 
Special land use permit applications shall be reviewed by the community council, according to the procedures in section 46-1561. Prior to presentation to the community council, each application for a special land use permit shall be made available to the appropriate community council in accordance with the provisions of section 46-1561 for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1593. - Staff analysis, findings of fact, and recommendation on each application. 
An application for a special land use permit shall be filed on forms provided by the community development department and shall not be considered an authorized application unless complete in all respects. Upon receipt of a complete application, the staff of the community development department shall conduct a site inspection and shall prepare an analysis of each application for a special land use permit and shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the planning commission. No application shall be amended later than the required deadline for advertising in the legal organ of the city which falls immediately prior to the scheduled hearing before the planning commission. Staff analysis and recommendations on each application for special land use permit shall be based on the criteria contained in section 46-1594 and, in addition, where applicable to the use proposed, on the criteria contained in section 46-1595. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1594. - Special land use permit; criteria to be considered. 
The following criteria shall be considered by the community development department, the planning commission, and the mayor and city council in evaluating and deciding any application for a special land use permit. No application for a special land use permit shall be granted by the mayor and city council unless satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning each of the following factors, all of which are applicable to each application, and the application is in compliance with all applicable regulations in article IV of this chapter: 
(1)  Adequacy of the size of the site for the use contemplated and whether or not adequate land area is available for the proposed use including provision of all required yards, open space, off-street parking, and all other applicable requirements of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located. 
(2)  Compatibility of the proposed use with adjacent properties and land uses and with other properties and land uses in the district. 
(3)  Adequacy of public services, public facilities, and utilities to serve the proposed use. 
(4)  Adequacy of the public street on which the use is proposed to be located and whether or not there is sufficient traffic-carrying capacity for the use proposed so as not to unduly increase traffic and create congestion in the area. 
(5)  Whether or not existing land uses located along access routes to the site will be adversely affected by the character of the vehicles or the volume of traffic generated by the proposed use. 
(6)  Adequacy of ingress and egress to the subject property and to all proposed buildings, structures, and uses thereon, with particular reference to pedestrian and automotive safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in the event of fire or other emergency. 
(7)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration generated by the proposed use. 
(8)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the hours of operation of the proposed use. 
(9)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the manner of operation of the proposed use. 
(10)  Whether or not the proposed use is otherwise consistent with the requirements of the zoning district classification in which the use is proposed to be located. 
(11)  Whether or not the proposed use is consistent with the policies of the comprehensive plan. 
(12)  Whether or not the proposed use provides for all required buffer zones and transitional buffer zones where required by the regulations of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located. 
(13)  Whether or not there is adequate provision of refuse and service areas. 
(14)  Whether the length of time for which the special land use permit is granted should be limited in duration. 
(15)  Whether or not the size, scale and massing of proposed buildings are appropriate in relation to the size of the subject property and in relation to the size, scale and massing of adjacent and nearby lots and buildings. 
(16)  Whether the proposed use will adversely affect historic buildings, sites, districts, or archaeological resources. 
(17)  Whether the proposed use satisfies the requirements contained within the supplemental regulations for such special land use permit. 
(18)  Whether or not the proposed use will create a negative shadow impact on any adjoining lot or building as a result of the proposed building height. 
(19)  Whether the proposed use would result in a disproportionate proliferation of that or similar uses in the subject character area. 
(20)  Whether the proposed use would be consistent with the needs of the neighborhood or the community as a whole, be compatible with the neighborhood, and would not be in conflict with the overall objective of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1595. - Additional criteria for specified uses. 
In addition to the criteria contained in section 46-1594, for which each applicant for a special land use permit is required to provide information, the following additional criteria shall apply to specific uses as specified below. No application for a special land use permit for the uses specified below shall be granted by the mayor and city council unless it is determined that, in addition to meeting the requirements contained within the zoning district in which such property is located and the criteria contained in section 46-1594, and complying with applicable regulations in article IV of this chapter, satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning each of the following criteria: 
(1)  Telecommunications towers and antennas. In determining whether to authorize a special land use permit for a telecommunication tower or antenna, the mayor and city council shall comply with and apply the requirements of section 46-1200. 
(2)  Mine, mining operation, gravel pit, quarry, or sand pit. In determining whether to authorize a special land use permit for a mine, mining operation, gravel pit, quarry, or sand pit, the mayor and city council shall also consider each of the following criteria: 
a.  Whether the type and volume of traffic associated with such use will cause congestion in the streets and will create noise and vibration along streets used for residential purposes or adjacent to activity centers. 
b.  Whether the applicant has provided a soil erosion control plan and a reuse or reclamation plan which meets the requirements of the city and of the Georgia Surface Mining Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq., as amended, and Ga. Admin. Rules ch. 391-3-3. 
c.  Whether or not the applicant meets the requirements of the city's noise ordinance. 
(3)  Child day care facility. In determining whether to authorize a special land use permit for a child day care facility, the mayor and city council shall also consider each of the following criteria: 
a.  Whether there is adequate off-street parking for all staff members and for visitors to the child day care facility. 
b.  Whether the proposed off-street parking areas and the proposed outdoor play areas can be adequately screened from adjoining properties so as not to adversely impact any adjoining land use. 
c.  Whether there is an adequate and safe location for the dropping off and picking up of children at the child day care facility. 
d.  Whether the character of the exterior of the proposed structure will be compatible with the residential character of the buildings in the zoning district in which the child day care facility is proposed to be located, if proposed for a residential zoned district. 
(4)  Biomedical waste disposal facilities, disposal facilities, landfills, solid waste disposal facilities, solid waste landfills, private industry solid waste disposal facilities, solid waste handling facilities, solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities, and disposal facilities for hazardous and/or toxic materials including radioactive materials. In determining whether to authorize a special land use permit for a biomedical waste disposal facility, disposal facility, landfill, solid waste disposal facility, solid waste landfill, private industry solid waste disposal facility, solid waste handling facility, solid waste thermal treatment technology facility, or disposal facility for hazardous and/or toxic materials including radioactive materials, the mayor and city council shall also consider each of the following criteria: 
a.  Whether the proposed use does not pose any potential negative impact resulting from air pollution, degradation of soil and/or water quality, noise, odor, or other negative environmental effects. 
b.  Whether the proposed use will not have a significant deleterious effect on use of land and value of existing housing in adjacent and nearby neighborhoods. 
c.  Whether the proposed use will not create a negative traffic impact on any adjacent or nearby residential streets resulting from truck and other vehicular traffic associated with the facility. 
d.  Whether the proposed use does not represent an over-concentration of such uses in the area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1596. - Action by the planning commission. 
(a)  Community development staff shall provide the members of the planning commission complete information on each proposed application for a special land use permit that the commission considers, including a copy of the application and all supporting materials. The planning commission, after conducting a public hearing with public notice, as required by this division, shall vote on its recommendation to be provided to the mayor and city council. 
(b)  The planning commission may recommend approval of the application, approval of the application with conditions, denial of the application, or deferral of the application. 
(c)  The planning commission may recommend the imposition of conditions based upon the facts of a particular application in accordance with section 46-1564. 
(d)  The planning commission recommendation on each application shall be based on a determination as to whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in section 46-1594, the criteria contained in section 46-1595 where applicable to the use proposed, and the requirements of the zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1597. - Action by the mayor and city council. 
(a)  The mayor and city council, after conducting the public hearing with public notice as required by this division, shall vote to approve the application, approve the application with conditions, deny the application, defer the application, or, upon request of the applicant, to permit withdrawal of the application without prejudice. 
(b)  The mayor and city council may impose conditions based upon the facts of a particular application in accordance with section 46-1564. 
(c)  The decision of the mayor and city council on each application for special land use permit shall be based on a determination as to whether or not the application satisfies the criteria contained in section 46-1594, the criteria contained in section 46-1595 where applicable to the use proposed, and the requirements of the zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located. 
(d)  The mayor and city council may specify the duration of each such special land use permit approved. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1598. - Appeals of decisions of the city council. 
All appeals of all final decisions of the mayor and city council under the provisions of this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the mayor and city council on an amendment to the zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another or which changes zoning conditions, or which denies any such ordinances may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court of the county via direct appeal, setting forth plainly the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the board is rendered. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the mayor and city council on a special land use permit may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court of the county via a writ of certiorari plainly setting forth the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the board is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.10), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 6(F), 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 46-1599. - Limitations of special land use permits. 
(a)  Development of an approved special use. The issuance of a special land use permit shall only constitute approval of the proposed use, and development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits and approvals required by any applicable law or regulation. 
(b)  Expiration of a special land use permit. Unless a building permit or other required approval is applied for within 12 months of the mayor and city council' approval, and construction pursuant to such building permit is promptly begun and diligently pursued thereafter, the special land use permit shall expire automatically, unless the permit is extended upon application to the mayor and city council in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Time extension of a special land use permit. A time limitation imposed on special land use permits by the mayor and city council and the expiration date established pursuant to subsection (b) of this section may be extended once for 12 consecutive months upon written request by the applicant and approval by the community development director. Any further time extensions shall be by the mayor city council upon written request by the applicant and approval of the mayor and city council after compliance with the public notice provisions of section 46-1526(c). In considering a request to extend, the community development director and the mayor and city council shall consider the criteria described in section 46-1594. 
(d)  Limitations on approvals for special land use permits. A special land use permit shall expire automatically and cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months. 
(e)  Modifications to a special land use permit. Changes to an approved special land use permit, including changes to approved conditions, expansion of the approved use, or expansion of building square footage, shall be subject to the same application, review and approval process as a new application, including the payment of relevant fees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1600. - Transfer of special land use permits. 
A special land use permit, including the site plan and any conditions imposed at the time of the grant of the special land use permit by the mayor and city council, is granted to the person, corporation or other legal entity that applied for the permit. A special land use permit expires automatically upon change in ownership of the subject property, unless the special land use permit is transferred as authorized in this section. A special land use permit may only be transferred from one person, corporation, or other legal entity to another person, corporation, or other legal entity upon application to the community development director. Any such application by any person, corporation, or other legal entity to transfer a special land use permit shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the proposed transferee certifying that the new owner or operator is familiar with and will abide by the approved site plan and all of the conditions, if any, imposed by the mayor and city council at the time of the grant of the special land use permit. At the time a special land use permit transfer is requested, the district councilmembers shall be notified by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.12), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1601. - Compliance upon denial. 
If an application to the mayor and city council for a special land use permit is submitted due to an existing violation of this division and such application for special land use permit is denied, the violation shall be required to be corrected within 30 days of such denial. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the community development director may extend the deadline for correction of the violation for a period up to 90 days following the denial of the special land use permit application upon a showing that the violation cannot reasonably be corrected within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.4.13), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1602—46-1630. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 46-1631. - Testimony and burden of proof. 
The chairperson of the zoning board of appeals, or in his absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(1)  Requirements. The standards and requirements of this zoning ordinance and decisions made by public officials are presumed to be valid and just. It shall be the responsibility of an applicant seeking relief to assume the burden of proof and rebut this presumption by presenting sufficient facts and evidence to explain how the proposed appeal or variance is consistent with the general spirit and intent of this zoning ordinance and the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Review. It is the duty of the zoning board of appeals to review such facts and evidence in light of the intent of the zoning ordinance to balance the public health, safety and general welfare against the injury to a specific applicant that would result from the strict application of the provisions of this zoning ordinance to the applicant's property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1632. - Appeals of decisions of administrative officials. 
(a)  General power. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any final order, requirement, or decision made by an administrative official based on or made in the enforcement of this zoning ordinance or as otherwise authorized by local law. Administrative officials must make final decisions covered by this section within 180 days of receipt of all necessary information to make such decision. A failure to act prior to the passage of 180 days shall not be construed to be a final order, requirement or decision within the meaning of this division. If a decision is not made by the 181st day, the requested decision is deemed denied, and becomes appealable. All such appeals shall be heard and decided following the notice requirements of section 46-1526, and pursuant to the following criteria and procedural requirements. 
(b)  Appeals of decisions of administrative officials. Appeals of decisions of administrative officials may be filed by: 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by; 
(2)  Any elected member of the mayor and city council affected by; or 
(3)  An owner of property within 250 feet of the nearest property line of the property that is the subject of any final order, requirement, or decision of an administrative official, based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter, or as otherwise authorized by local law, by filing with the secretary of the zoning board of appeals an application for appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, within 15 days after the action was taken by the official that is the subject of the appeal. 
(c)  Appeal stays all legal proceedings. An appeal of a decision of an administrative official stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action or decision appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in that official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, legal proceedings shall be stayed only pursuant to a restraining order granted by a court of competent jurisdiction directed to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(d)  Appeal stays land-disturbance or construction activity in certain situations. If the action or decision appealed from permits land-disturbance or construction activity to commence or continue on residentially zoned property, the appeal stays the land-disturbance or construction activity until the zoning board of appeals issues a decision on the appeal. Thereafter, land-disturbance or construction activity in such cases shall only be stayed by an order from a court of competent jurisdiction. In all cases involving nonresidentially zoned property, the appeal to the zoning board of appeals does not stay land-disturbance or construction activity; such activity shall only be stayed by an order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Activity stayed. Thereafter, in such situations land-disturbance or construction activity shall only be stayed by an order granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  Time of hearing. The zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give notice thereof pursuant to the requirements of section 46-1526 as well as written notice to the appellant. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by an agent, by an attorney, or by the submission of written documentation. 
(g)  Decision of the zoning board of appeals. Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the zoning board of appeals shall make a determination on each appeal and shall issue a written decision explaining the reasons for its decision. The zoning board of appeals shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time, but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the hearing. An appeal shall be sustained only upon an expressed finding by the zoning board of appeals that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, erroneously applied the zoning ordinance to the facts, or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit, provided all requirements imposed by any applicable laws are met. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1633. - Applications for variances; criteria to be used by the zoning board of appeals in deciding applications for variances. 
The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide applications for variances from the strict application of the regulations of this chapter and chapter 8 where the strict application of any regulation enacted under said chapters would result in exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property. In determining whether or not to grant a variance, the board shall apply the criteria specified in this section to the facts of each case. The board may attach reasonable conditions to any approved variance in accordance with section 46-1564. Once imposed, conditions shall become an integral part of the approved variance and shall be enforced as such. No changes to an approved condition attached to a variance shall be authorized except by reapplication to the zoning board of appeals in full compliance with the applicable provisions of this division. No relief may be granted or action taken under the terms of this division unless such relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of this division and the comprehensive plan. The zoning board of appeals shall apply the following criteria to the types of applications specified below as follows: 
(1)  Variances from the provisions or requirements of this division other than variances described in section 46-1634 shall be authorized only upon making all of the following findings in writing: 
a.  By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific lot, or by reason of exceptional topographic and other site conditions (such as, but not limited to, floodplain, major stand of trees, steep slope), which were not created by the owner or applicant, the strict application of the requirements of this division would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the same zoning district. 
b.  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
c.  The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
d.  The literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of this division would cause undue and unnecessary hardship. 
e.  The requested variance would be consistent with the spirit and purpose of this division and the comprehensive plan text. 
(2)  Appeals of decisions regarding building architectural design standards shall be evaluated using the same criteria as section 46-1669(b). 
(3)  Appeals to the height standards, but not to add stories, shall be evaluated using the criteria as follows: 
a.  Adequacy of the size of the site for the use contemplated and whether or not adequate land area is available for the proposed use including provision of all required yards, open space, off-street parking, and all other applicable requirements of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located. 
b.  Compatibility of the proposed use with adjacent properties and land uses and with other properties and land uses in the district. 
c.  Adequacy of public services, public facilities, and utilities to serve the proposed use. 
d.  Whether or not the proposed use provides for all required buffer zones and transitional buffer zones where required by the regulations of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located. 
e.  Whether or not the size, scale and massing of proposed buildings are appropriate in relation to the size of the subject property and in relation to the size, scale and massing of adjacent and nearby lots and buildings. 
f.  Whether or not the proposed use will create a negative shadow impact on any adjoining lot or building as a result of the proposed building height. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1634. - Applications for variances to reduce or waive off-street parking or loading space requirements. 
The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide applications for variances to reduce or waive required off-street parking or loading spaces in accordance with the provisions and standards of this section. All such applications shall be heard and decided based on the notice requirements of section 46-1526. The zoning board of appeals may waive or reduce the required number of parking or loading spaces in any district only upon an expressed finding that: 
(1)  The character of the use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading spaces; 
(2)  The lot upon which the building is located is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of a MARTA Rapid Transit Station; 
(3)  The provision of the full number of parking spaces would have a deleterious effect on an historic building, site, district or archaeological resource; 
(4)  The use has a characteristic that differentiates it from the typical use example used in the formulation of this zoning ordinance; 
(5)  The location of the proposed development is relatively isolated where the opportunity for diversity of use, pedestrian access, and alternative modes is not available; or 
(6)  The developer is providing the additional spaces for general public parking (for hourly or daily parking charges) to serve surrounding development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1635. - Limitations of authority of the zoning board of appeals. 
No variance shall be granted by the zoning board of appeals to: 
(1)  Allow a structure or use not listed as a permitted use or a special use in the applicable zoning district or a density of development that is not authorized within such district. This prohibition does not apply to any variance from the supplemental regulations of article IV of this zoning ordinance or from any other accessory feature or characteristic of a permitted or special use, unless said variance is otherwise prohibited by the regulations of this division. 
(2)  Allow any variance which conflicts with or changes any requirement enacted as a condition of zoning or of a special land use permit by the mayor and city council. 
(3)  Reduce, waive or modify in any manner the minimum lot width unless the purpose is to reverse a lot merger. 
(4)  Reduce, waive or modify in any manner the minimum lot area established by this division. 
(5)  Extend the time period for a temporary outdoor social, religious, entertainment or recreation activity approved by the community development director. 
(6)  Permit the expansion or enlargement of any nonconforming use of land, nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination, nonconforming use of land and structures in combination, or nonconforming use requiring special land use permit. 
(7)  Permit the reestablishment of any nonconforming use of land, nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination, nonconforming use of land and structures in combination, or nonconforming use requiring special land use permit where such use has lapsed pursuant to the requirements and limitations of article VIII of this chapter. 
(8)  Permit customer contact for a home occupation authorized by this division. 
(9)  Allow any variance to increase the height of a building which will result in adding a story. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1636. - Decision by the zoning board of appeals. 
Each application presented to the zoning board of appeals regarding a variance shall be scheduled for a public hearing within 60 days of the filing of a complete application and shall be supported by findings and conclusions which shall be a part of the record established by the zoning board of appeals for each application. The zoning board of appeals shall grant or deny the variance in writing. In its written variance decision, the zoning board of appeals must include findings of fact citing evidence of compliance with all applicable criteria imposed by this division or other applicable provisions of law. The zoning board of appeals may adopt the findings of fact of the staff or the applicant, they may adopt the findings of fact of the staff or applicant with modifications, or they may adopt a separate set of facts developed by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1637. - Compliance with standards upon denial. 
In such case that an application to the zoning board of appeals is initiated due to an existing violation of this division and such application is denied, the violation shall be required to be corrected within 30 days of such denial or as specified by the zoning board of appeals if a greater time period is required. The maximum extension of time the board may grant for correction shall be 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1638. - Appeals of decisions of the zoning board of appeals. 
All appeals of all final decisions of the zoning board of appeals under the provisions of this division shall be as follows: Only persons aggrieved by a final decision of the zoning board of appeals may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court of the county by writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the zoning board of appeals is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.8), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 6(G), 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 46-1639. - Fair Housing Act accommodation variance. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter to the contrary, the zoning board of appeals shall consider and grant reasonable accommodations necessary to afford persons with disabilities equal housing opportunities. In determining whether a particular accommodation is reasonable, the zoning board of appeals shall consider whether the request imposes an undue burden or expense on the city and whether the proposed accommodation would create a fundamental alteration in the zoning scheme. An application for a Fair Housing Act Accommodation Variance shall comply with all other procedural requirements for consideration and approval of variances in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.5.9), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 6(H), 3-27-2017) 
Sec. 46-1640. - Concurrent variance. 
The mayor and city council may consider a concurrent variance from any standards of the zoning ordinance which shall be filed simultaneously with rezoning, special land use permit or zoning modification requests on the same property based on the conceptual plan submitted with the petition for the same agenda. The community council and planning commission shall also hear and make recommendations on concurrent variances filed with rezoning's or special land use permit applications. The mayor and city council shall consider such concurrent variance requests in accordance with the standards set forth in section 46-1633. Public notification shall be in accordance with section 46-1526. 
(1)  Limitations on concurrent variances. 
a.  The mayor and city council may only consider variance requests as part of, or in conjunction with, a rezoning, use permit or modification application. 
b.  If an application for a variance to the zoning board of appeals duplicates a concurrent variance request denied by the mayor and city council, such an application shall not be accepted by the director of the department of community development prior to the expiration of 24 months from the date of the mayor and city council' denial of the variance request. A variance request to the zoning board of appeals cannot be considered simultaneously with the same variance request pending before the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Application for concurrent variances. 
a.  Applications for a concurrent variance shall be submitted to the director of the department of community development in accordance with the advertised filing deadlines for the mayor and city council meetings. A regular variance fee shall be charged and the application shall comply with all advertising and notification requirements specified in section 46-1526. One notice sign may serve for both the rezoning, special land use permit, zoning modification, and concurrent variance request as long as the sign is marked to indicate all actions which are pending. 
b.  The variance case file number for each concurrent variance requested shall be included on the rezoning petition. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (7.5.10), 9-1-2016) 
Secs. 46-1641—46-1663. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS; WAIVERS AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 46-1664. - Special administrative permits generally. 
The community development director is hereby authorized to consider and decide requests for special administrative permits specifically authorized in this zoning ordinance. All such requests for special administrative permits shall be filed in writing on forms promulgated by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.6.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1665. - Standards for special administrative permits, criteria to be applied. 
All applications filed for special administrative permit with the community development director shall be considered and decided pursuant to the standards contained in sections 46-1594 and 46-1595, and any supplemental regulations, as applicable, in article IV of this chapter. All special administrative permits approved by the community development director shall specify the length of time of the duration of each such special administrative permit 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.6.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1666. - Time limitations. 
All applications for special administrative permits shall be considered and decided by the community development director no later than 30 days from the receipt of a complete application for such special administrative permit, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the community development director. If the community development director does not render a decision on the application within 30 days, the application shall be deemed denied as of the 31st day after receipt of a complete application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.6.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1667. - Administrative variances, administrative waivers: authority. 
The community development director is hereby authorized to consider and grant or deny, pursuant to the procedures and standards contained in this division, an administrative variance or an administrative waiver from the following regulations and subject to the standard limitations: 
(1)  Reduce by variance any front, side or rear yard setback by an amount not to exceed ten percent of the district requirement, but not including any transitional buffer zone or any setback which is a condition of zoning or special land use permit, pursuant to the standards specified in section 46-1633. 
(2)  Reduce by variance the required spacing between buildings in districts where multiple buildings are authorized on a single lot in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the requirement, pursuant to the standards specified in section 46-1633. 
(3)  Reduce by variance the off-street parking or loading requirements imposed by this division in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the district requirement, pursuant to the standards specified in section 46-1634. 
(4)  Reduce by variance the off-street parking requirements imposed by this division for any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of the boundary of a MARTA Rapid Transit Station in an amount not to exceed 25 percent of the district requirement, pursuant to the standards specified in section 46-1634. 
(5)  Increase by variance the retaining wall height as set forth in article 5, division 4 of this chapter by an amount not to exceed two feet, but no such variance is allowed for property located in an historic district. 
(6)  Increase by variance the distancing requirements for retaining walls set forth in article 5, division 4 of this chapter by an amount not to exceed two feet. 
(7)  Increase by variance the elevation of residential thresholds as set forth in article 5, division 2 of this chapter by two feet. 
(8)  Reduce by variance, as follows, if necessary to allow reasonable use following a public road right-of-way donation or acquisition: 
a.  To reduce required minimum lot size by up to 50 percent only to maintain the predetermined yield. 
b.  To reduce required setbacks for a permitted or existing structure on a lot in the event of public road right-of-way donations or acquisition that would otherwise cause the lot to be nonconforming with respect to the minimum setback standards. 
c.  To reduce the number of parking spaces for any existing or permitted structure below the minimum required parking spaces applicable to the use. 
(9)  Waive architectural building standards and designs provided in article V of this chapter. The community development director shall notify the mayor and city council in writing within ten days of granting said waiver. 
(10)  No administrative variance or waiver shall be authorized to delete, modify, or change in any manner any condition imposed by the mayor and city council or the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.6.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1668. - Procedures for applications for administrative variances and administrative waivers. 
An application for administrative variance or administrative waiver shall be submitted to the community development director on forms approved by the community development director, along with any such fees as may be established by the mayor and city council. 
(1)  The community development director shall review and decide upon each complete application pursuant to the applicable standards referred to in section 46-1669. A written decision on each such application shall be issued no later than 30 days from the date a complete application was filed, unless an extension is agreed to by the applicant and community development director. If the community development director does not render a decision on the application within 30 days the application shall be deemed denied as of the 31st day after receipt of a complete application. 
(2)  The application for an administrative variance or administrative waiver shall state the specific regulation from which exception is sought and the reasons the exception is needed. The application shall contain such information as the community development director deems necessary to evaluate the request. 
(3)  It shall be the applicant's burden to provide sufficient justification for granting the variance or waiver. 
(4)  The community development director and staff shall prepare an evaluation statement concerning each application showing the impact of the applicable criteria as set forth in this division. 
(5)  No later than ten calendar days after making a decision, the community development director shall post a sign on the subject property and on the city's website which reflects the decision of the community development director and the deadline for taking an appeal of the decision to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.6.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1669. - Criteria used by the community development director in deciding administrative variances and administrative waivers. 
(a)  The community development director shall grant or deny applications for administrative variances from the strict application of the regulations identified in section 46-1667(1), where the strict application of the associated regulations would result in exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property. In determining whether or not to grant a variance, the director shall apply the criteria specified in sections 46-1633 and 46-1634 to the facts of each application. 
(b)  The community development director shall consider administrative waivers to amend, reduce, or waive architectural, design, or building material standards found in article V of this chapter, using the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the proposed change in appearance will have a substantial adverse effect on the design standards set out in article V of this chapter. 
(2)  The extent to which the proposed project complies with the design standard in terms of architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and color (non-painted surfaces) material of architectural features, and other site features. 
(3)  The extent to which the proposal is compatible with other structures in the area. 
(c)  When issuing a written decision on an administrative waiver request, the community development director may make a decision to approve the waiver, approve with conditions, or deny the waiver, and shall cite the grounds relied upon in reaching the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.6.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1670. - Persons entitled to appeal to the zoning board of appeals. 
Any person identified in section 46-1632(b) shall have the right to appeal by a decision of the community development director related to administrative permits, variances or waivers to the zoning board of appeals. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the decision of the director is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.6.8), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1671—46-1693. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 46-1694. - Administration and enforcement; granting of permits. 
The community development director shall be responsible for the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division. The community development director shall have the duty to issue development permits as required with respect to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1695. - Development permits. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this division, a development permit shall be required for any proposed use of land or buildings in order to ensure compliance with all provisions of this division and all other ordinances and regulations before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading, or alteration of land or buildings commences. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1696. - Building permits and certificates of occupancy required. 
A building permit and a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the community development director prior to occupancy of any building or structure. Such permit and certificate of occupancy shall be approved by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1697. - Applications for permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  All applications for development permits shall be made to the community development director. 
(b)  All applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be made to the community development director. 
(c)  Prior to the release of a development permit, compliance with zoning shall be reviewed and verified by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1698. - Development and building permits; plans required. 
(a)  Plans required. All applications for development permits shall be accompanied by complete plans, which shall be drawn to scale, filed in duplicate, and which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and signature of the author, and the author's address and telephone number; 
(2)  Plans shall show the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, based on an actual survey by a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the state; 
(3)  Plans shall show all required building setback lines, buffer zones, and open space required by this division; 
(4)  Plans shall show the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing and the lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered; 
(5)  Plans shall show the current zoning classification of the property including zoning conditions and zoning variances, if any; 
(6)  Plans shall show the existing or intended use of each building or part of building, and the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; 
(7)  Plans shall show such other information as may be required by the community development director with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the application of and enforcement of the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Plans shall be returned to the owner when the plans have been approved by the community development director. 
(c)  Approval of the preliminary subdivision plat and compliance with all applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations contained in chapter 22 and in this chapter shall constitute approval of the development permit for a subdivision. 
(d)  Development permits for individual structures within approved residential subdivisions or developments shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1699. - Issuance of development permits. 
All development permits shall be issued by the community development director, which shall in no case grant any development permit for the use, construction or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of this division or any other ordinances and laws of the city or the state, except as provided herein. Development permits issued on properties for which any variance or special exception has been approved by the board of zoning appeals shall be in compliance with all of the terms and conditions of such approval. Development permits issued on properties for which any special land use permit has been approved by the mayor and city council shall be in compliance with all of the terms, conditions, and site plans related to such approval. Development permits issued on properties in an R-SM, MR-1, MR-2, HR-1, HR-2, HR-3, MU-1, MU-2, MU-3, MU-4 or MU-5 district (or prior classifications of retired districts of CH, TND, or any PC District) shall be in compliance with the final plans approved by the community development director. Development permits issued on properties for which conditional zoning is approved shall be in compliance with the approved statement of zoning conditions for such application. Minor alterations of conditions shall be authorized only in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1700. - Duration of validity of development permits. 
A development permit shall be valid for two years from its issuance subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  If the work authorized in any development permit has not begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If the work described in any development permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire. 
(3)  Written notice of the expiration shall be given to the applicant for the permit, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1701. - Building inspection. 
The building inspection duties of the community development director with respect to this division shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Issuance of building permits in accordance with all provisions of this division and only after the community development director has issued a development permit. 
(2)  Making field inspections to determine that the building or structure being constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered or used is being constructed or modified in accordance with the site plan for which a development permit and building permit have been issued. When a violation is found to exist, the community development director shall immediately initiate appropriate legal action to ensure compliance. 
(3)  Ensuring that all construction has been completed in accordance with all applicable requirements of the Code of the City of Tucker prior to allowing occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1702. - Records. 
The community development director shall maintain records of all official administrative actions taken by their department pursuant to their duties as set forth in this division. The community development director shall further maintain records of all complaints filed with their department pursuant to the requirements of this division and of all actions taken with regard to such complaints, and of all violations discovered by whatever means, with remedial action taken and disposition of cases. All such records shall be public records and shall be retained in accord with Georgia's Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., and pertinent record retention schedules. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1703. - Inspection; right of entry. 
Upon presentation of city identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupant, city employees authorized by the community development director may enter during all reasonable hours any property for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this division. Should access to the property be denied, an inspection warrant may be obtained as authorized in section 46-1704. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1704. - Inspection; warrants. 
The community development director, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this division. The warrant shall authorize the community development director or the director of public works to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the recorder's court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. 
b.  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this section and applicable state and federal law. 
(2)  An inspection warrant shall be validly issued only if it meets all of the following requirements: 
a.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
b.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
c.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
d.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1705. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this division, the city may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of this division requiring the presence of the violator in court. The city may also in such cases institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate the violation or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land. Where a violation of this division exists with respect to a structure or land, the community development director may, in addition to other remedies, require that public utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.12), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1706. - Notice in writing order to stop work; revocation of permits. 
Whenever any building or premises is being constructed, used, or occupied contrary to the provisions of this chapter or chapter 8, the community development director may order the work stopped in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8. The community development director may revoke any building permit or certificate of occupancy for any land, building or this division in order to protect the health, safety and general structure being constructed, used or occupied in violation of welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.13), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1707. - Fees. 
Fees and charges for permits and inspections shall be as established by official action of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.14), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1708. - Certificates of occupancy. 
Certificates of occupancy are required as follows and shall be issued by the community development director only after all requirements of this division and other applicable parts of the Code have been met: 
(1)  For new or altered structures and uses. No person shall use or permit the use of any building, structure, or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, enlarged or moved, wholly or partly, in use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy reflecting the extent and location of the use shall have been issued to the owner or tenant by the community development director. Where a building permit is involved, such certificate of occupancy shall show that the structure or use, or both, to the affected part thereof, is in conformance with the requirements of this division. It shall be the duty of the community development director to issue such certificate of occupancy if the community development director finds that all of the requirements of this chapter have been met, and to withhold such certificate of occupancy if the director finds that all of the requirements of this chapter have not been met. 
(2)  Temporary certificates of occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a building or premises may be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and the community development director may impose such additional conditions and safeguards as are necessary in the circumstances of the case to protect the safety of the occupants and of the general public. 
(3)  Certificates of occupancy for existing uses or structures. An owner may request a new certificate of occupancy for existing uses or structures. Said requests shall be in the form required by the community development director and shall require all professional surveys or certifications required by the community development director to adequately comply with said request. The community development director shall require as a part of said request, fees to process said requests as are established by the mayor and city council. Upon review of the application and other relevant investigation by the community development director, if in conformance with the requirements of this division, the community development director shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any buildings, premises or use, certifying that the building, premises or use is in conformance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.15), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1709. - Violations of this chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or use any land in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.16), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1710. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction in court shall be punished as is provided by law. Where any violation continues, each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this division exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. In addition, the city may revoke the business license of any entity found guilty of violating this division in accordance with the procedures of this section for a period of time not to exceed five years, except to the extent prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.17), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1711. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances; validity of prior approvals and actions. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as repealing the conditions of use, operation, or site development accompanying zoning approvals or permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions, provided further that modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as authorized and provided by this division. All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the zoning board of appeals shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed by the zoning board of appeals shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against these violations and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (7.7.18), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1712—46-1730. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 46-1731. - Statement of intent and purpose. 
Within the zoning districts established by this article, or by amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, uses of land, uses of land and buildings, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of buildings, structures and sites which were lawful before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article's adoption or amendment is derived, but that are now prohibited under the terms of this article or due to future amendments, collectively referred to as nonconforming situations. Such nonconforming situations are hereby declared to be incompatible with authorized and permitted uses in the zoning districts involved. It is the intent of the mayor and city council to require the cessation of certain nonconforming situations and to permit others to continue until they are otherwise removed or cease. It is further the intent of the mayor and city council that nonconforming situations not be used as grounds for adding other buildings, structures, or uses of land prohibited by this article, and that no such nonconforming building, structure, or use of land be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in a manner that increases the degree of nonconformity, except where expressly authorized in this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1732. - Applicability. 
(a)  Applicability. Nonconforming regulations apply only to those nonconforming situations that were legally authorized when established or that were subsequently approved through procedures in effect at the time the approval was obtained. Additionally, except as provided in section 46-1735(2), nonconforming situations must have been maintained continuously and without interruption since the initial existence or subsequent approval of the nonconforming situation. Nonconforming situations which were not authorized when established or have not been continuously maintained over time in accordance with this subsection have no legal right to continue and must terminate as set forth herein. 
(b)  Documentation. An owner or applicant may request from the community development director a determination of nonconforming status. The owner or applicant must provide documentation sufficient to show that the situation was authorized when established and was continuously maintained over time. Upon receipt of the owner or applicant's evidence, the community development director will determine if the evidence is satisfactory and, if so, shall issue a written determination that the lot, building, structure and/or use is a legal nonconforming situation. The burden of establishing the nonconforming status of a particular lot, building, structure or use is on the applicant or owner of the property or use. 
(c)  Evidence that a nonconforming situation was authorized when established. Standard evidence that the proposed nonconforming situation was authorized, or legal, when established includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Building or land-disturbance permits; 
(2)  Business licenses; 
(3)  Adopted zoning ordinances or maps in force at the time of permitting; 
(4)  Conditions of zoning; 
(5)  Other appropriate evidence as determined by the community development director or designee. 
(d)  Evidence that a nonconforming situation has been continuously maintained since inception. Standard evidence that the proposed nonconforming use has been continuously maintained without interruption since inception includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Utility bills; 
(2)  Tax records; 
(3)  Business licenses; 
(4)  Advertisements in dated publications; 
(5)  Insurance policies; 
(6)  Leases; 
(7)  Receipts; and 
(8)  Other appropriate evidence as determined by the community development director or designee. 
(e)  Evidence of discontinuance or abandonment. When considering whether a nonconforming situation has been continuously maintained without interruption since inception, the community development director may consider evidence of the following: 
(1)  Failure to maintain regular business hours, typical or normal for the use; 
(2)  Failure to maintain equipment, supplies or stock-in-trade that would be used for the active operation of the use; 
(3)  Failure to maintain utilities that would be used for the active operation of the use; 
(4)  Failure to pay taxes, including, but not limited to, sales tax, workers' compensation taxes, corporate taxes that would be required for the active operation of the use; 
(5)  Failure to maintain required local, state or federal licenses or other approvals that would be required for the active operation of the use; 
(6)  Failure to maintain applicable business licenses; and 
(7)  Other appropriate evidence as determined by the community development director. 
(f)  Change to a conforming situation. A nonconforming situation may be changed to a conforming situation by right. Once a conforming situation occupies a site that was previously nonconforming, the nonconforming rights are lost, and a nonconforming situation shall not be re-established. 
(g)  Maintenance. Normal maintenance and repair of nonconforming situations is allowed and does not alter legal conformity status. 
(h)  Strengthening and restoring to safe condition. Nothing in this article shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any part of a building or structure declared unsafe by the community development director, and such strengthening or restoration shall not cause the loss of nonconforming status, provided such strengthening or restoration would not constitute a violation of the regulations of reconstruction of damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures in section 46-1745. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1733. - Legal nonconforming lot. 
A lot of record that at the effective date of the ordinance from which this zoning ordinance is derived does not conform to the applicable minimum road frontage requirement, minimum lot area, or lot width requirements for the zoning district in which it is located may still be used as a building site provided that the height, buffer, setback, and other dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the lot of record is located are complied with, or a variance therefrom is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.3), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1734. - Legal nonconforming single-family lots: lot merger requirements. 
(a)  In any zoning district in which single-family dwelling units are allowed, a single-family dwelling unit and allowed accessory structures may be erected on any single nonconforming lot of record so long as such single nonconforming lot of record is not in common ownership with any other contiguous lot or lots. A property owner shall not be permitted to erect a structure on a nonconforming lot of record if he could have used his contiguous land to avoid the nonconformity. 
(b)  Two or more contiguous lots of record that are held in common ownership on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived or come into common ownership after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be governed by this subsection or subsection (c) of this section. If any contiguous lots of record held in common ownership do not meet the requirements established in this chapter for street frontage, access requirements, lot width or lot size, then all of the contiguous lots of record held in common ownership shall be considered to be an undivided lot for the purpose of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No portion of the resulting undivided lot shall then be considered a separate lot, a nonconforming lot of record or used or conveyed in a manner which is not in compliance with the existing street frontage, access, lot width or lot area requirements established by this chapter and/or any amendments thereto. No division of any hereby merged nonconforming lots of record held in common ownership shall be made which creates a substandard lot. If two or more contiguous nonconforming lots of record are in common ownership and, as merged, the property is compliant for development with a single-family dwelling without violating the provisions of this chapter, then none of the former nonconforming lots of record may be considered nonconforming and authorized for single-family development. A property owner shall not be permitted to create a nonconforming lot of record if he could have used his contiguous lots to avoid the nonconformity. 
(c)  Two or more nonconforming contiguous lots of record that are held in common ownership as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, or that come into common ownership after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be governed by the requirements of subsection (b) of this section unless the owner obtains a variance from the city zoning board of appeals pursuant to the provisions and the criteria set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
(d)  Whenever a variance from the strict application of subsection (b) of this section is sought with respect to properties located within an historic district, the variance applicant shall first obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission finding that the proposed variance allowing the subject lot to retain its legal nonconforming status will not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In approving such a certificate of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission may include a finding that merger of lots pursuant to the strict application of subsection (b) of this section would have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.4), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1735. - Nonconforming use. 
A legal use in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment thereto may be continued even though such use does not conform with the use provisions of the zoning district in which said use is located, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(1)  Change of use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. A change in tenancy or ownership shall not constitute termination or abandonment of the nonconforming use, provided that the use itself remains unchanged and is continuously maintained. 
(2)  Discontinuance or abandonment. A nonconforming use shall not be re-established after discontinuance or abandonment for six consecutive months, unless the cessation of the nonconforming use is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. Vacancy or non-use of a building for six continuous months, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance or abandonment under this subsection. 
(3)  Nonconforming land changes, A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.5), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1736. - Nonconforming structures. 
(a)  A legal structure in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment thereto that could not presently be built under the provisions of this chapter because of restrictions on building area, lot coverage, height, minimum yard setbacks, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot shall be deemed a legal nonconforming structure subject to this article VIII of this chapter. 
(b)  No legal nonconforming structure shall be enlarged, or structurally altered, in a way that increases its degree of nonconformity, except as expressly permitted in this article VIII of this chapter. 
(c)  Alteration of legal nonconforming structures occupied by permitted, conforming uses may be allowed for improvement or modification, provided that the structure may not be enlarged and the alterations must either comply with this division or result in a reduction in site or structure nonconformity. See also section 46-1746. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.6), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1737. - Landscaping and screening requirements for new or additional parking, service or storage areas. 
New or additional automobile parking, service, or storage areas may be added to a legal nonconforming structure or site that contains a conforming use, provided that all required landscaping, lighting, and screening requirements are met in the new or additional parking, service or storage area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.7), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1738. - Nonconforming parking. 
On an existing structure, no new permitted use may be substituted, nor shall an existing permitted use be expanded unless the requirements for off-street parking and loading shall be met for the proposed use and for any expansion, unless a variance is granted, pursuant to article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.8), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1739. - Prior nonconformities. 
(a)  The adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not extend the six-month time period of discontinuance or abandonment set forth in section 46-1735(2) for a legal nonconforming use that was nonconforming prior to the time the ordinance from which this division is derived was adopted. 
(b)  A use, lot, building, or structure that was previously legally nonconforming shall become conforming if, as a result of amendments to this division, such use, lot, building, or structure complies with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.9), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1740. - Nonconforming signs. 
See chapter 34 for provisions regarding nonconforming signs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.10), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1741. - Nonconformities caused by government action. 
If a property is required by a federal, state or local government to provide right-of-way or easements that cause an existing structure to have nonconforming yards or setbacks, the property and structure shall be deemed to be legal nonconforming, and, from that time forward, the owner may not expand any existing building in a way to increase the degree of nonconformity or to build new structures that are nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.11), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1742. - Rezoning that results in nonconforming structures. 
For structures or lots that become nonconforming due to rezoning, the structure or lot shall be considered legal nonconforming, subject to the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.12), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1743. - Nonconforming uses requiring a special administrative permit or special land use permit. 
No use, building or structure that was authorized as of right prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived but would require a special administrative permit or special land use permit upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner except after application for and approval of the required special administrative permit or special land use permit. Normal repair and maintenance of legal nonconforming buildings and structures is authorized without the need for special permits. If the use of a legal nonconforming building or structure is discontinued for a continuous period of six months, it may not be reestablished unless such discontinuance was a direct result of governmental action as provided by section 46-1741. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.13), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1744. - Buildings and structures where construction has begun. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this division shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any legal nonconforming building or structure for which land-disturbance or building permits were lawfully applied for or issued, or for which preliminary or final subdivision plats were lawfully submitted, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived or amendment thereto, provided: 
(1)  Any application on which reliance is placed for the existence of nonconforming rights must have been complete as that term is defined in article IX of this chapter; 
(2)  Such permit or approval has not by its own terms expired; and 
(3)  Actual building construction is carried on pursuant to said permit or approval and limited to and in strict accordance with said permit or approval. Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, no renewals or extensions of such permit or approval shall be authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.14), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1745. - Reconstruction of damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures. 
A legal nonconforming building or structure that has been damaged by fire, flood or other natural cause to an extent that the estimated cost of reconstruction does not exceed 60 percent of its fair market value according to the county tax assessor's valuation for the tax year in which the damage occurred, as determined by the community development director, may be reconstructed and used as it was prior to being damaged if a complete permit application is submitted for said reconstruction within two years of the date of the damage and the work progresses continuously upon issuance of the permit therefor. If said building or structure has been determined by the community development director to have been damaged to an extent that the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 60 percent of its fair market value according to the county tax assessor's valuation for the tax year in which the damage occurred, then any repair, reconstruction or new construction shall conform to the then existing requirements of the zoning district in which said building or structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.15), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1746. - Expansion, redevelopment or improvement of legal nonconforming buildings, structures and/or sites. 
(a)  Major redevelopment. Expansion, alteration or redevelopment of a legal nonconforming building or structure to an extent that the estimated cost of the expansion, alteration or redevelopment exceeds 60 percent of its fair market value prior to expansion, alteration or redevelopment according to the county tax assessor's valuation of the improvements for the tax year in which the first permit for expansion, alteration or redevelopment is applied for shall require the entire building or structure to conform to the city codes in every respect, except as approved by variance or special administrative permit as applicable. 
(b)  Minor redevelopment. Expansion, alteration or redevelopment of a legal nonconforming building or structure to an extent that the estimated cost of the expansion, alteration or redevelopment is no greater than 60 percent of its fair market value prior to expansion, alteration or redevelopment according to the county tax assessor's valuation of the improvements for the tax year in which the first permit for expansion, alteration or redevelopment is applied for shall require the portion of the building or structure comprising the expansion, alteration or redevelopment to conform to all of the city codes that are relevant to the nature of the expansion, alteration or redevelopment. 
(c)  Proposed improvements. Proposed improvements to access, parking, landscaping, pedestrian systems, lighting, utilities, and stormwater facilities, shall conform in every respect, except as approved by variance or special administrative permit as applicable. 
(d)  Prohibited. Notwithstanding subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, no building or structure on property on which a nonconforming use is located shall be expanded, altered, or redeveloped in any way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.16), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1747. - Prior variances, special exceptions, and special permits authorized. 
Variances and special permits lawfully authorized and granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall continue in effect, provided the terms and conditions of said authorization are followed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (8.1.17), 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 46-1748—46-1772. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 46-1773. - Statement of intent and purpose. 
The definitions contained herein shall apply to this article. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in the Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (9.1.1), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1774. - Interpretation. 
For the purpose of this article, words and terms are to be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  Unless the obvious construction of the wording indicates otherwise, words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; words used in the singular number include the plural; and words used in the plural include the singular. An abbreviated word shall have the same meaning as the unabbreviated word. 
(2)  Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally and at right angles or radially to the line in relation to which the distance is specified. 
(3)  The word "lot" shall be deemed also to mean "plot"; the word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed", "intended", or "arranged to be used"; the term "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed", "reconstructed", "altered", "placed", "relocated" or "removed". 
(4)  The terms "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building use" and "use of building." 
(5)  Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. Words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them as directed above, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (9.1.2), 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 46-1775. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
ADA means the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
"A" weighted sound level means the sound level reported in units of dB(A) approximating the response of human hearing when measuring sounds of low to moderate intensity as measured using the "A" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
Abandonment means the relinquishment, discontinuance and cessation of a use, other than as a result of government action, for any continuous period of time as may be provided in this chapter. 
Abutting means having property or district lines in common. The term "abutting" does not include property separated by a road or right-of way. 
Accessory building means a building detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. 
Accessory dwelling unit. See Dwelling unit, accessory. 
Accessory equipment. See section 46-1200(b). 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from the principal building and located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. Compare with Building, primary. 
Accessory use means a use of land or building or structure or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. See division 2, article IV of this chapter for supplemental regulations. 
Active recreation means leisure activities, usually performed with others, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites, or fields. The term "active recreation" includes, but is not limited to, swimming, tennis, and other court games, baseball and other field sports, golf and playground activities. 
Adaptive reuse means buildings and sites constructed and developed originally for one use but converted to or repurposed for a use not traditionally occupying the building or development form. For example, the conversion of former hospital or school buildings to residential use, or the conversion of an historic single-family home to office use. 
Adjoining property means a property that touches or is directly across a street, easement or right-of-way (other than an interstate, principal arterial, urban freeway/expressway or urban principal arterial) from the subject property. 
Adult day care center means an establishment operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision, and oversight only during daytime hours of seven or more adults who are elderly, physically ill or infirm, physically handicapped, or mentally handicapped. This may also include recreational and social activities for said persons. 
Adult day care facility means an establishment operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision, and oversight only during daytime hours of six or fewer adults who are elderly, physically ill or infirm, physically handicapped, or mentally handicapped. This may also include recreational, cultural and social activities for said persons. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any one or any combination of the following: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, printed materials, magazines or other periodicals or novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising at least five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or consisting of said printed material or novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means an establishment other than those expressly specified in this section, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building, or enclosed or semi-enclosed room or booth within an enclosed building, with a capacity of less than 50 persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes, movies, CD ROMS, or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising at least five percent of its net sales from said videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic entertainment/dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by dancers, entertainers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. These establishments are also regulated pursuant to chapter 10. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for fee, commission, hire, reward, profit or other consideration furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusements, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Lingerie modeling studio means an establishment wherein a patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments. 
Adult service facility means a commercial establishment in which the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in private, personal contact with employees, patrons, or personnel primarily for entertainment purposes, using steam rooms or other devices or equipment provided by the establishment, and that is not otherwise regulated as an adult entertainment establishment or massage establishment. 
Affordable housing means housing that has a sale price or rental amount that is within the means of a household that may occupy middle-, moderate-, or low-income housing. In the case of dwelling units for sale, housing that is affordable means housing in which mortgage, amortization, taxes, insurance, and condominium or association fees, if any, together constitute no more than 28 percent of such gross annual household income for a household of the size which may occupy the unit in question. In the case of dwelling units for rent, housing that is affordable means housing for which the rent and utilities constitute no more than 30 percent of such gross annual income for a household of the size that may occupy the unit in question. 
Aggrieved person means a person who either: 
(1)  Is the applicant or the owner of property that is the subject of an application or a decision by a city administrative official; or 
(2)  Has a substantial interest in an action appealed from and that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
Agricultural activities means activities performed in order to cultivate the soil, produce crops, or raise livestock. 
Agricultural produce stand means a temporary building or structure used for the retail sales of fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs, or plants and may include accessory sales of other unprocessed foodstuffs, home processed food products such as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces, or baked goods, and home-made handicrafts. 
Alcohol manufacturing (brewery) means a light malt beverage manufacturer licensed by the state as a brewery. All state and federal licensing and regulatory requirements shall be met prior to the approval of a certificate of occupancy. Such establishment may include restaurants as an accessory use. 
Alcohol manufacturing (distilled spirits) means any maker, producer, or bottler engaging in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits. All state and federal licensing and regulatory requirements shall be met prior to the approval of a certificate of occupancy. 
Alcohol outlet means a retail establishment that sells beer, wine or distilled liquor for off-site consumption. The term "alcohol outlet" includes retail stores, less than 25,000 square feet that may sell beer and/or wine, as well as other products. 
All-weather material means a hard surface, dust-free material, capable of withstanding normal weather conditions during ordinary use without substantial deterioration. Gravel, rock, or screenings alone, without use of a petroleum or cement binder, does not meet the definition of an all-weather material. 
Alley means a minor way, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise fronting on a street. 
Alternative energy production means an energy production site or facility that is dedicated to the commercial production of electricity by means of wind, solar, biomass, grease, oil, or other non-petroleum energy source. 
Alternative fuel vehicle. a vehicle that runs on a fuel other than traditional petroleum fuels (petrol or diesel) including means biodiesel, denatured alcohol, electricity, hydrogen, methanol, mixtures containing up to 85 percent methanol or denatured ethanol, natural gas, and propane (liquefied petroleum gas). 
Amateur radio service means radio communication services, including amateur satellite service and amateur service, which are for the purpose of self-training, intercommunication, and technical investigations carried out by duly licensed amateur radio operators solely for personal aims and without pecuniary interest, as defined in 47 CFR 97 and regulated thereunder. 
Amateur radio service antenna structure means a tower and antenna for radio transmission and reception which is maintained by a licensed amateur radio operator as an accessory structure. 
Ambulance service facility means a privately owned facility for the dispatch, storage, and maintenance of emergency care vehicles. 
Amenity means a natural or manmade feature that enhances a particular property, increasing aesthetics and desirability to the owner or community. 
Amplified sound reproduction device means any device capable of producing, reproducing or emitting sounds by means of any loudspeaker or amplifier. 
Amusement park means an outdoor recreation facility, which may include structures and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment, including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, and buildings for shows and entertainment. 
Animal means any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom, excluding humans. 
Animal hospital means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use of an animal hospital as a kennel shall be limited to short-term boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use. 
Animal shelter/rescue center means a facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a public organization or by an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other non-profit organization devoted to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
Antenna. See section 46-1200(b). 
Antique shop means a place offering antiques for sale. An antique, for purposes of this chapter, shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, of or belonging to the past, at least 30 years old. 
Apartment. See Dwelling, multifamily. 
Apartment unit means one or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a building containing four or more dwelling units. 
Apiary means a place where beehives of honey bees are kept. 
Apiculture. See Beekeeping. 
Apparel store means a retail store where clothing is sold, such as department stores, dry goods and shoe stores, and dress, hosiery, and millinery shops. 
Appeal means a review authorized by this chapter of any final order, requirement, or decision of the planning director or designee that is based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter. 
Applicant means a person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of a property owner, who seeks a zoning decision, or who seeks a decision regarding a permit or approval by the community development director. 
Arcade means an area contiguous to a street or plaza that is open and unobstructed to a height of not less than 12 feet and that is accessible to the public at all times. 
Archaeological resource means any material remains of past human culture or activities which are of archaeological interest, including, but not limited to, the following: basketry, bottles, carvings, graves, human skeletal materials, pit houses, pottery, rock intaglios, rock paintings, soapstone quarries, structures or portions of structures, tools, weapons, weapon projectiles, or any portion or piece of any of the foregoing items. Non-fossilized and fossilized paleontological specimens, or any portion or piece thereof, shall not be considered archaeological resources under the regulations of this chapter, unless found in archaeological context. No item shall be deemed to be an archaeological resource under the regulations of this chapter unless such item is at least 200 years of age. 
Art gallery means an establishment engaged in the sale, loan, or display of art books, paintings, sculpture, or other works of art. The term" art gallery" does not include libraries, museums, or non-commercial art galleries. 
Art, private, means a work or collection, usually displayed in a gallery or curated space that is owned by a private individual or entity. 
Art, public, means any visual work of art located so as to be visible in a public, city-owned area; on the exterior of any city-owned facility; within any city-owned facility in areas designated as public areas, lobbies, or public assembly areas; or on non-city property if the work of art is installed or financed, either wholly or in part, with city funds or grants procured by the city. Such public art shall not contain characteristics of an advertising sign. 
Articulated facade means a building elevation that faces a street and that is constructed with a variety of surfaces, materials, colors, projections, recesses, or similar features. 
Asphalt manufacturing means an industrial facility used for the production of asphalt, concrete, or asphalt or concrete products that are used in building or construction, and that includes facilities for the administration or management of the business, the stockpiling of bulk materials used in the production process or of finished products manufactured on the premises, or the storage and maintenance of required equipment, but does not include the retail sale of finished asphalt or concrete products. 
Assembly hall means a meeting place at which civic, educational, political, religious, or social groups assemble regularly or occasionally; including, but not limited to, schools, churches, theaters, auditoriums, funeral homes, stadiums, and similar places of assembly. 
Assisted living facility means a multifamily structure whose occupants are 55 years of age or older, or where each unit is occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age, and where occupants receive assistance with daily living activities. 
Atrium means an open hall lighted from above, into which rooms open at one or more levels. 
Attic means an open space at the top of a house just below the roof; often used for storage. 
Authorized (permitted) use means any use allowed by right in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Automobile means a self-propelled, free-moving vehicle, which is licensed by the appropriate state agency as a passenger vehicle. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "automobile" shall include motorcycles, scooters, small trucks used for daily passenger trips, sports utility vehicles (SUVs), and similar passenger vehicles or any vehicle classified by the state department of driving services as a Class "C" vehicle. 
Automobile and truck rental and leasing means a business that rents or leases automobile or light trucks, and may store the automobiles and trucks on the same site as the business office. 
Automobile brokerage means the business of providing services for the purchase or leasing of a vehicle, whether non-commercial or commercial and including trailers and RVs. The brokered vehicles are not stored on the same lot as that on which the business office is located. A vehicle brokerage may find the desired vehicle, negotiate the price or lease contract, manage paperwork associated with the sale or lease, or secure financing for the sale or lease of the vehicle. 
Automobile dealership. See Automobile sales. 
Automobile mall means a single location that provides sales space and centralized services for a number of automobile dealers and may include related services as auto insurance dealers and credit institutions that provide financing opportunities. 
Automobile manufacture means a facility engaged in the manufacture of passenger cars, light trucks, and/or light commercial vehicles. 
Automobile parts or tire store means a building that is used for the retail sale of new or used parts or tires for non-commercial vehicles. The term "automobile parts or tire store" does not include outdoor storage yards. 
Automobile rental and leasing means a business that rents or leases automobiles. 
Automobile recovery and storage means a facility that provides temporary outdoor storage of Class "C" passenger vehicles and motorcycles that are intended to be claimed by the titleholders or their agents. Such storage includes vehicles that have been towed, or that will be transported to a repair shop or will be subject to an insurance adjustment after an accident. See Vehicle storage and tow service. 
Automobile repair and maintenance, major, means a business that services passenger vehicles including the dismantling and repair of engines, transmissions, carburetors, drive shafts, and similar major vehicle parts, the provision of collision repair services including body frame straightening and body part replacement, or the painting or re-painting of passenger vehicles and motorcycles. Major automobile repair establishments may also perform minor automobile repairs. 
Automobile repair and maintenance, minor: 
(1)  The term "minor automobile repair and maintenance" means a business that repairs, replaces, or services tires, ignitions, hoses, spark plugs, and other minor vehicle parts as part of the regular upkeep of passenger vehicles and motorcycles, and may perform regular maintenance such as brake repair and replacement, lubrication, or replacement of small or incidental automobile parts. 
(2)  The term "minor automobile repair and maintenance" may also, as an accessory function, include automobile detailing, including the application of paint protectors, the cleaning or polishing of a vehicles interior, exteriors, or engine, and the installation of aftermarket parts and accessories such as tinting, alarms, sound systems, spoilers, sunroofs or headlight covers. 
(3)  The term "minor automobile repair and maintenance" does not include the dismantling and repair of engines, transmissions, or drive shafts, the provision of collision repair services including body frame straightening and body part replacement, or the painting or re-painting of passenger vehicles. 
(4)  The term "minor automobile repair and maintenance" does not include automobile car washes where vehicles are washed and/or waxed either by hand or by mechanical equipment. 
Automobile sales means a business establishment that engages in the retail sale or the leasing of new or used automobiles, small passenger trucks, motorcycles, or other passenger vehicles. Such merchandise may be stored on the same lot as that on which the business office is located. An automobile sales dealership may be located in an automobile mall. See Automobile mall; Automobile brokerage. 
Automobile service station means a building, structure, or land used primarily for the sale of automotive fuels such as gasoline. The term "automobile service station" includes the following accessory uses: convenience stores; the sale of incidental vehicle parts and fluids such as motor oil, coolant, windshield wipers, seat or floor pads; and minor automobile repair as defined in this article. 
Automobile upholstery shop means a building in which automobile seats are re-covered or re-upholstered. For the purposes of regulating home occupations, an automobile upholstery shop shall be considered to be major automobile repair. 
Automobile wash/wax service means a building, structure, or land that is used for the washing, waxing, cleaning, or detailing of automobiles as defined in this article. The service may be enclosed in a building or conducted outdoors, includes mobile wash/wax service, and may be a principal or accessory use. 
Automobile wrecking yard. See Salvage yard. 
Awning means a roof-like cover, usually of canvas or plastic, which can fold, collapse and retract, extended over or before places like storefront, window, door or deck as a shelter from the sun, rain, or wind. 
Balcony means a horizontal flat surface that projects from the wall of a building, is enclosed by a parapet or railing, and is entirely supported by the building. 
Bank means a facility for the custody, loan, or exchange of money; for the extension of credit; and for facilitating the transmission of funds. 
Barber shop means an establishment or place of business within which the practice of barbering is engaged in or carried on by one or more barbers. 
Basement means a space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average finished grade of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than 6.5 feet. 
Beauty salon means a commercial building, residence, or other building or place where hair cutting or styling or cosmetology is offered or practiced on a regular basis for compensation. The term "beauty salon" includes the training of apprentices under the regulation of such training by the appropriate licensing board. 
Bed and breakfast means accessory use of a single-family detached dwelling by the homeowner who resides in the dwelling, to provide sleeping accommodations to customers. Breakfast may also be provided to the customers at no extra cost. The term "customer" means a person who pays for the sleeping accommodations for fewer than 30 consecutive days. 
Bedroom means a private room planned and intended for sleeping, separated from other rooms by a door, accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom, and having a closet. 
Beekeeping means the maintenance of honey bee colonies, commonly in hives, by humans. 
Beer growler means a retail alcohol outlet that pours craft beers from a tap into re-usable containers for off-site consumption. The term "beer growler" does not include distilled liquor sales. See Alcohol outlet. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing up to 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Best Management Practices (BMP) means activities, procedures, structures or devices, systems of regulations and activities, or other measures that prevent or reduce pollution of the waters of the United States. BMPs are intended to: 
(1)  Control soil loss, protect natural features such as trees, and reduce water quality degradation; 
(2)  Control drainage from outside storage of materials; 
(3)  Minimize adverse impacts to surface water and groundwater flow and circulation patterns, and to the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of streams and wetlands; and 
(4)  Control industrial plant site runoff, spillage, leaks, sludge or waste disposal. 
Blight means a state or result of being blighted or deteriorated; dilapidation or decay. A structure is blighted when it exhibits objectively determinable signs of deterioration sufficient to constitute a threat to human health, safety, and public welfare such as inadequate public or community services, vacant land with debris, litter, lack of utilities, accumulation of trash and junk or general disrepair including, but not limited to, peeling paint, broken windows, deteriorating wood. Also see chapter 28. 
Block means an area of land bounded by a street, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, exterior boundaries of a subdivision, shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundaries. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the community development director may delineate the outline of the block. 
Block face means that portion of a block or tract of land facing the same side of a single street and lying between the closest intersecting streets. 
Boardinghouse means a building containing one or more lodging units but not more than 20 lodging units, all of which offer non-transient lodging accommodations, available only at weekly or longer rental rates to the general public. Meals may only be provided from a single central kitchen and compensation for such meals, if provided, shall be included in the weekly or longer rental rate. No restaurant, meeting, reception, or banquet facilities shall be provided. 
Borrow pit means a pit from which sand, gravel or other construction material is taken for use as fill in at another location. 
Brewpub means a light male beverage manufacturer licensed as a brewpub by the state. All state and federal licensing and regulatory requirements shall be met prior to the approval of a certificate of occupancy. Such establishment is required to derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food per the state. 
Broker means a party that mediates between a buyer and a seller. 
Buffer means that portion of a lot set aside for open space and/or visual screening purposes, pursuant to a condition or conditions imposed by the mayor and city council in the enactment of a conditional zoning ordinance or special land use permit or by the zoning board of appeals in the grant of a variance, to separate different use districts, or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. Any such buffer shall not be graded or otherwise disturbed, and all trees and other vegetation shall remain, provided that additional trees and other plant material may be added to such landscaped buffer. 
Buildable area means the area of a lot remaining after all setback requirements, including buffers, have been met. 
Figure 9.1. Buildable Area 

Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building, accessory. See Accessory building. 
Building coverage means the maximum area of the lot that is permitted to be covered by buildings, including principal structures, structured parking and roofed accessory structures. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "building coverage" does not include wooden decks, stone walkways and patios set without grout, and pervious, permeable, or porous pavements. 
Building entrance feature means an architecturally designed element for entrances and exits of the building. 
Building footprint means the outline of the total area covered by a building's perimeter at the ground level. 
Figure 9.2. Illustration of Building Footprint 

Building form means a design term that refers to the shape and/or configuration of a building and the space created by the building. Attributes of building form may include the building relationship to the street, sidewalk, and/or other buildings and uses; the general usage of floors (office, residential, retail) which influence form; height; and/or physical elements of the building (such as stoops, porches, entrances, materials, window coverage). 
Building frontage means the maximum width of a building measured in a straight line parallel with the abutting street or fronts upon a public street, a customer parking area, or pedestrian mall, and has one or more entrances to the main part of the building or store. 
Building height (as to all structures with the exception of single-family detached dwellings) means the vertical distance from the average finished grade to the top of the highest roof beams on a flat or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard roof, and the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. See article V of this chapter. 
Building height (as to single-family detached dwellings) means the vertical distance from the front-door threshold of the proposed residential structure to the highest point of the roof of the structure. See article V of this chapter. 
Building mass means the overall visual impact of a structure's volume; a combination of height and width, and the relationship of the heights and widths of the building's components. 
Building materials supply establishment means a facility for the sales of materials used in the construction of a building such as cement, brick, steel, etc. 
Building, primary or principal means a structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
Building scale means the relationships of the size of the parts of a structure to one another and to humans. 
Building width means the distance from the exterior face of the building siding as measured from side to side. 
Figure 9.3. Illustration of Building Width 

Bulkhead means a structural panel just below display windows on storefronts. Bulkheads can be both supportive and decorative in design. Bulkheads from the 19th century are often of wood construction with rectangular raised panels while those of the 20th century may be of wood, brick, tile, or marble construction. 
Bury pit means a place where construction waste or refuse caused by the dismantling of a building or structure is dumped and covered with soil. 
Bus rapid transit (BRT) means a permanent, integrated transit system that uses buses or specialized vehicles on roadways or dedicated lanes to transport passengers to their destinations. 
Business service establishment means an entity primarily engaged in rendering services to businesses on a fee or contract basis, including the following and similar services: advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment services; management and consulting services; protective services; commercial research; development and testing; photo finishing; and personal supply services. 
Business vehicle means vehicle, or heavy construction equipment, or trailer used to transport passengers or property in furtherance of a commercial enterprise. The term "business vehicle" may include, but is not limited to, pick-up trucks with exterior equipment storage, passenger vans, passenger vehicles with or without logos or advertisements identifying the commercial enterprise, ambulances, limousines, taxi cabs, tow trucks, earthmoving machinery such as bobcats and bulldozers, dump trucks, flatbed trucks, box vans, any vehicle with a trailer attached to it, tractors, "dually" trucks (pick-up trucks with four wheels on the rear axle), heavy construction equipment, and semi-tractor cabs whether or not a trailer is attached. 
"C" weighted sound level means the sound level reported in units of dB(C) as measured using the "C" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
Campus style development means a development type which is primarily characterized by having several separate buildings on one site, unified through design and landscape elements. 
Canopy means a protective roof-like covering, often of canvas, mounted on a frame over a walkway or door. 
Canopy tree means a deciduous tree whose mature height and branch structure provide foliage primarily on the upper half of the tree. The purpose of a canopy tree is to provide shade to adjacent ground areas. 
Car wash means a facility for washing, waxing, and cleaning of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles, or other light duty equipment. 
Car wash, self-service, means a car wash wherein operating functions are performed entirely by an operator owner with the use of washing, waxing, and drying equipment supplemented with manual detailing by the operator owner. 
Cat means a feline that has reached the age of six months. 
Catering establishment means an establishment in which the principal use is the preparation of food and meals on the premises, and where such food and meals are delivered to another location for consumption. 
Cellar means a space having less than one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than 6.5 feet. 
Cemetery means property used for the interring of the dead. 
Chapel. See Place of worship. 
Check cashing facility means a person, business or establishment licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-700 et seq. that for compensation engages, as a principal use, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. The term "check cashing facility" does not include a state or federally Chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan company. 
Child caring institution means a building in which housing, meals, and 24-hour continuous watchful oversight for children under the age of 18 are provided and which facility is licensed or permitted as a child caring institution by the state. The term "child caring institution" shall not include a "child day care center" or "child day care facility." 
Child caring institution, community, means a child caring institution that offers care to seven or more children. 
Child caring institution, group, means a child caring institution that offers care to between four and six children. 
Child day care center means an establishment operated by any person with or without compensation providing for the care, supervision, and protection of seven or more children who are under the age of 18 years for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody. 
Child day care facility means an establishment operated by any person with or without compensation providing for the care, supervision, and protection of six or fewer children who are under the age of 18 years for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody. For the purpose of computing the number of children within the child day care facility, all children who are related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship to the person operating the facility shall be included. 
Church. See Place of worship. 
Cistern means an underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater. 
Clinic, health services, means a facility or institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human diseases, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general hospital, diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care center, nursing home, intermediate care facility, outpatient laboratory, or central services facility serving one or more such institutions. 
Club, private, means a group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests, or activities and characterized by definite membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and bylaws, such as country clubs and golf clubs, but excluding places of worship, personal service facilities, adult entertainment establishments, and adult service facilities which shall be defined and regulated as otherwise provided herein. The term "private club" also means, where the context requires, the premises and structures owned or occupied by members of such group within which the activities of the private club are conducted. 
Clubhouse means a structure in which the activities of a private club are conducted. 
Cluster housing development means a development that permits a reduction in lot area provided there is no increase in overall density of development, and in which all remaining land area is perpetually and properly protected, maintained and preserved as undivided open space or recreational or environmentally sensitive areas. 
Code means the Code of the City of Tucker, Georgia. 
Coliseum means a large building with tiers of seats for spectators at sporting or other recreational events. 
Collector street means a street or road designated as a collector street in the transportation and thoroughfare plan. 
College means a post-secondary institution for higher learning that grants associate or bachelor degrees and may also have research facilities and/or professional schools that grant master and doctoral degrees. The term "college" also includes community colleges that grant associate or bachelor degrees or certificates of completion in business or technical fields. 
Collocation. See section 46-1200(b). 
Colonnade means a series of columns placed at regular intervals, usually supporting a roof. 
Columbarium means a structure with niches for the placement of cinerary urns. 
Commercial district means any parcel of land which is zoned for any commercial use including regional commercial centers, neighborhood and community oriented stores, shopping centers and other developed centers where commercial land uses predominate. Such districts would include O-I, O-I-T, C-2, NS, and C-1. 
Commercial parking garage/structure means a covered or sheltered structure of one or more stories designed, constructed and used for the parking of motor vehicles for profit. 
Commercial parking lot means an uncovered or unsheltered structure of one or more stories designed, constructed and used for the parking of motor vehicles for profit. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Common open space means open space designed for common use by all property owners in the development. 
Common ownership means ownership as recognized by law of real property by one or more persons, their parents, brothers, sisters, children over the age of 18, spouses or any association, firm, corporation or partnership in which such person or spouse is a corporate officer, partner or is a stockholder with an ownership interest of ten or more percent. 
Community development director means the director of the community development department of the city, or his designee. 
Community garden. See Urban garden. 
Community living arrangement. See Personal care home. 
Compact design means the design of a structure and or development that encourages efficient land use and the preservation of open space, usually via building more vertically, and by minimizing surface parking. 
Compatible (as used in article II of this chapter, purpose and intent for each established district) means land development that is consistent with existing, identified physical elements in proximity to that land development, such as architectural style, building mass, building scale, land uses, and landscape architecture. 
Complainant means any person who has registered a noise or code complaint with an authorized enforcement agency that he is the recipient of noise or nuisance on a protected property category. A complainant must have an interest in the protected property as an owner, tenant, or employee. 
Complete application means, when used in conjunction with an application under this zoning ordinance, containing all of the required elements, information, fees, approvals or other materials as set forth in this zoning ordinance, other applicable provisions of this Code, state law, and in the most recent checklist previously issued by the community development director. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Comprehensive plan means the county comprehensive plan adopted by the board of commissioners as it may be amended from time to time, which divides the unincorporated areas of the county into land use categories and which constitutes the official policy of the county regarding long-term planning and use of land. 
Concert hall means an open, partially enclosed, or fully enclosed facility used or intended to be used primarily for concerts, spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions, and other public gatherings. Typical uses and structures include concerts, conventions, exhibition halls, sports arenas, and amphitheaters. 
Conditional approval means the imposition of special requirements, whether expressed in written form or as a site plan or other graphic representation, made a requirement of development permission associated with a particular parcel or parcels of land and imposed in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
Condominium means a building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units, offices, or floor area are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis in compliance with state law. 
Condominium unit means a unit intended for any type of use with individual ownership, as defined in the Georgia Condominium Act, together with the undivided interest in the common elements appertaining to that unit. 
Conservation area means any area designated as containing physical features of natural, historical, social, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance to be restored to or retained in its original state or enhanced to promote existing natural habitat. 
Conservation easement means a restriction or limitation on the use of real property which is expressly recited in any deed or other instrument of grant or conveyance executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein and whose purpose is to preserve land or water areas predominantly in their natural scenic landscape or open condition or in an agricultural farming, forest or open space use. 
Connectivity ratio means a ratio of links to nodes in any subdivision. 
(1)  The connectivity ratio shall be the number of street links divided by the number of nodes or end links, including cul-de-sac heads. 
(2)  A link shall be any portion of a street, other than an alley, defined by a node at either end. Stub-outs to adjacent property shall be considered links. For the purpose of determining the number of links in a development, boulevards, median-divided roadways, and divided entrances shall be treated the same as conventional two-way roadways. 
(3)  A node shall be the terminus of a street or the intersection of two or more streets. Any curve or bend of a street that exceeds 75 degrees shall receive credit as a node. Any curve or bend of a street that does not exceed 75 degrees shall not be considered a node. A divided entrance shall only count once. 
Figure 9.4. Example 1: Does not meet ratio 

Figure 9.5. Example 2: Modified to meet ratio 

Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures. 
Continuing care retirement community means a residential facility providing multiple, comprehensive services to older adults. Such facility normally contains a combination of independent living units, assisted living, and skilled nursing care units as defined herein. Such facilities generally provide support services, such as meals, laundry, housekeeping, transportation, and social and recreational activities. 
Continuous sound means any sound with duration of more than one second, as measured with a sound level meter set to the slow meter response. 
Contractor, general, means a contractor or builder engaged in the construction of buildings like residences or commercial structures. 
Contractor, heavy construction, means a contractor or builder engaged in the heavy construction activities such as paving, highway construction, landscaping, and utility construction. 
Contractor, special trade, means industries in the special trade contractors subsector engage in specialized construction activities, such as plumbing, painting, and electrical work. 
Convalescent home means a nursing care facility. 
Convenience store means any retail establishment offering for sale items such as household items, newspapers and magazines, prepackaged food products, sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, and beverages, for off-site consumption. When a convenience store sells unopened alcoholic beverages, it is also considered to be an alcohol outlet. A convenience store may also include accessory fuel pumps. 
Convent means a building or buildings used as both a place of worship and as a residence, operated as a single housekeeping unit, solely by and for a group of women who have professed vows in a religious order and who live together as a community under the direction of a local supervisor designated by the order. 
Cornice means any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, of any building, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roof line, including eaves and other roof overhang. 
Corridor means a broad geographical band that follows a general directional flow connecting major sources of trips that may contain a number of streets, highways, and transit route alignments. 
Cottage development means small detached dwelling units arranged on a single site whereby the dwelling units are arranged so that each unit faces a common open space. 
County means DeKalb County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the state. When appropriate to the context, the term "county" also includes authorized officers, employees and agents thereof. 
County solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family, duplex, and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, picnic grounds and day use recreation areas. The term "county solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
County solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of county solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, and includes, but is not limited to, county solid waste landfills and county solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
County solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of county solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludge, or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Cremation means the reduction of a dead human body or a dead animal body to residue by intense heat. 
Crematorium means a location containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation. Crematoriums do not include establishments where incinerators are used to dispose of toxic or hazardous materials, infectious materials or narcotics. 
Cultural facility means a building or structure that is primarily used for meetings, classes, exhibits, individual study, referral services, informational and entertainment presentations, and other similar programs oriented around the customs and interests of a specific group of people, including, but not limited to, an immigrant, ethnic, or national minority group, or the heritage of defined geographic region. Movies, theater performances and similar entertainment may occur in a cultural facility, but the purpose of the cultural facility is not to provide a venue solely for such entertainment. A cultural facility may be programmed, managed, or operated by a public, private, or non-profit entity. 
Curb cut means a curb break, or a place or way provided for the purpose of gaining vehicular access between a street and abutting property. 
Dairy means a commercial establishment for the manufacture, processing, or sale of dairy products. 
Dance school means a school where classes in dance are taught to four or more persons at a time. 
Day means, unless otherwise stated, calendar days. 
Day spa. See Health spa. 
Decay resistant wood means wood harvested from tree species that are known to have extractives in the heartwood which are toxic to fungi. 
Decibel (dB) means the unit for the measurement of sound pressure based upon a reference pressure of 20 micropascals (zero decibels), i.e., the average threshold of hearing for a person with very good hearing. 
Deciduous tree means a tree that loses all of its leaves for part of the year. 
Deficiencies means exterior conditions or signs of neglect within a conservation subdivision and within the Stonecrest Area Overlay District that contributes to nuisances, hazards, or unkempt appearances, such as, but not limited to, uncut or overgrown grass or weeds, peeling paint, severe corrosion, or wood rot; accumulation of trash or debris; fallen, dead, dying, damaged, or diseased trees or shrubbery; severe erosion; stagnant pools of water; broken inoperable, or severely damaged benches, seating, paving, walls, fences, gates, signs, fountains or other structures, furnishings or equipment which is intended for decoration or use by the public. The term "deficiencies" shall only be applicable to the Stonecrest Area Overlay District regulations and the conservation subdivision regulations. 
Demolition means any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings, structures, or roadways whether man-made or natural occurring both above and below ground. 
Demolition of an infill building means the destruction and removal of an existing building or structure in whole or in part whether such destruction and removal involves removal of all or part of the prior foundation. 
Density means the number of dwelling units per gross acreage of land. 
Dental clinic. See Office, dental. 
Department of community affairs (DCA) means the state department that provides a variety of community development programs to help the state's communities realize their growth and development goals. 
Department store means a business which is conducted under a single owner's name wherein a variety of unrelated merchandise and services are housed enclosed and are exhibited, and sold directly to the customer for whom the goods and services are furnished. 
Deterioration means a condition of a building or a portion of a building characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of maintenance, or excessive use. 
Development permit means any permit that authorizes land-disturbance for the use, construction thereon or alteration of any real property within the city. 
Development of regional impact (DRI) means a large-scale development that is likely to have regional effects beyond the local government jurisdiction in which it is located and meets the DCA requirements for review. 
Director of public works means the city public works department and community development director. 
Dispatch office means an office used exclusively for the communication and dispatch of taxis, ambulances, limousines and similar vehicles, with no fleet parking or storage allowed. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs including, but is not limited to, landfills and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Distilled spirit means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume. 
Dog means a canine that has reached the age of six months. 
Dog day care means any premises containing four or more dogs, where dogs are dropped off and picked up daily between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. for temporary care on site and where they may be groomed, trained, exercised, and socialized, but are not kept or boarded overnight, bred, sold, or let for hire. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-term boarding and shall be only incidental to such dog day care. See Kennel, commercial. 
Dog grooming means the hygienic care and cleaning of a dog, as well as enhancement of a dog's physical appearance. 
Dormitory means a building intended or used principally for sleeping accommodations where such building is related to an educational or public institution, including religious institutions, and located on the campus of that institution. 
Dripline means a vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground. 
Drive-in theater means an open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. 
Drive-through facility means a business establishment so developed that its retail or service character includes a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure. 
Drive-through restaurant means a retail establishment where food and/or drinks are prepared and may be consumed by customers within the principal building, or may be ordered and picked up from an exterior service window that serves customers while in their automobiles. The term "drive-through restaurant" includes restaurants that serve customers at an exterior walk-up service window. 
Driveway means a private roadway providing access for vehicles to an individual lot, parking space, garage, dwelling, or other structure. 
Dry cleaning agency means an establishment or agency maintained for the pickup and delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry without the maintenance or operation of any laundry or dry cleaning equipment or machinery on the premises. 
Dry cleaning plant means an establishment for dry cleaning or laundry where the operation, equipment and machinery is on site. 
Durable materials means materials that can resist wear, tear and decay from use, time and other conditions like weather. 
Dwelling, mobile home. See Mobile home. 
Dwelling, multifamily. See Dwelling unit, multifamily. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for and containing one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, single-family attached, means a dwelling unit located in a building in which multiple units are attached by a common party wall. 
Dwelling, single-family detached, means a dwelling unit on an individual lot unattached to another dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, single-family detached condominiums in the residential neighborhood conservation district , means single-family detached dwelling units which are owned under the condominium form of ownership such that there are no individual lots associated with the units and the common areas are held in common ownership by a condominium association. 
Dwelling, three-family or triplex, means a building designed for and containing three dwelling units. 
Dwelling, two-family or duplex, means a building designed for and containing two dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
Dwelling unit, accessory, means a dwelling unit located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling, either within or attached to the single-family dwelling, or detached, and is a separate, complete housekeeping unit with a separate entrance, kitchen, sleeping area, and full bathroom facilities. 
Dwelling unit, efficiency or studio, means a self-contained residential unit consisting of not more than one room together with a private bath and kitchen facilities. 
Dwelling unit, multifamily, means one or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent, self-contained residential unit in a building containing four or more dwelling units. 
Dyeworks means a facility or workshop where the process of applying a comparatively permanent color to fiber, yarn or fabric takes place. 
Edifice means a building or a structure, especially one of imposing appearance or size, which has a roof and walls and stands permanently in one place. 
Elevation. 
(1)  The term "elevation" means an architectural term referring to the view of a building seen from one side; it is a flat representation of one facade. This is the most common view used to describe the external appearance of a building. Each elevation is labeled in relation to the yard it faces (front, rear or side). 
(2)  The term "elevation' means height above sea level or ground level. See Grade, existing. 
Emergency work means any work or action necessary to deliver essential services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions. 
Enclosed area means surrounded by a fence or walls, sheltered by a structure with a roof and no side walls, but not located within a building. 
Encroachment means a building or some portion of it, or a wall or fence, which extends beyond the land of the owner and illegally intrudes upon land of an adjoining owner, a street or an alley. 
Environmental contamination means a presence of hazardous substances in the environment. From the public health perspective, environmental contamination is addressed when it potentially affects the health and quality of people living or working nearby. 
Exceptional topographical restrictions means the physical condition of a lot or parcel, determined by the contours of the land itself, which may inhibit or alter the compliant status of an existing or proposed structure. 
Explosive manufacture or storage means the manufacture or storage of any chemical compound mixture or device, the primary and common purpose of which is to function by explosion with substantially simultaneous release of gas and heat, the resulting pressure being capable of producing destructive effects. 
Exterior insulation and finishing system (EIFS) means a type of building exterior wall cladding system that provides exterior walls with an insulated finished surface and waterproofing in an integrated composite material system. 
Extraneous sound means a sound of high intensity and relatively short duration which is neither part of the neighborhood residual sound, nor comes from the sound source under investigation. 
Facade means one exterior side of a building, usually, but not always, the front. In this chapter and the design standards, the term "facade" may be synonymous with architectural elevation. In architecture, the facade of a building is often the most important from a design standpoint, as the facade elements of wall face, parapet, fascia, fenestration, and canopy establish the architectural aesthetic of a building creating the public realm. 
Facade, primary, means refers to the exterior building wall considered the front and features the main entrance to the building. The term "primary facade" is synonymous with front facade. 
Fair market value means the price a property would likely bring if offered for sale in the marketplace. 
Fairgrounds means an area of land use including, but not limited to, agricultural related office buildings, animal shows and judging, carnivals, circuses, community meeting or recreational buildings and uses, concerts, food booths and stands, games, rides, rodeos, sales and auctions, storage, and theaters. Fairgrounds do not include racetracks or motorized contests of speed. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship; or not more than three persons not so related who live together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan, based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability; or not more than two unrelated persons and any children related to either of them. A family does not include larger institutional group living situations such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries or nunneries. A family may have a live-in caretaker, au pair, nanny, or housekeeper. 
Family day care home means a private residence in which a business, registered by the state, is operated by any person who receives pay for supervision and care for fewer than 24 hours per day, not more than six persons who are not residents in the same private residence. For purposes of this chapter, a family day care home may be operated as a home occupation, subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
Family-oriented entertainment venues means places of entertainment intended to serve families. 
Farm equipment and supplies sales establishment means establishments selling, renting, or repairing agricultural machinery, equipment, and supplies for use in soil preparation and maintenance, the planting and harvesting of crops, and other operations and processes pertaining to farming and ranching. 
Farmer's market means a market, usually held out-of-doors, in public spaces, where farmers and other vendors can sell produce or value added products. 
Farming, active, means the growing of crops, plants, and trees. The term "active farming" also includes the maintaining of horses, livestock, or poultry for the residents' needs or use, and the sale of agricultural products grown on the premises. 
Fascia means a type of roof trim mounted on exposed rafter ends or top of exterior walls to create a layer between the edge of the roof and the outside. 
Fat rendering means any processing of animal byproducts into more useful materials, or more narrowly to the rendering of whole animal fatty tissue into purified fats like lard or tallow. 
Fee simple means absolute title to land, free of any other claims against the title, which one can sell or pass to another by will or inheritance. Fee simple ownership includes the land immediately underneath a unit, and may or may not include land in front of and behind a building. 
Fee simple condominium development means a development where the owner of a unit possesses fee simple interest to the exterior walls and roof of the unit, as well as fee simple interest to the land lying immediately beneath the unit and coincident with the external walls of such unit as depicted on a recorded final plat. A fee simple condominium unit must be a part of an approved development in which all other land consists of privately owned common areas, utilities, streets, parking, stormwater management, landscaping and other facilities that are owned by all unit owners on a proportional, undivided basis in compliance with state law and subject to a mandatory property owners' association organized in accordance with state law. 
Fee simple condominium declaration means an official affidavit filed with the city attesting to the fact that the owner of a condominium development that was the subject of a site development plan, no longer intends to sell units in the subject development as condominiums and will offer for sale such units as fee simple condominium units and that otherwise the development shall conform to a previously approved condominium development plan consisting of the same units along with the same related facilities on the same tract of land as the previously approved condominium development. 
Fence means a structure designed to provide separation and security constructed of materials including chainlink, wire, metal, artistic wrought iron, vinyl, plastic and other such materials as may be approved by the community development director. 
Fenestration means the arrangement, proportioning, and design of windows and doors in a building. 
Fertilizer manufacture means the manufacture and storage of organic and chemical fertilizer, including manure and sludge processing. 
Fitness center means building or portion of a building designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise, leisure time activities, or other customary and usual recreational activities, operated for profit or not-for-profit and which can be open only to bona fide members and guests of the organization or open to the public for a fee but specifically excluding adult service facilities. Accessory uses which support the principal use can include therapy treatments such as massage, mediation and other healing arts. The term "fitness center" shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Flea market means an occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. 
Floodplain means land within the special flood hazard area (SFHA) or covered by the "future-conditions" flood as defined in chapter 22. 
Floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the special flood hazard area (SFHA) flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Floor area means the gross heated horizontal areas of the floors of a building, exclusive of open porches and garages, measured from the interior face of the exterior walls of the building. For nonresidential construction, net floor area is measured as the usable, heated floor space and gross floor area is measured as the total floor space. 
Floor area of accessory building means the gross horizontal areas of the floors of an accessory building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of the accessory building. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) means the relationship between the amount of gross floor area permitted in a building (or buildings) and the area of the lot on which the building stands. FAR is computed by dividing the gross floor area of a building or buildings by the total area of the lot. For purposes of this calculation, parking areas or structures shall not be included in floor area. 
Figure 9.6. Illustration of Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 

Florist means an enclosed retail business whose principal activity is the selling of plants which were grown off-site. 
Forestry means establishments primarily engaged in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, the gathering of forest products, or in performing forest services. 
Fortunetelling includes all forms of foretelling, including, but not limited to, palm reading, casting of horoscopes, and tea leaf reading. 
Fraternal organization means a group of people formally organized for a common interest, usually cultural, religious, or entertainment, with regular meetings and formal written membership requirements. See Club. 
Fraternity house means a building containing sleeping rooms, bathrooms, common rooms, and a central kitchen and dining room maintained exclusively for fraternity members and their guests or visitors and affiliated with an institution of higher learning. 
Freestanding wall means a wall or an upright structure of masonry, wood, plaster, or other building material standing on its own foundation and not attached to any part of a building. 
Freeway means a multiple-lane roadway carrying local, regional, and interstate traffic of relatively high volumes which permits access only at designated interchanges and is so designated in the comprehensive plan. 
Freight service means an establishment primarily engaged in undertaking the transportation of goods and people for the compensation, and which may in turn make use of other transportation establishments in effecting delivery. The term "freight service" includes parking lots for overnight truck storage, and such establishments as commercial distribution services, freight forwarding services, and freight agencies. 
Frequency means the time rate of repetition of sound waves in cycles per second, reported as Hertz (Hz), also referred to as "pitch." 
Frontage, lot, means the horizontal distance for which the boundary line of a lot and a street right-of-way line are coincident. 
Front facade. See Facade, primary. 
Fuel and ice dealers, manufacturers and wholesalers means an establishment primarily engaged in the sale to consumers of ice, bottled water, fuel oil, butane, propane and liquefied petroleum gas, bottled or in bulk, as a principal use. 
Funeral home means a building used for the preparation of deceased humans for burial or cremation and display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation, including the storage of caskets, funeral urns, funeral vehicles, and other funeral supplies, and where allowed by use standards, crematoriums. See Crematorium. 
Furniture sales and showroom means a retail trade establishment primarily engaged in the sale and exhibition of furniture or home decoration items. 
Garage means a part of a residential building or a separate structure on the same lot as the residence designed to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles that belong to the residents or visitors of the building. 
Garage, parking. See Parking garage or Parking structure. 
Gas regulator station means an assemblage of equipment which reduces, regulates, and meters natural gas pressure in the transmission line, holder, main, pressure vessel, or the compressor station piping. This may include auxiliary equipment such as valves, control instruments, or control lines as well as piping. 
General business office means any building or part of a building in which one or more persons are employed in the management or direction of an agency, business or organization, but excludes such uses as retail sales, manufacturing, assembly or storage of goods, or assembly and amusement. 
Gift shop means a retail store where items such as art, antiques, jewelry, books, and notions are sold. 
Glue manufacture means the manufacturing of glue, epoxy, sealant or other adhesives. 
Go-cart means a small low motor vehicle, with four wheels and an open framework, used for racing. 
Go-cart concession means a place, usually sheltered, where patrons can purchase snacks or food accessory to go-cart racing. 
Go-cart track means a track or network of tracks used for the racing of go-carts. 
Golf course means a tract of land laid out with at least nine holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, green, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse, restrooms, driving range and shelters as accessory uses. 
Grade, average finished, means the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building determined by dividing the sum of the elevation of the highest point and the elevation of the lowest point by two. 
Grade, existing, means the elevation of the ground surface before development. 
Grade, finished, means the final grade of the ground surface after development. 
Grassed playing fields means reasonably flat and undeveloped recreation areas intended for a variety of informal recreational uses, including, but not limited to, walking, kite-flying, flying disc-throwing, and recreational games of soccer, softball, or cricket. In the creation of grassed playing fields, minimal grading may be used; however, specimen trees may not be damaged or removed. Grassed playing fields may not include recreation areas with amenities for a particular sport, such as baseball diamonds or golf courses. 
Gravel pit means an open land area where sand, gravel, and rock fragment are mined or excavated for sale or off-site use. The term "gravel pit" includes sifting, crushing, and washing as part of the primary operation. To excavate the rock, blasting also may be necessary. 
Grazing land or pasture land means any open land area used to pasture livestock in which suitable forage is maintained over 80 percent of the area at all times of the year. 
Greenhouse, commercial, means a retail or wholesale business whose principal activity is the selling of plants grown on the site and having outside storage, growing, or display. 
Greenspace means undeveloped land that has been designated, dedicated, reserved, or restricted in perpetuity from further development, which is not a part of an individual residential lot. 
Grid pattern means a continuous web of streets in which most streets terminate at other streets to form multiple vehicular and pedestrian connections. Streets are to be laid out with primarily linear features, but the grid may be broken by circles, ovals, diagonals, and natural curves to add visual interest. 
Grocery store means a store where most of the floor area is devoted to the sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, which typically also offers other home care and personal care products, and which is substantially larger and carries a broader range of merchandise than convenience stores. 
Ground cover means small plants such as salal, ivy, ferns, mosses, grasses, or other types of vegetation, that normally cover the ground and include trees of less than six inches caliper. 
Group homes. See Child caring institution, Personal care homes, Transitional housing facility. 
Growler means a glass or plastic or other type of container, not less than 12 ounces nor more than 64 ounces, used to hold specialty malt beverages such as beer and hard cider, which are dispensed from a tap and sealed airtight before being sold to the customer for off-premises consumption. 
Gym. See Fitness center. 
Hardscape means the inanimate elements of landscaping, especially any masonry work or woodwork. For instance, stone walls, concrete or brick patios, tile paths, wooden decks and wooden arbors would all be considered part of the hardscape. 
Hardship means a condition of significant practical difficulty in developing a lot because of physical problems relating solely to the size, shape or topography of the lot in question, which are not economic difficulties and which are not self-imposed. 
Hardware store means a facility of 30,000 or less square feet gross floor area, primarily engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders' hardware, plumbing and electrical supplies, paint and glass, housewares and household appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery. 
Health spa means a nurturing, safe, clean commercial establishment, which employs professional, licensed therapists whose services include massage and body or facial treatments. Private treatment rooms are provided for each client receiving a personal service. Massage treatments may include body packs and wraps, exfoliation, cellulite and heat treatments, body toning, waxing, aromatherapy, cleansing facials, medical facials, nonsurgical face lifts, electrical toning, and electrolysis. Hydrotherapy and steam and sauna facilities, nutrition and weight management, spa cuisine, and exercise facilities and instruction may be provided in addition to the massage and therapeutic treatment services. Full service hair salons, makeup consultation and application and manicure and pedicure services may be provided as additional services. 
Heavy industrial. See Industrial, heavy. 
Heavy manufacturing. See Industrial, heavy. 
Heavy vehicle repair means major or minor repair of non-passenger vehicles that are classified by the state department of driving services as a Class E, F, or commercial vehicle. 
Heliport means an area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed by the federal government or an appropriate state agency and approved for the loading, landing, and takeoff of helicopters and including auxiliary facilities, such as parking, waiting room, fueling, and maintenance equipment. 
High-rise building or structure means a building of any type of construction or occupancy having floors used for human occupancy located more than 55 feet above the lowest floor level having building access of three stories or greater unless otherwise defined by individual zoning or overlay district. 
Historic means a building, structure, site, property or district identified as historic by the historic preservation commission, the county historic resources survey, the comprehensive plan, by listing on the state or National Register of Historic Places, by listing as a National Historic Landmark, or determined potentially eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places as a result of review under section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended. 
Hobby, toy and game store means a retail establishment for sale and exhibition of items related to hobbies such as arts and crafts materials, toys, or items related to games. 
Home improvement center means a facility greater than 30,000 square feet gross floor area, primarily engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders' hardware, plumbing and electrical supplies, paint and glass, housewares and household appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery. 
Home occupation means an occupation carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use of the dwelling that is incidental to the primary use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and is operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The term "home occupation" does not include "private educational use" as defined in this chapter. 
Home stay bed and breakfast residence means a single-family dwelling in which is provided not more than two rooms for not more than four people for overnight rental and a morning meal to transient persons for compensation on a nightly basis by the occupant of said dwelling. 
Hospice means any facility that provides coordinated program of home care with provision for inpatient care for terminally ill patients and their families. This care is provided by a medically directed interdisciplinary team, directly or through an agreement under the direction of an identifiable hospice administration. A hospice program of care provides palliative and supportive medical and other health services to meet the physical, psychological, social, spiritual, and special needs of patients and their families, which are experienced during the final stages of terminal illness and during dying and bereavement. 
Hospital means an institution, licensed by the state department of health, providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, or training facilities. 
Hotel/motel means any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more than five dwelling units with provisions for transient living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary lodging of 30 days or less is offered for pay to guests, is not intended for long-term occupancy, and does not otherwise meet the definition of an extended-stay hotel as defined in this section. Related ancillary uses may include but shall not be limited to conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, and recreational facilities. 
Hotel/motel, extended stay, means any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more than five dwelling units with provisions for living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary residence is offered for pay: 
(1)  To persons for non-transient extended stays and/or stays longer than 30 days, regardless of the presence of rentals or leases for shorter periods of time; or 
(2)  For stays longer than 15 days in rooms equipped with kitchen facilities. 
Household pet means a domestic animal that is customarily kept for pleasure rather than utility or profit and that is normally kept within a residence for personal use and enjoyment including domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic potbellied pigs, canaries, parrots, parakeets, domestic tropical birds, hamsters, guinea pigs, lizards and turtles. The term "household pet" does not include livestock, poultry, and snakes, nor does the term "household pet" include hybrids of animals normally found in the wild. 
Impervious surface means a surface that either prevents or retards the entry of surface water into the soil mantle and causes surface water to run off in greater quantities or at an increased flow rate when compared to natural, undeveloped soil mantle. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, paved areas, pavement graveled areas, packed or oiled earthen materials or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface waters. Open uncovered flow control or water quality treatment facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces. See Lot coverage for exemptions. 
Impulsive sound means a single pressure peak or a single burst (multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second characterized with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
INCE means the Institute of Noise Control Engineering. 
Industrial district means any parcel of land which is zoned for industrial use including property used for light and heavy distribution, warehouses, assembly, manufacturing, quarrying, truck terminals and landfills. Such districts include M and M-2 districts. 
Industrial, heavy, means the building or premises where the following or similar operations are conducted: processing, creating, repairing, renovating, painting, cleaning, or assembly of goods, merchandise, or equipment, including the wholesale or distribution of said goods, merchandise, or equipment when not conducted wholly within a building or other enclosed structure or when such operations generate measurable dust, vibrations, odor, glare or emissions beyond the property on which said building or structure is located. 
Industrial, light, means the following or similar operations: processing, creating, repairing, renovating, painting, cleaning, or assembly of goods, merchandise, or equipment, other than light malt beverages, including the wholesale or distribution of said goods, merchandise, or equipment, when conducted wholly within a building or other enclosed structure, and when such operations generate no measurable dust, vibrations, odor, glare or emissions beyond the property on which said building or structure is located. 
Industrial solid waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste as defined herein. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. The term "industrial solid waste" does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation-site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Infill building means any building built or proposed to be built on an infill lot. 
Infill development means a development surrounded by or in close proximity to areas that are substantially or fully developed. 
Infill lot means: 
(1)  A vacant lot of record in an infill overlay zoning district created by the demolition of an existing residential structure for the replacement of that structure with new construction; 
(2)  Any lot intended for use as a site for a single-family dwelling that is created by act of subdivision which, at the time of final plat approval, is in whole or in part within the boundaries of a residential infill overlay district; or 
(3)  Any lot within a residential infill overlay district that, at the time it is zoned, has no principal building and which is subsequently proposed as a site for a single-family dwelling. 
Intermediate care home means a facility which admits residents on medical referral; it maintains the services and facilities for institutional care and has an agreement with a physician or dentist who will provide continuing supervision including emergencies; it complies with rules and regulations of the state department of human resources or state agency as may have jurisdiction. The term "intermediate care" means the provision of food, including special diets when required, shelter, laundry and personal care services, such as help with dressing, getting in and out of bed, bathing, feeding, medications and similar assistance, such services being under appropriate licensed supervision. Intermediate care does not normally include providing care for bed-ridden patients except on an emergency or temporary basis. 
Intermodal freight terminal means an industrial establishment in which freight is transferred in containers from truck to railroad cars for transportation. 
Inter-parcel access means a physical way or means to facilitate movement of pedestrians and/or vehicles between adjacent lots (that is, "lot-to-lot access") without generating additional turning movements on a public street. 
Jewelry repair shop means establishment primarily engaged in the provision of jewelry repair services to individuals. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle which is non-operable, or any vehicle which does not bear a current license plate. 
Junkyard means any lot, or lot and building in combination, which is utilized for the parking, storage or disassembling of junk vehicles, storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap iron and other metals, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old refrigerators and other old household appliances, and used brick, wood or other building materials. These uses shall be considered junkyards whether or not all or parts of these operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, in addition to or accessory to other uses of the premises. 
Keeping of chickens means the breeding, boarding, and caring of chickens for personal or agriculture use, or raised for sale and profit. 
Keeping of livestock means the breeding, boarding and caring of livestock for personal or agricultural use, or raised for sale and profit. 
Keeping of pigeons means the breeding, boarding, and caring of pigeons for personal or agriculture use, or raised for sale and profit. 
Kennel, breeding, means a kennel where no more than ten dogs, registered with a nationally recognized registration organization, over the age of six months are owned, kept or harbored for the purpose of breeding purebred or pedigreed dogs; provided, however, this definition shall not apply to zoos or to animal hospitals operated by a veterinarian, duly licensed under the law. 
Kennel, commercial, means an establishment for the boarding, caring for and keeping of dogs over the age of six months other than a breeding kennel or a noncommercial kennel. 
Kennel, noncommercial, means an establishment for the boarding, caring for and keeping of more than three but not more than ten dogs over the age of six months, not for commercial purposes. 
Kidney dialysis center means an establishment where a process of dialysis, an artificial process of getting rid of waste and unwanted water from blood, is carried out for the patients whose kidneys have been damaged or lost kidney function. 
Kindergarten means an establishment operated by any person wherein compensation is paid for providing for the care, supervision, instruction, and protection of seven or more children who are under the age of seven years for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody. For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, a kindergarten school is considered to be a child day care center or facility. 
Kiosk means a freestanding structure upon which temporary information and/or posters, notices, and announcements are posted. 
Kitchen facilities means a room used to prepare food containing, at a minimum, a sink and a stove or oven. 
Kitchenette means a small, compact apartment kitchen, often part of another room utilized for different activities. 
Laboratories (medical/dental) means a facility offering diagnostic or pathological testing and analysis of diagnostic tests related to medical or dental care industry. 
Land use means a description of how land is occupied or utilized. 
Landfill means an area of land on which or an excavation in which solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile. 
Landscape area means an area set aside from structures and parking which is developed with natural materials (i.e., lawns, trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, bedding plants, rock) and decorative features, including paving materials, walls, fences, and street furniture. 
Landscape business means a business whose primary operation is the sale and installation of organic and inorganic material, plants, pine straw and other limited accessory products for the landscape industry and the storage and use of associated landscape vehicles and equipment. 
Landscape strip means a strip intended to be planted with trees, shrubs, or other vegetation; also landscape zone. 
Landscaped space means the areas of a parking lot which are planted with trees, shrubs and ground cover, plazas, fountains and other hardscape elements and similar features which are located within such parking lot and which are generally accessible to patrons or the general public during normal business hours. 
Large-scale retail means a singular retail or wholesale user who occupies no less than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Late-night establishment means any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where such establishment is open for use by patrons beyond 12:30 a.m. 
Laundry means a facility used or intended to use for washing and drying of clothes and fabrics. 
Laundry, coin operated, means a self-service laundry facility where clothes are washed and dried by washing and drying machines that require coins to operate. 
Laundry pick-up station means a facility where clothes and linens are dropped off for laundry or dry cleaning and where clothes and linen are picked up once they are cleaned. These facilities do not perform dry cleaning on site. See Dry cleaning agency. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Leasing office means a facility where commercial or residential spaces available for renting are exhibited, or where documents related to the lease agreements are prepared. This facility may also be used to collect rent or used by occupants to report needs of services or other support. 
Library means a public facility, a room or building, for the exhibition and use, but not sale of literary, scientific, historical, musical, artistic or reference materials. 
Light industrial. See Light manufacturing establishment. 
Light malt beverage manufacturer. See Brewpub and Alcohol manufacturing (brewery). 
Light manufacturing. See Industrial, light. 
Liner building means a specialized building, parallel to the street, which is designed to conceal areas like a parking lot, parking deck or loading docks. 
Liquor store. See Alcohol outlet. 
Live-work unit means a structure or portion of a structure that combines residential living space with an integrated work space used principally by the occupant with access for customers and employees. 
Livestock means domestic animals and fowl customarily kept on a farm including horses, mules, donkeys, cows, cattle, sheep, goats, ducks, geese and turkeys. 
Lodge means a membership organization that holds regular meetings and that may, subject to other regulations controlling such uses, maintain dining facilities, serve alcohol, or engage professional entertainment for the enjoyment of dues paying members and their guests. There are no sleeping facilities. The term "lodge" shall not include fraternities or sororities. See Fraternal organization. 
Lodging unit means one or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with sleeping, and bathroom facilities provided within the lodging unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both, intended to be devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, and having principal frontage on a public road or an approved private road or drive. 
Lot area means the total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. 
Lot coverage means that portion of a lot that is covered by buildings, structures, driveways or parking areas, and any other impervious surface. For purposes of calculating lot coverage, wooden decks, stone walkways and patios set without grout, or pervious, permeable, or porous pavements shall be considered pervious. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county, or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds, the plat or description of which has been recorded in said office. 
Lot of record, nonconforming, means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or amendment of this chapter which does not meet the lot area, lot width, or public or private street frontage and access requirements of this chapter. 
Lot remnant means any portion of a lot not suitable for building because of its size and remaining after the transfer of other portions of said lot to adjoining lots. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance measured at the building line between the side lines of a lot, measured at right angles along a straight line parallel to the street, or in case of a curvilinear street, parallel to the chord of the arc. 
Lot, buildable area of. See Buildable area. 
Lot, conforming, means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land which meets the lot area, lot width and street frontage requirements of this chapter. 
Lot, contiguous (as used in section 46-1734), means lots adjoining the rear or either side of the lots. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street. 
Figure 9.7. Corner Lots 

Lot, double-frontage, means a lot that abuts two parallel streets or that abuts two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. A double-frontage lot may also be referred to as a through lot. 
Figure 9.8. Double Frontage Lots 

Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. A flag lot may also be referred to as a panhandle lot. 
Lot, interior, means a lot, other than a corner lot, abutting only one street. 
Lot, irregular, means a lot of such a shape or configuration that technically meets the area, frontage, and width to depth requirements of this chapter but meets these requirements by incorporating unusual elongations, angles, curvilinear lines unrelated to topography or other natural land features. 
Figure 9.9. Irregular lots 

Lot, substandard, means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land created after the time of enactment of this chapter or amendment of this chapter which does not meet the lot area, lot width, or public or private street frontage and access requirements of this chapter. Such a lot is illegal except where created by governmental action in which case such lot shall have the status of a nonconforming lot of record. 
Lumber supply establishment means a facility for manufacturing, processing, and sales uses involving the milling of forest products to produce rough and finished lumber and other wood materials for use in other manufacturing, craft, or construction processes. 
Mail room means a room in an office which mail and package shipments are prepared and deliveries accepted. 
Major automobile repair and maintenance shop. See Automobile repair, major. 
Major modification. See section 46-1200(b) 
Major modification to zoning conditions. See article VII of this chapter. 
Major thoroughfare means a street, road or highway shown as a major thoroughfare in the transportation and thoroughfare plan. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufactured home, Class I, means a single-family dwelling unit that is constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and bears an insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or a single-family dwelling unit that, if constructed prior to applicability of such standards and insignia requirements, was constructed in conformity with the Georgia State Standards in effect on the date of manufacture. 
Manufactured home, Class II, means a single-family dwelling unit meeting the requirements of a Manufactured Home Class I and, in addition, bears the insignia of the Southern Standard Building Code Congress International. 
Manufacturing, alcohol. See Alcohol manufacturing (brewery) and Alcohol manufacturing (distilled spirits). 
Manufacturing, heavy. See Industrial, heavy. 
Manufacturing, light. See Industrial, light. 
Massage establishment means any business properly licensed under article VIII of chapter 10 that is established for profit and employs one or more massage therapists, operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, and which, for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages. All massage therapists shall be licensed by the state. The term "massage establishment" shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Materials recovery facility means a handling facility that provides for the extraction of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Mausoleum means a building containing aboveground tombs. 
Mayor and city council means the seven-member legislative branch of the city. 
Meat processing means a building where live animals are killed and processed; and/or a building where meat, poultry, or eggs are cooked, smoked, or otherwise processed or packed but does not include a butcher shop or rendering plant. 
Medium and high density residential zoning districts means any of the following zoning districts: R-SM, MR-1, MR-2, HR-1, HR-2, and HR-3. 
Mine means: 
(1)  A cavity in the earth from which minerals and ores are extracted; and 
(2)  The act of removing minerals and ores from the earth. 
Mineral extraction and processing means extraction and processing of metallic and nonmetallic minerals or materials, including rock crushing, screening, and the accessory storage of explosives. 
Mini-warehouse means a single-level building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and secured compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the storage of customers' goods or wares, and may include climate control. 
Multi-warehouse means a multi-level building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and secured compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the storage of customers' goods or wares, and is climate controlled. 
Miniature golf course means a novelty version of golf played with a putter and a golf ball on a miniature course, typically with artificial playing surfaces, and including obstacles such as bridges and tunnels. 
Mining means extraction of minerals, including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term "mining" includes quarrying; groundwater diversion; soil removal; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing, and floatation; and other preparation customarily done at the mine site as part of a mining activity. 
Minor automobile repair and maintenance shop. See Automobile repair, minor. 
Minor modification to zoning conditions. See article VII of this chapter. 
Minor thoroughfare means a street, road or highway shown as a minor thoroughfare in the transportation and thoroughfare plan. 
Mixed-use building or development means a development which incorporates a variety (two or more) of land uses, buildings or structures that can include both primary residential uses and primary nonresidential uses which are part of the same development. Such uses may include, but not be limited to, residential, office, commercial, Institutional, recreational or public open space, in a compact urban setting that encourages pedestrian oriented development that can result in measurable reductions in traffic impacts. Such a development would have interconnecting pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation. 
Mixed-use zoning districts means any of the following zoning districts: MU-1, MU-2, MU-3, MU-4, and MU-5. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Mobile home lot means a parcel of land, approved pursuant to the subdivision requirements of chapter 22, in a mobile home park which is intended and used for the placement of a single mobile home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land which has been planned and improved pursuant to the requirement of this chapter and chapter 22 for the placement of mobile homes for non-transient use. 
Mobile home sales means exhibition and sale of mobile homes. 
Mobile home stand means that part of a mobile home lot which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile home for non-transient use. 
Modular home means a factory-manufactured single-family dwelling which is constructed in one or more sections and complies with the definition of "industrialized building." 
Monastery means a building or buildings used as both a place of worship and as a residence, operated as a single housekeeping unit, solely by and for a group of men who have professed vows in a religious order and who live together as a community under the direction of a local supervisor designated by the order. 
Monopole. See section 46-1200(b). 
Mortuary means an establishment in which the deceased are prepared for burial or cremation. The facility may include a crematory, a chapel for the conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and informal gatherings or display of funeral equipment. 
Mosque. See Place of worship. 
Motel. See Hotel. 
Muffler means a sound-dissipative device or system for lessening the sound of the exhaust of an internal combustion machine where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
Multifamily dwelling. See Dwelling unit, multifamily. 
Multifamily dwelling, supportive living, means four or more dwelling units in a single building or group of buildings which are designed for independent living for persons with disabilities of any kind and in which are provided supportive services to the residents of the complex but which supportive services do not constitute continuous 24-hour watchful oversight, and which does not require licensure as a personal care home by the office of regulatory services of the state department of human resources. 
Multi-use property means any distinct parcel of land that is being used for more than one land use purpose. 
Museum means a building or structure that is primarily used as a repository for a collection of art or natural, scientific, or literary objects, and is intended and designed so that members of the public may view the collection, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public or educational activities. 
Natural state means that condition that arises from or is found in nature and not modified by human intervention; not to include artificial or manufactured conditions. 
Nature preserve means an area or a site with environmental resources intended to be preserved and remain in a predominately natural or undeveloped state to provide resource protection and possible opportunities for passive recreation and environmental education for present and future generations in their natural state. 
Neighborhood means an area of the city within which residents share a commonality of interests including distinct physical design and street layout patterns, a shared developmental history, distinct housing types, or boundaries defined by physical barriers such as major roads and railroads or natural features such as creeks or rivers. 
Neighborhood residual sound level means that measured value that represents the summation of the sound from all of the discrete sources affecting a given site at a given time, exclusive of extraneous sounds, and those from the source under investigation. Neighborhood residual sound level is synonymous with background sound level. Neighborhood residual sounds are differentiated from extraneous sounds by the fact that the former are not of a relatively short duration, although they are not necessarily continuous. 
New construction on an infill lot means the replacement of an existing residential building or structure with a new building, structure or an addition that increases the usable square footage in the building, structure or addition. 
News dealer means a person who sells newspapers and magazines as a retailer. 
News stand means a temporary structure, manned by a vendor that sells newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals. 
Nightclub means a commercial establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and in which dancing and musical entertainment is allowed, where music may be live, disc-jockey, karaoke, and/or non-acoustic. 
Node means a concentration of population, retail, and employment within a well-defined area that has a diverse mix of land uses and a pedestrian and transit orientation. 
Noise control officer means a city employee or agent who has received noise enforcement training and is currently certified in noise enforcement. 
Noise sensitive facility means any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include but are not limited to schools, hospitals, and places of worship. 
Nonconforming characteristics of building or structure means a building or structure, legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but which fails to comply with one or more of the district or general non-use development regulations adopted under the terms of this chapter which are applicable to said building or structure, including, but not limited to, setbacks, lot frontage, lot area, building height limitations, off-street parking or loading, buffers, landscaping or any other applicable development regulation. 
Nonconforming use of land means a use of land, legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but which is not an authorized use under the terms of this chapter in the district in which such land is located. 
Nonconforming use of land and buildings or nonconforming use of land and structures means a use of land and buildings or land and structures, in combination, legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but which is not an authorized use of land and buildings or land and structures, in combination, under the terms of this chapter in the district in which such use is located. 
Nonconforming use requiring special exception or special land use permit means a use of land, or land and buildings or structures in combination, legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but which is not an authorized use under the terms of this chapter in the district in which such use is located but is permitted only upon approval of a special exception or special land use permit by the appropriate body. 
Nonresidential development means all commercial, office, institutional, industrial and similar lands and uses. 
Nonresidential zoning district means any of the following zoning districts: NS, C-1, C-2, O-I-T, O-I, O-D, M and M-2. 
Non-transient lodging accommodations means long-term or permanent sleeping accommodations offered to persons as a residence, domicile, or settled place of abode. 
Nursery, plant means an establishment for the growth, display, and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees, and materials used in indoor or outdoor planting, conducted within or without an enclosed building. 
Nursing care facility means an establishment providing inpatient nursing and rehabilitative services to patients who require health care but not hospital services, where such services have been ordered by and under the direction of a physician and the staff includes a licensed nurse on duty continuously with a minimum of one full-time registered nurse on duty during each day shift. Included are establishments certified to deliver skilled nursing care under the Medicare and Medicaid programs. The term "nursing care facility" includes convalescent homes with continuous nursing care, extended care facilities, skilled nursing homes and intermediate care nursing homes. 
Nursing home means a facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has an agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the patients; and complies with rules and regulations of the state department of human resources or state agency with jurisdiction as may be reorganized. 
Office, dental, means a building used exclusively by dentists and similar personnel for the treatment and examination of patients solely on an outpatient basis, provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on the premises. 
Office, medical, means a building or floor used exclusively by physicians, dentists, license counselors and similar personnel for the treatment and examination of patients solely on an outpatient basis, provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on the premises. 
Office, professional, means an office for the use of a person generally classified as professionals, such as architects, engineers, attorneys, accountants, doctors, dentists, chiropractors, psychiatrists, psychologists, and the like. 
Office park means a large tract of land that has been planned, developed, and operated as an integrated facility for a number of separate office buildings and supporting ancillary uses with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility. 
Office supply store means a facility established where office supplies, furniture and technology regularly used in offices are exhibited and sold. 
Official zoning map or maps means the zoning map of the city which are adopted with and incorporated by reference as a part of this chapter and amendments to the official zoning map are synonymous with and commonly referred to as rezonings. 
One-part commercial block style means a single-story building that has a flat roof, a facade that is rectangular in shape, and in which the fenestration in the facade is equal to 75 percent of the width of the front facade of the building. 
Open space means a portion of a development project or lot that is intended to be free of buildings or parking lots. Open space may be in its natural state or improved with recreation amenities. 
Open space, clubhouse or pool amenity area means an open space that can be found in a neighborhood park, mini-park or alone as an amenity area for the residents of a developed community. Clubhouse/pool areas can include swimming pools, group activity rooms, outdoor eating areas, and/or exercise stations, and must meet all applicable building and health codes. 
Open space, enhanced, means a planned open area suitable for relaxation, recreation or landscaping which may be held in common or private ownership, provided that all residents of the development in which the open space is located shall have a right to enter and use the open space. Such enhanced open spaces may include walkways, patios, recreational amenities, picnic pavilions, gazebos and water features. See article V of this chapter for types of open space functions considered "enhanced." 
Open space, green, means an informal area for passive use bound by streets or front facing lots, typically between 500 square feet and one acre, which is small, civic, surrounded by buildings, natural in its details, and may be used to protect specimen trees and provide for conservation functions. 
Open space, greenway, means an open space that typically follows natural or constructed features such as streams or roads and is designed to incorporate natural settings such as creeks and significant stands of trees, and is used for transportation, recreation, and environmental protection. Greenways are natural (i.e., informally planted) in their details except along rights-of way, and may contain irregular topography. 
Open space, neighborhood park, means an open space designed for active or passive recreation use. 
Open space, playground or tot lot, means an open space that provides play areas for toddlers and children as well as open shelter and benches, which is located in a neighborhood, or as part of a larger neighborhood or community park and urban center, including retail shopping areas. 
Open space, plaza, means an open space paved in brick or another type of impervious surface that provides passive recreation use adjacent to a civic or commercial building. 
Open space, pocket park, means an open space that provides active recreational facilities, most often in an urban area that is surrounded by commercial buildings or houses on small lots, and is typically less than one-quarter of an acre. 
Open space, square, means an open space used to emphasize important places, intersections, or centers, bounded by streets or front-facing lots, typically between 500 square feet and one acre. 
Operator means a person who conducts a home occupation, has majority ownership interest in the home occupation, lives full-time in the dwelling on the subject property, and is responsible for strategic decision and day-to-day operation of the home occupation. 
Ordinary maintenance. See section 46-1200(b). 
Ornamental metal means any metalwork that serves as adornment and/or nonstructural purposes during construction of a building. 
Outdoor advertising service means a service to provide advertisements visible in the outdoors such as billboards. 
Outdoor amusement enterprise means any outdoor place that is maintained or operated for provision of entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee where any portion of the activity takes place outside of a building, including, but not limited to, a golf driving range, archery range, or miniature golf course. This use does not include a stadium or coliseum. 
Outdoor display means an outdoor arrangement of items or products for sale, typically not in a fixed location capable of rearrangement, designed for advertising or identifying a business, product or service. 
Outdoor manufacturing means a facility established for manufacturing activities that takes place outside an enclosed building. 
Outdoor storage means the keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, material, or merchandise associated with a land use. Storage does not include the parking of any vehicles or outdoor display of merchandise. The term "outdoor storage" includes outdoor work areas. See Vehicle storage yard. 
Outdoor theater means an outdoor open space where dramatic, operatic, motion picture, or other performance, for admission to which entrance money is required takes place. 
Overstory tree means any self-supporting woody plant of a species that normally achieves an overall height at maturity of 30 feet or more. 
Package store means any facility established for the sale of package liquor, for off-premises consumption. See Alcohol outlets. 
Parapet means that portion of a wall that extends above the roof line. 
Parcel. See Lot. 
Parking or park means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of property or passengers. 
Parking, valet means parking of vehicles by an attendant provided by the establishment for which the parking is provided. 
Parking aisle means an area within a parking facility intended to provide ingress and egress to parking spaces. 
Parking bay means the clear space containing one or two rows of parking stalls and a parking aisle. 
Parking garage means a covered or sheltered structure designed, constructed and used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Parking lot means any area designed for temporary storage of motor vehicles by the motoring public in normal operating condition, whether for a fee or as a free service. 
Parking space means a paved area of not less than 120 square feet (small car space) or not less than 153 square feet (large car space) space with dimensions of not less than eight feet wide by 15 feet deep (small cars) or eight feet six inches wide by 18 feet deep (large cars), the exclusive purpose of which is for the parking of a vehicle. 
Parking structure means a structure or portion thereof composed of one or more levels or floors used exclusively for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. A parking structure may be totally below grade (as in an underground parking garage) or either partially or totally above grade with those levels being either open or enclosed. 
Pasture land. See Grazing land. 
Path means a paved or structurally improved walkway that provides access to areas within a development. 
Paved means a structurally improved surface supporting the intended or allowed uses of traffic. An area may be covered by asphalt, concrete, permeable pavement or permeable pavement system that is acceptable to the community development director. For the purposes of a driveway for the parking of automobiles, two paved tire tracks with an unpaved area between them shall be considered paved. 
Pavement, permeable means pavement materials including pervious asphalt and concrete, interlocking pavers, modular pavers, and open-celled paving or similar materials that allow the infiltration of water below the pavement surface. Pavement must support the expected loading and traffic. 
Pawn shop means any entity engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130(5)), or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on a condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. Includes title pawn. 
Pedestrian oriented means a density, layout and infrastructure that encourages walking and biking within a subdivision or development, including short setbacks, front porches, sidewalks, and bike paths. 
Pedestrian zone in the Northlake Overlay District means that portion of a sidewalk area that offers a clear and unobstructed pathway which provides a safe travel lane for pedestrians within the public right-of-way. 
Permitted use means any use which can be undertaken without approval by the designated authority of a special land use permit, special exception, or special administrative permit which is required by the terms of this chapter. 
Personal assistance services means assistance to an individual with, or supervision of self-administration of, medication, ambulation, and transfer from location to location, and/or essential activities of daily living, such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. 
Personal care home means a building in which housing, meals, personal assistance services, and 24-hour continuous watchful oversight for adults are provided and which facility is licensed or permitted as a personal care home by the state. The term "personal care home" shall not include the term "childcare institution," "transitional housing," "rehabilitation housing facility," "roominghouse" or "boardinghouse." The term "personal care home" includes the term "community living arrangement," which is an establishment licensed by the state and providing a residence for adults receiving care for mental health, development disabilities, and/or addictive diseases. 
Personal care home, community, means a personal care home that offers care to seven or more persons. 
Personal care home, group, means a personal care home that offers care to between four and six persons. 
Personal services establishment means an establishment primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or providing personal goods where the sale at retail of such goods, merchandise, or articles is only accessory to the provision of such services, including barber shops, beauty shops, tailor shops, laundry shops, dry cleaning shops, shoe repair shops, and similar uses, but specifically excluding adult service facilities and adult entertainment establishments. 
Pervious area means an area maintained in its natural condition, or covered by a material that permits infiltration or percolation of water into the ground. 
Pervious pavers means a range of sustainable materials and techniques for permeable pavements with a base and sub-base that allow the movement of stormwater through the surface. 
Pet. See Household pet. 
Pet cemetery means property used for the interring of dead domestic animals. 
Pet shop means a retail sales establishment primarily involved in the sale of domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, fish, birds, and reptiles, excluding exotic animals and livestock. 
Phased development means a development project that is constructed in increments, each stage being capable of meeting the regulations of this chapter independently of the other stages. 
Physical therapy facility means a facility where service of developing, maintaining, and restoring maximum movement and functional ability is provided to individuals. 
Pharmacy (retail) means a place where drugs and medicines are legally prepared and dispensed and which is licensed by the state. 
Pitch of roof lines means the ratio of the rise to the run of a roof. 
Place of worship means a lot or building wherein persons assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. The term "place of worship" also includes any of the following accessory uses and buildings: schools, religious education, social gathering rooms, food service facilities, indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, child day care center, kindergarten, parsonage, rectory or convent and columbarium. 
Plainly audible means any sound that can be detected by a person using his unaided hearing faculties. 
Planned industrial center means an industrial development planned with multiple buildings for industrial users. 
Planning director. See Community development director. 
Plant material means material derived from plants. 
Planting strip means a strip of land intended to contain plant materials for the purpose of creating visual and physical separation between uses or activities. 
Plat means: 
(1)  A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets; 
(2)  A map of a subdivision or a site plan. 
Pervious surface means an area that allows water to enter the soil mantle at a natural rate of flow. Compare with Impervious surface. 
Porch, enclosed, means a porch attached to the main building, which is covered by a roof. 
Porch, open, means a porch that is not covered by a roof. 
Portable storage container means any non-motorized vehicle, trailer or fully enclosed container intended for the temporary storage of items until relocated to another location or a long-term storage facility. Storage containers include but are not limited to PODS, Pack-Rats and similar containers. 
Porte-cochere means a porch or a structure attached to a residence and erected over a driveway, not exceeding one story in height and open on two or more sides. 
Post office means a public facility that contains service windows for mailing packages and letters, post office boxes, offices, vehicle storage areas, and sorting and distribution facilities for mail. 
Poultry means domestic fowl including chickens, duck, turkeys and geese raised for food (either meat or eggs) or profit. 
Primary building. See Building, primary or principal. Compare with Accessory structure. 
Primary conservation area means that portion of a site in the R-NC (Neighborhood Conservation) District for which application is made for cluster housing development which consists of areas that are unbuildable due to the presence of wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, or other similar environmental conditions. 
Primary material means the building material comprising the acceptable, dominant portion of a building exterior facade, as defined by standards within this chapter. Compare with Secondary material. 
Primary street means a street with access control, channelized intersections, and restricted parking that collects and distributes traffic to and from minor arterials. 
Principal use means the primary or predominant use of any lot. 
Principal structure means the building in which the principal use of the lot is located. 
Printing and publishing establishments mean an establishment providing printing, blueprinting, photocopying, engraving, binding, or related services. 
Printing and publishing establishments (limited) mean a printing establishment providing convenience mailing, photocopying and accessory retail-oriented services, not exceeding 5,000 square feet of floor area. 
Private ambulance service means a privately-owned facility for the dispatch, storage and maintenance of emergency medical care vehicles; transportation via ambulance; the provision of out-of-hospital emergency medical care to a patient from or in an ambulance; the trip to the site of a patient for the purpose of providing transport or out-of-hospital emergency medical care; the trip to or from any point in response to a medical emergency dispatch from the 9-1-1 Center. 
Private club. See Club, private. 
Private drive means a drive or road on privately owned property, by an individual or a group of owners who share the use and maintain the road without assistance from a government agency. A private drive has not been transferred to a governing entity. An easement of use on the private drive or road shall permit use by the public. A private drive is allowed to be exempt from the public street regulations of chapter 22, but shall meet dimensional requirements established in article V of this chapter. 
Private educational use means the instruction, teaching or tutoring of students by an occupant of a residential dwelling as a secondary use of the dwelling that is incidental to the primary use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. No articles or products shall be sold on the premises other than by telephone. Such instruction, teaching or tutoring shall be limited to a maximum of three students at a time, excluding children residing in the dwelling, and shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Such private educational use shall be allowed as a permitted use in all districts where home occupations are allowed but private educational uses shall be subject to the supplemental regulations in article IV of this chapter. 
Private industry solid waste disposal facility means a disposal facility which is operated exclusively by and for a private solid waste generator for the purpose of accepting solid waste generated exclusively by said private solid waste generator. 
Private restrictive covenants means private restrictions on the use of land or structures imposed by private contract, such as subdivision covenants. 
Private right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is not owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Private road. See Private drive. 
Private street means an access way similar to and having the same function as a public street, providing access to more than one property but held in private ownership. Private streets, when authorized, shall be developed in accordance with the specifications for public streets established in the Code. 
Produce means products from farms and gardens such as fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, herbs, grains, legumes, nuts, shell eggs, honey or other bee products, flowers, nursery stock, livestock food products (including meat, milk, yogurt, cheese and other dairy products), and seafood. 
Production, field crops means establishment for commercial agricultural field and orchard uses including production of field crops; may also include associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities, such as mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system construction, spraying, crop processing, and sales in the field not involving a permanent structure. 
Production, fruits, tree nuts, and vegetables means establishment for commercial agricultural field and orchard uses including production of fruits, tree nuts and vegetables. 
Prohibited uses means anything not expressly permitted within this zoning ordinance or by resolution. Examples may include structures, land uses, materials, or development control parameters. 
Public art. See Art, public. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public uses means land or structures owned by a federal, state or local government, including, but not limited to, a board of education, and used by said government for a necessary governmental function. 
Quarry means a mine where rock, ore, stone, or similar materials are excavated for sale or for off-site use. Quarry includes rock crushing, asphalt plants, the production of dimension stone, and similar activities. 
Quick copy and printing store means a facility established for the reproduction and printing of written or graphic materials on a custom order basis for individuals or businesses. 
Rainwater harvesting means gathering, or accumulating and storing, of rainwater from roof, ground or other catchments in order to reduce or avoid use of water from mains or from water sources like lakes and rivers. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have a known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recovered materials center means a facility in which materials that would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Recovered materials processing means activity of preparing source-separated recoverable materials, such as newspapers, glassware, and metal cans, including collecting, storing, flattening, crushing, or bundling prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to manufacture new products. The materials are stored on-site in bins or trailers for shipment to market. The term "recovered materials processing" means the preparation of material for efficient shipment by such means as baling, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, or cleaning. 
Recreation means the refreshment of body and mind through forms of play, amusement, or relaxation. The recreational experience may be active, such as boating, fishing, and swimming, or may be passive, such as enjoying the natural beauty of the shoreline or its wildlife. 
Recreation, active. See Active recreation. 
Recreation, indoor, means a commercial recreational land use conducted entirely within a building, including arcade, arena, art gallery and studio, art center, assembly hall, athletic and health clubs, auditorium, bowling alley, club or lounge, community center, conference center, exhibit hall, gymnasium, library, movie theater, museum, performance theater, pool or billiard hall, skating rink, swimming pool, tennis court. 
Recreation, outdoor, means a recreational land use conducted outside of a building, including athletic fields; miniature golf, skateboard park; swimming, bathing, wading and other therapeutic facilities; tennis, handball, basketball courts, batting cages, trampoline facilities. 
Recreation, passive, means recreation that involves existing natural resources and has a minimal impact on the existing condition of the resources. 
Recreation club means a not-for-profit association of people organized for the purpose of providing recreation facilities and programs and characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, and a Charter or bylaws. The term "recreation club" shall also mean, where the context requires, the premises and structures owned or occupied by members of such association within which the activities of the recreation club are conducted. 
Recreational vehicle means any vehicle, whether or not motorized, that is intended for personal recreational use and not intended for daily transportation. Such vehicles may include, but are not limited to, Class A and C motor homes, campervans, bus conversions, boats, military surplus vehicle, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), and similar vehicles intended for recreational purposes. Pick-up trucks with a fully enclosed bed that are used for daily transportation do not qualify as recreational vehicles. 
Recreational vehicle park means a commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included. 
Recreational vehicle/boat sales and service means a facility established for the exhibition, sale, and repair of recreational vehicles/boats. 
Recycling collection point means a neighborhood drop-off point for the temporary storage of recyclables. 
Recycling plant. See Recovered material center or processing. 
Rehabilitation housing facility means an establishment primarily engaged in inpatient care of a specialized nature with staff to provide diagnosis and/or treatment. 
Repair, small household appliance means a business established to provide a service of repairing small household appliances like microwaves, etc. 
Replacement. See section 46-1200(b). 
Research and training facilities means any facility owned by a private party, institution or government where research and training activities related to various fields like science, arts, etc. are conducted. 
Residence hall. See Dormitory. 
Residential component means the primarily residential portion of a development that may contain a mix of single-family detached, single-family attached and multifamily dwelling units and may include small scale, nonresidential uses. 
Residential zoning district means any of the following zoning districts: RE, R-LG, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, MHP, R-NC, R-SM, MR-1, MR-2, HR-1, HR-2, HR-3, MU-1, MU-2, MU-3, MU-4, and MU-5. 
Residential use means the occupation of a building and land for human habitation. 
Restaurant means an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. 
Restaurant, drive-through, means an establishment where food and drink are prepared which may be consumed within the principal building or which may be ordered and picked up from a service window for off-site consumption. 
Retail means the sale of goods, wares or merchandises directly to the end-consumer. 
Retail warehouse/wholesale means an establishment exceeding 70,000 square feet of gross floor area and offering a full range of general merchandise to the public, and may include gasoline. 
Retaining wall means a structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures and/or to prevent erosion. 
Riding stable means a building where horses and ponies are sheltered, fed, or kept. 
Right-of-way line means the limit of publicly-owned land or easement encompassing a street or alley. 
Roominghouse. See Boardinghouse. 
Salvage yard means land and/or buildings used for the dismantling, cutting up, compressing or other processing of waste items or materials, such as scrap, paper, metal, tires, large household appliances, such as washing machines or refrigerators, automobiles or other vehicles, or inoperable machinery. Salvaged materials may be stored outdoors or in a building and may be sold wholesale or retail. Typical uses include paper and metal salvage yards, used tire storage yards, or retail and/or wholesale sales of used automobile parts and supplies. The term "salvage yard" includes junkyards. 
Sand pit means a surface mine or excavation used for the removal of sand, gravel, or fill dirt for sale or for use off-site. 
Satellite television antenna means an apparatus capable of receiving but not transmitting television, radio, or cable communications from a central device transmitting said communications. 
Sawmill means a facility where logs or cants are sawn, split, shaved, stripped, chipped, or otherwise processed to produce wood products, not including the processing of timber for use on the same lot by the owner or resident of that lot. 
Sawmill, temporary or portable, means a facility where sawing related machines are installed on the site temporarily to run as sawmill, but which can be moved by removing and reinstalling the machines to some other site. 
School, elementary, means public, private or parochial school offering education for first through fifth grade. 
School, high , means public, private or parochial school for the ninth through 12th grades. 
School, middle, means public, private or parochial school offering education for sixth through eighth grade. 
School, parochial, means school run by a church or parish and engages in religious education in addition to the conventional education. 
School, private, means any building or group of buildings, the use of which meets state requirements for elementary, middle, or high school education and which use does not secure the major part of its funding from any governmental agency. 
School, public, means a building or group of buildings used for educational purposes, which meets state requirements for elementary, middle, or high school education, and that is funded by a government agency. 
School, specialty, means a school specializing in teaching martial arts, dance, music, visual arts and similar fields. 
School, vocational, means a specialized instructional establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial, and/or trade skills or specialized curriculum for special needs individuals or the arts. This classification excludes establishments providing training in an activity that is not otherwise permitted in the zone. 
Screening fence means an opaque structure designed to provide a visual barrier constructed of materials including wood, chainlink with wood or plastic inserts, metal, vinyl, plastic and other such materials as may be approved by the community development director. 
Secondary conservation area means that portion of a site for which application is made for cluster housing development which consists of those areas of land which are outside the primary conservation area but which are environmentally sensitive, historically or culturally significant, scenic, or which possess other unusual attributes that merit conservation. 
Secondary material means complimentary building material allowed by zoning standards. Compare with Primary material. 
Secondhand store means a facility for retail or consignment sales of previously used merchandise, such as clothing, household furnishings or appliances, sports/recreational equipment. This classification does not include secondhand motor vehicles, parts, or accessories. 
Self-service car wash. See Car wash, self-service. 
Semi-nude means the exposure of one or more, but not all, of the following: human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Service area means an outdoor work area associated with a commercial use, including work areas where goods and products are assembled, constructed, or repaired but not permanently stored. 
Service organization means a voluntary non-profit service club or organization where members meet regularly to perform charitable works or raise money for charitable works. 
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance required between the property line and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof except the projections allowed pursuant to article V of this chapter. 
Sexually-oriented business. See Adult entertainment establishment. 
Shared parking means parking shared by two or more lots or uses for which the peak parking demands are not at the same time, and parking that can reasonably be shared by such lots or uses. The number of parking spaces in a shared parking facility is less than the combined total of the required minimum number of spaces for each individual use. 
Shelter for homeless persons means a building or buildings in which is provided overnight housing and sleeping accommodations for one or more persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of temporary, short-term housing assistance, and in which may also be provided meals and social services including counseling services. Compare with the term Transitional housing facility. 
Shoe repair means an establishment where shoes and boots are repaired remodeled or rebuilt by skilled shoe repairers. The establishment may also mend items like handbags and luggage. 
Shopping center means a group of at least two commercial establishments typically planned, constructed, and managed as a single entity, with on-site parking for customers and employees, and with delivery of goods separate from customer access. 
Shrub means a woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground. It may be deciduous or evergreen. 
Sidewalk means a hard surface, ADA compliant, clear pathway that does not include any street furniture. 
Sight triangle means a triangular area of visibility required on a corner of a roadway intersection to allow for the safe operation of vehicles, trains, pedestrians, and cyclists in the proximity of intersecting streets, rail lines, sidewalks, and bicycle paths. 
Figure 9.10. Sight Triangles 

Single-family attached. See Dwelling unit, single-family attached. 
Single-family zoning district means any of the following zoning districts: RE, R-LG, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, MHP, and R-NC. 
Site means the lot, area of a lot, or assemblage of lots subject to development. 
Site plan means that plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit which shows the means by which the developer will conform to applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
Soldier course means a course of upright bricks with their narrow faces showing on the wall surface. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 State. 923). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means a facility primarily used for the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Solid waste thermal treatment technology facility means any solid waste handling facility, the purpose of which is to reduce the amount of solid waste to be disposed of through a process of combustion, with or without the process of waste to energy. 
Solid waste transfer facility means a facility or site at which temporary storage and transfer of solid waste from one vehicle or container to another, generally of larger capacity, occurs prior to transportation to a point of processing or disposal. A solid waste transfer facility is an intermediary point between the location of waste generation (e.g., households, businesses, and industries) and the site of ultimate processing or disposal. 
Sorority house means a building containing sleeping rooms, bathrooms, common rooms, and a central kitchen and dining room maintained exclusively for sorority members and their guests or visitors and affiliated with an institution of higher learning. 
Sound level meter means an instrument that conforms to ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
Special administrative permit means a written authorization granted by the community development director for a use of land pursuant to an application which that official is authorized to decide, in cases where a permit is required, pursuant to the procedures and criteria contained in article VII of this chapter. 
Special events facility means a building and/or premises used as a customary meeting or gathering place for personal social engagements or activities, where people assemble for parties, weddings, wedding receptions, reunions, birthday celebrations, other business purposes, or similar such uses for profit, in which food and beverages may be served to guests. The term "special events facility" shall not include places of worship. 
Special exception means the approval by the zoning board of appeals of an application which that board is authorized to decide as specified within a zoning district pursuant to the procedures and criteria contained in article VII of this chapter. 
Special land use permit means the approval of a use of land that the mayor and city council is authorized to decide as specified within a zoning district pursuant to the procedures and criteria contained in article VII of this chapter. 
Special permit means a special administrative permit, special exception, or special land use permit. 
Specialty store means a store, usually retail, that exhibits and sells specific or specialized types of items or brand. For example, a specialty store may sell cellular phones or organic food, or video games exclusively. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Sporting goods store means a store that exclusively exhibits and sells items related to sports including, but not limited to, instruments, gears, shoes, and clothes. 
Stadium means a structure with tiers of seats rising around a field or court, intended to be used primarily for the viewing of athletic events. The structure may also be used for entertainment and other public gathering purposes, such as conventions, circuses, or concerts. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Steady tonal quality means sound emissions comprised of a single frequency or a narrow cluster of frequencies, which may be referred to as a whine, hum or buzz, with measured sound levels not fluctuating by more than plus or minus three dB(A). 
Stealth telecommunications facility. See section 46-1200(b). 
Stepback means a step-like recession in the profile of a building, whereby the exterior wall surface of each successive story is located farther towards the interior of the building than the exterior wall of the story below it. Stepbacks may result from the transitional height plane requirement. See Transitional height plane. 
Stoop means a small porch, platform, or staircase leading to the entrance of a house or building. 
Storage building means any structure that is used for storage and does not have a door or other entranceway into a dwelling unit and that does not have water fixtures within its confines, the use of which is limited solely to storage of inanimate objects. 
Stormwater management facility means those structures and facilities that are designed for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff into and through the drainage system. 
Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Each floor or level in a multistory building used for parking, excluding a basement, shall be classified as a story. 
Street furniture zone in the Northlake Overlay District means that portion of a sidewalk area that is intended to enhance that street's physical character and used by pedestrians, such as benches, trash receptacles, kiosks and newspaper racks. 
Street, public, means any right-of-way set aside for public travel deeded to the city or county and any right-of-way which has been accepted for maintenance as a street by the city or county. 
Street right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. The term "structure" does not include telephone poles and utility boxes. 
Structure, accessory. See Accessory structure. 
Subdivision means as defined in chapter 22. 
Subdivision, major, means all subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including, but not limited to, subdivisions of five or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street, public or private. 
Subdivision, minor, means a division of land into not more than four lots, provided: 
(1)  A minor subdivision does not require the construction of any public improvements including street, sidewalks, sewer or water lines and street trees. 
(2)  All lots and any remaining tract shall be consistent with all applicable requirements of this zoning ordinance, including lot size, setbacks, frontage on a public road, width to depth ratio, and lot width. 
(3)  At the time of filing of a subdivision plat, the property owner shall be required to show all possible lots which are permitted to be created through minor subdivision provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(4)  All driveway permits shall be subject to the review of the city or county department of transportation and development or the state department of transportation. 
Supplemental zone means the additional sidewalk area other than the required sidewalk used to support outdoor dining or other amenities. 
Support structure. See section 46-1200(b). 
Sustainable development means a development that maintains or enhances economic opportunity and community well-being while protecting and restoring the natural environment upon which people and economies depend. Sustainable development meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 
Synagogue. See Place of worship. 
Tandem parking means a parking space within a group of two or more parking spaces arranged one behind the other such that the space nearest the street serves as the only means of access to the other spaces. 
Tattoo parlors and piercing studios means an establishment whose principal business activity, is the practice of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin; 
(2)  Creation of an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. 
Taxi stand means a reserved area where taxis or cabs are parked. 
Telecommunications antenna. See section 46-1200(b). 
Telecommunications facility/tower. See section 46-1200(b). 
Telecommunications tower. See section 46-1200(b). 
Telecommunications tower or antenna height. See section 46-1200(b). 
Telephone exchange building means a building used exclusively for the transmission and exchange of telephone messages. The term "telephone exchange building" shall not include wireless telecommunication towers or antennas. 
Temple. See Place of worship. 
Temporary outdoor sales or event, seasonal, means outdoor sales of products associated with seasons, holidays and agricultural seasons. 
Temporary produce stand means a temporary vending structure used for the sale and/or display of seasonal produce. 
Tennis courts, play and recreation areas, community means a public or private facility for the playing of tennis, swimming, or other type of outdoor recreation, including related retail sales and an accessory restaurant. The term "tennis courts, play and recreation areas, community," does not include amenities for a subdivision or other form of housing. 
Theater means a structure used for dramatic, operatic, dance, or music performances, or the rehearsal and presentation of other similar performing arts events, or for motion pictures, for which an admission fee is charged. Such establishments may include related services such as food and beverage sales and other concessions. 
Threshold means the top of the subfloor in the opening that is designated as the front door of a dwelling. 
Thrift store means a for-profit or non-profit business or organization that engages or specializes in the sale or resale of previously owned or used goods. The term "thrift store" includes antique shops, consignment stores, and secondhand stores. 
Tire retreading and recapping means businesses that primarily repair and retread automotive tires. 
Total sound level means that measured level which represents the summation of the sounds from the sound source under investigation and the neighborhood residual sounds which affect a given place at a given time, exclusive of extraneous sound sources. 
Tow service means establishment that provides for the removal and temporary storage of vehicles, but does not include disposal, permanent disassembly, salvage, or accessory storage of inoperable vehicles. See Automobile recovery and storage. 
Townhouse means one of a group of three or more single-family dwelling units, attached side-by-side by a common wall. See Dwelling, single-family. 
Townhouse, stacked, means multifamily building with the appearance of a townhouse (side-by-side attached), but which has multiple dwelling units whereby a unit is located above or below another. 
Trailer means any non-motorized vehicle or wheeled attachment designed to be towable, including, but not limited to, landscape utility trailers, horse trailers, storage trailers, campers, recreational vehicle trailers designed for temporary living quarters while traveling or camping, fifth-wheel trailers, pop-up campers, transport trailers, and boat trailers. 
Transit means the conveyance of persons or goods from one place to another by means of a local, public transportation system. 
Transit oriented development (TOD) means moderate and high-density mixed-use development which is located along transit routes and encourages pedestrian use of public transportation. 
Transitional buffer zone means a natural or planted buffer area between two different land uses which is intended to provide protection between said land uses and which meets the criteria for said buffer specified in article V of this chapter. 
Transitional height plane means a geometric plane that establishes the maximum permitted height of a building in a district that allows a greater density than that of an adjoining lower-density residential district. The transitional height plane shall begin at a point 35 feet above setback or transitional buffer line, whichever is furthest from the property line, then extend at an upward angle of 45 degrees over the lot of the building. 
Figure 9.11. Transitional Height Plane 

Transitional housing facility means a building or buildings in which is provided long-term but no permanent living accommodations for more than six persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of long-term housing assistance. Compare with Homeless shelter. 
Transparent material means any material which allows light to be transmitted and objects to be seen clearly and with definition. 
Transportation equipment and storage or maintenance (vehicle) means any building, premises or land in which or upon which is the storage or maintenance of motor freight vehicles or equipment, without services provided, such as those provided by a truck stop. Compare with truck terminal. 
Tree means any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant which has a trunk caliper of two inches or more measured at a point six inches above the ground and which normally attains a height of at least ten feet at maturity usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree canopy means the area directly beneath the crown and within the outermost edges of the branches and leaves of a tree. 
Truck stop means any building, premises, or land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage, or repair of commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including the dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products directly into such commercial vehicles and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles. A truck stop may also include overnight accommodations and restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck crews. 
Truck terminal means an area and building where vehicles load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. 
Turnaround means a space, as in a driveway, permitting the turning around of a vehicle. 
Two-part commercial block style means a building of two stories or greater in height that has a flat roof and is characterized by a horizontal division of the building facade into two distinct zones. These zones may be similar in design but shall be clearly separated from one another. The ground floor level of the building shall contain fenestration equal to 75 percent of the width of the front facade of the building. 
Universal barrier means a type of root barrier for street trees. 
Understory tree means a deciduous or evergreen tree which attains a mature height of no greater than 30 feet. 
University. See College. 
Urban garden means a lot, or any portion thereof, managed and maintained by a person or group of persons, for growing and harvesting, farming, community gardening, community-supported agriculture, or any other use, which contributes to the production of agricultural, floricultural, or horticultural products for beautification, education, recreation, community or personal use, consumption, sale, or donation. An urban garden may be a principal or accessory use on lots including, but not limited to, those owned by individuals, non-profit organizations, and public or private institutions like universities, colleges, school districts, hospitals, and faith communities. The term "urban garden" excludes gardens accessory to an individual's residence. 
Usable open space. See Open space, usable. 
Usable satellite signals means satellite signals from all major communications satellites that, when viewed on a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations by way of cable television. 
Use means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
Utility means any public or private agency that provides for the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity, gas, water, stormwater, wastewater, communication, transportation, or other similar service, excluding those utilities that are public uses. 
Valet. See Parking, valet. 
Value added products means prepared farm products such as baked goods, jams and jellies, canned vegetables, dried fruit, syrups, salsas, salad dressings, flours, coffee, smoked or canned meats or fish, sausages, or other prepared foods. 
Van service means a commercial or not-for-profit service in which the provider offers transportation service to clients from their home to another destination, such as a medical service facility or other destination. 
Variance means permission to depart from the requirements of this chapter pursuant to the requirements of article VII of this chapter. 
Vehicle storage yard means a building or land that is used principally for long-term parking of any class of passenger or non-passenger vehicles, including, but not limited to, automobile fleets associated with commercial business, delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles, or associated with government operations such as school buses, postal delivery trucks, or sanitation trucks. The term "vehicle storage yard" includes off-site parking of commercial vehicles such as those used in light or heavy landscaping or construction, but does not include transportation vehicle such as semi-tractor trailers. A vehicle storage yard may include minor repair of the vehicles as an accessory use. Compare with Auto recovery and storage. 
Vehicle trip means a vehicular movement either to or from the subject property by any vehicle used in a home occupation, any vehicle associated with a home occupation, or any customer or client vehicle. 
Vehicular use area means any portion of a site or a property, paved or unpaved, designed to receive or accommodate vehicular traffic, including the driving, parking, temporary storage, loading, or unloading of any vehicle. 
Veterinary clinic. See Animal hospital. 
Videotape sales and rental store means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail rental or lease of video tapes, films, CDROMs, laser discs, electronic games, cassettes, or other electronic media. Sales of film, video tapes, laser discs, CD-ROMs, and electronic merchandise associated with VCRs, video cameras and electronic games are permitted accessory uses. 
Viewshed means the total visible area from an identified observation position or positions. 
Village center means the central shopping or gathering place within a traditional neighborhood which contains commercial uses and open space and which may contain public space. 
Wall means a structure used as a solid retaining, screening, or security barrier constructed of materials including brick, stone, concrete, concrete block, ceramic tile or other aggregate materials and other such materials. 
Wall plane means an area of a wall between a wall offset and another wall offset or a corner. 
Waste to energy facility means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction and utilization of energy from county solid waste through a process of combustion. 
Weekday means the time period of the week that begins at 7:00 a.m. on each Monday and ends at 6:00 p.m. on each Friday. 
Weekend means the time period of each week that begins at 6:00 p.m. on each Friday and ends at 7:00 a.m. on each Monday. 
Wetlands means an area of land meeting the definition of "wetlands" set forth in 33 CFR 328.3(b), as amended, and that is subject to federal, state or local regulations governing land meeting that definition. 
Wind turbine means a turbine, a rotating machine which mounted on a tower, is used to capture energy from the wind to produce electricity. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage not more than 24 percent by volume made for fruits and berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagne, and combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. Such establishment may include (sell) tastings as an accessory use. 
Workforce housing means for-sale housing that is affordable to those households earning 80 percent of median household income for the Atlanta Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) as determined by the current fiscal year HUD income limit table at the time the building is built. 
Xeriscape means a landscape designed and maintained with the principles that promote good horticultural practices and efficient use of water and is characterized by the use of vegetation that is drought-tolerant or of low water use in character. 
Yard means that area of a lot between the principal building and adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, corner side, means an open-space area of a corner lot between the exterior side lot line and the required exterior side building setback line, extending between the front building setback line and the rear building setback line. 
Yard, front, means an area extending across the total width of a lot between the front lot line and the building. With respect to limitations within the front yard, there can only be one front yard. 
Yard, interior side, means a yard extending between the front and rear yards and being that area between the side lot line, where the side lot line is coincidental with the side or rear lot line of an adjacent lot, and that line or lines established by the side wall or walls of the principal structure. 
Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the total width of a lot between side lot lines and being that area between the rear lot line and that line or lines established by the rear wall or walls of the principal structure projected to intersect the side lot lines. 
Yard, side, means a yard extending between the front and rear yards and being that area between the side lot lines and the principal structure. 
Figure 9.12. Illustration of Yard 

Yard sale means the temporary residential sale of tangible personal property, such as but not limited to, household items, clothing, tools, toys, recreational equipment, or other used or secondhand items normally found in and about the home. The term "yard sale" includes the terms estate sale, if held outside, garage sale, basement sale, carport sale, moving sale, or rummage sale. This temporary use may be conducted by an individual, multiple persons, churches, social civic or charitable organizations, a neighborhood group, church or civic association. 
Zoning decision means final legislative action by a local government which results in: 
(1)  The adoption of a zoning ordinance; 
(2)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance; 
(3)  The adoption of any amendment to a zoning ordinance which rezones the property from one zoning classification to another; 
(4)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance by a municipal local government which zones property to be annexed into the municipality; 
(5)  The grant of a permit relating to a special use of property, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-3, and as may hereafter be amended by state law; or 
(6)  Denial of the aforementioned ordinances or permits. 
Zero lot line means when location of a building in such manner that one or more of building's exterior wall is allowed to rest directly on the lot line or property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-07, att. (9.1.3), 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07-16, att. (9.1.3), 9-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-10-37, att. (9.1.3), 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03-57, § 7, 3-27-2017; Ord. No. O2017-09-76, exh. A(9.1.3), 10-9-2017; Ord. No. O2018-03-7, exh. A(9.1.3), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-40, 1-14-2019) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia statutes. 

 