LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE of the CITY OF WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: January 25, 2010  Effective: January 25, 2010 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Donnie Henriques  Mayor 
____________ 
Council, Ward 1 - Warren Johnson  Council, Ward 2 - Chris Casdia  Council, Ward 3 - Bob Mueller  Council, Ward 4 - Liz Baxter  Council, Ward 5 - Bud Leonard  Council, Ward 6 - Rob Usher  Councilmembers 
____________ 
Jeffrey S. Moon  City Manager 
____________ 
Eldon Basham  City Attorney 
____________ 
Rhonda Pezzello  City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This volume constitutes the Land Development Code of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, adopted January 24, 1995 and revised through September 24, 2009. 
Section Numbering System 
The section numbering system used in this publication is the same as that originally adopted in the City of Woodstock, Georgia Land Development Code. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this publication is a prefix system. The numbers and letters to the left of the colon represent the chapters of the Land Development Code. The number to the right of the colon represents the sequence of the page within that chapter; thus, page 3 of chapter IV of the Land Development Code would appear as LDC-IV:3. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of A. Lawton Langford, President, and Becky Moore, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Rhonda Pezzello, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a publication of the city's Land Development Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 2009. 
ORDINANCE  CODIFICATION OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE FOR THE CITY OF WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN: PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Land Development Code of the City of Woodstock, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapter I through Chapter XVII, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 24, 2009, not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, and as an alternative to fine or imprisonment, to sentence any offender upon the conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city staff is authorized, upon the finding of any violation of this ordinance or any other ordinance of the city, to withhold all permits or certificates of occupancy and, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 24, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Land Development Code is incorporated into the City Code of Ordinances by reference in Chapter 50 and is hereby codified separately. 
Section 8. This ordinance, This ordinance, together with the ordinance attached hereto as "Exhibit A" and incorporated herein by reference, shall be effective upon the 2 nd and final reading. 
Passed and adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia on the 25 th day of January, 2010. 
1 st Reading: 1/11/2010 
2 nd Reading: 1/25/2010 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Land Development Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter I - INTRODUCTION 
ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY 
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article IX, Section IV of the Georgia Constitution. (O.C.G.A. § 32-6102) 
ARTICLE II. - JURISDICTION 
This Ordinance shall apply only in the incorporated area of the City of Woodstock. 
ARTICLE III. - SHORT TITLE 
This Ordinance shall be known as cited as "The City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance". 
ARTICLE IV. - PURPOSE 
An Ordinance regulating the subdivision of land in a manner which will encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities, assure the provision of required public improvements, assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, and assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the reservation of land. 
This Ordinance sets forth standards which apply to any person undertaking any land-disturbing activities which have a potential of causing soil erosion. 
Standards are set forth in this Ordinance which regulate the location, type and structural requirements of outdoor advertising displays in order to insure compatible land uses and to protect public safety. 
The Ordinance establishes minimum standards regarding the development of and placement of mobile homes in mobile home parks for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City. 
The Ordinance further regulates the size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied; the size of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the location and use of buildings and other structures; and the use, conditions of use or occupancy of land for trade, industry, housing, recreation, transportation, agriculture or for the other purposes; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof. 
The Ordinance establishes definitions of certain terms used herein; provides for the method of administration, enforcement and amendment; creates an appeals process; provides for violation, and repeals conflicting Ordinances and resolutions. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE 
The requirements of this Ordinance are declared to be minimum requirements and shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. However, whenever the provisions of this Ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings than the provisions of the Ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEPARABILITY 
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the part as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
Chapter II - DEFINITIONS[1] 
For the purpose of this Ordinance and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, association, governmental body, corporation and all other legal entities. The term "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or Building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. Where requirements are set based on number of days, days are computed based on the calendar, except that when the final date falls on a weekend or holiday, the day due shall continue until the next regular working day. 
The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such throughout the Ordinance. Terms not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in the Ordinance, or as defined in Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language-Second College Edition and shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
Access: The right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property. 
Accessory Building: A subordinate Building, the use of which is incidental to that of a main Building and is located on the same Lot therewith. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit not greater than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or forty (40) percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is greater, located in an Outbuilding and located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. 
Accessory Use: A use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or Building and located upon the same Lot therewith. 
Accidental Discharge: A discharge prohibited by this article into the MS4 which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Addition (to an Existing Building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a Building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is New Construction. 
Administrative Floodplain: Means any land area susceptible to Flooding, which would have one (1) percent probability of Flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the projected future land use map. 
Advertising: Includes any writing, printing, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign, or other device designed, used or intended for advertising, whether placed on the ground, rocks, trees, tree stumps, or other natural Structures or on buildings, Structures, milestones, signboards, billboards, wallboard, roofboard, frames, supports, fences, or other man-made Structure, and any such advertising is a Structure within the meaning of the word "Structure" as utilized in the Ordinance. 
Advertising Sign or Structure: See Sign. 
Affordable Unit: Units are defined as affordable when the total housing cost does not exceed thirty (30) percent of a household's income. Housing costs include rental expenditures or mortgage expenses. For the purposes of the density bonus units are defined as affordable when they are affordable to a household whose income is at or below fifty (50) percent of Cherokee County's median income as reported by the most recent survey provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. The affordable housing income threshold and associated housing cost shall be updated annually by the City based on U.S. Census Bureau data, U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD) data and existing mortgage financing conditions. Affordable units must be restricted as such for the lifetime of the unit and are available for sale or rent only to households whose income is at or below fifty (50) percent of Cherokee County's median income as reported by the most recent survey provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. 
Aggregate Sign Area. The combined Sign Area of all Signs of a particular category on a single parcel. For example, the Aggregate Sign Area of all Freestanding Signs on a parcel is the sum total of the sign areas of all Freestanding Signs on such Parcel. 
Aging in Place: The opportunity to live in a specific community for as long as possible. Aging in Place is facilitated by the presence of housing which meets the changing needs of an aging adult, provides transportation alternatives, opportunities for exercise and physical activity and a vibrant community life which engages older residents with the community as a whole. 
Alley: A service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration of Building: Any change in the supporting members of a Building except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; or any change in use from that of one (1) district classification to another or of a Building from one (1) location to another. 
Animal Clinic: A place where dogs, cats, birds or other animals normally kept as household pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. 
Animated Sign. Any Sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Apartment Building: A Structure containing three (3) or more Dwelling Units. 
Appeal: Means a request for a review by the Woodstock City Council of an interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance or a request for a variance. 
Applicant: Any person making a request to the City for any approval, permit or authorization under the procedures contained in this Ordinance. 
Area of Shallow Flooding: Means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with Base Flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of Flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area(s) of Special Flood Hazard(s), or Special Flood Hazard Area(s) (SFHA) or Special Flood Hazard(s): Means the land subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of Flooding in any given year. This includes all Floodplain and Flood prone areas at or below the Base Flood Elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all Floodplain and Flood prone areas at or below the Future Conditions Flood Elevation, and all other Flood prone areas as referenced in Chapter XIII of this Ordinance. All Streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the Area of Special Flood Hazard delineated. 
Areas adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain: Means those areas that are at or below either three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
Assisted Living: Multi-family housing including congregate and/or personal care services licensed by the State of Georgia as a long-term care provider and commonly referred to as "assisted living community". Assisted living goes by many names including nursing homes, personal care, residential care, or congregate care. The services offered vary widely, but frequently include core services, meals, housekeeping and transportation and often some assistance with laundry, grooming, medication management and other functions of daily living. 
Attraction Device. An object made to conspicuously draw attention to something or someone that may also revolve, rotate, move or simulate movement or action. 
Automobile Filling Station: A Building or Lot having pumps and storage tanks at which fuels, oils or accessories for the use of motor vehicles are dispersed, sold or offered for retail sale and where repair service is incidental. (Gasoline service station.) 
Automotive Repair Facility—Major: A facility performing major repair services for motor vehicles which require substantial replacement and/or repair of major components. Examples of major repair services include, but are not limited to, transmission repair/replacement, engine overhaul and radiator repair, along with body and paint repair. Any repair services to construction equipment, agricultural equipment, commercial highway tractors, or dump trucks shall be considered major automotive repair. 
Automotive Repair Facility—Minor: A facility performing minor repair services for motor vehicles which require only brief adjustment and replacement of minor components. Examples of minor automotive repair services include, but are not limited to, tune-up, oil change, lubrication, brake repair, air conditioning system service, muffler replacement, tire repair and replacement, alignment, emissions testing, audio and alarm installation, custom accessories, minor scratch and dent repair, and glass repair or replacement. 
Awning Sign. See Canopy Sign. 
Balloon. A flexible bag designed to be inflated with hot air or with a gas, such as helium, that is lighter than the surrounding air, causing it to rise and float in the atmosphere. 
Bandit Sign. Any Sign that is temporary in nature located to attract attention of passing traffic. These Signs can be made in a variety of sizes, but are most common in an eighteen inches by twenty-four inches (18" × 24") size. These Signs may also be known as "Roadside Signs," "Yard Signs" and "Street Signs." 
Banner. Any Sign of fabric, thin plastic or similar lightweight material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one (1) or more edges. Flags shall not be considered banners. 
Base Flood: The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year as established in the most recent FEMA Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
Base Flood Elevation: Means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the Base Flood. 
Basement: Means that portion of a Building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Beacon. A stationary or evolving light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multi-colored, in any manner which is intended to attract or divert attention; except, however, this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar agencies. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs), Erosion Control: Erosion BMPs refer to sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize Erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the Land-Disturbing Activity was permitted. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs), Stormwater: Stormwater BMPs refer to a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of Stormwater Runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the specifications contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Billboard. A Freestanding Sign with a Sign Area of more than two hundred ten (210) square feet. 
Block: A land area, which may consist of contiguous Lots, established by a recorded plat, and usually bordered by ways or spaces for public or common use. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Boarding House: A Dwelling Unit other than a Hotel/Motel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals, are provided for five (5) or more persons who are not blood related. 
Bond: A legal instrument with clause, which establishes a sum or money, fixed as a penalty, binding the parties to pay the same; conditioned, however, that the payment of penalty may be avoided by the performance by the part of certain acts. 
Breakaway Wall: Means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the Building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the Building or the supporting foundation system. 
Buffer, Erosion: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of State Waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer, Stream (see also Stream Buffer): The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of State Waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer Area(s): A Buffer Area is a land area reserved to provide a visual and noise barrier, which is created by the use of planted or natural existing materials, alone or in combination with berms, fencing or walls. A Buffer Area shall be located on the outer perimeter of a Lot or parcel, extending from the Lot or parcel boundary line and shall be established independently of Building Setbacks. Building Setback requirements shall begin at the portion of a Buffer Area furthest from the property line such that the Buffer Area is not included within any area required for a Building Setback. 
Building: Any permanent Structure attached to the ground, which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing, or enclosure or persons, animals, or property of any kind. However, for use in Chapter 13, see "Structure." 
Building Inspector: The legally designated Building Code and Inspection Official of the City of Woodstock, or his authorized representatives. 
Building, Main or Principal: A Building in which is conducted the principal use of the Lot on which it is situated. In any resident district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main Building of the Lot on which it is located. 
Building Marker: Any Sign made of bronze, stone or other permanent material and permanently installed as a portion of the exterior wall of the building in such manner it cannot be removed or replaced without substantial damage to the building surface. 
Building Sign: Any Sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a Freestanding Sign. For the purpose of this Chapter, any Sign Face that is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be considered a Wall Sign. Any Sign that is affixed to the building marquee, building awning, a building canopy or a fence shall be considered a Wall Sign. 
Build-To Line: The Build-To Line is the line along which the building Street Facade is permitted to be located. The distance between the Build-To Line and the nearest street curb is equal to the Sidewalk Area width requirements, except where Public or Private Open Space is adjacent to the Sidewalk Area, the Build-To Line shall extend around the perimeter of such Open Space Requirements include the minimum Street Facade Frontage of principal structures. 
Campground: A parcel of land used or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by camping trailers, tents, or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
Canopy Sign: Any Sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. Canopy Signs are considered Building Signs. 
Certified Personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate erosion and sedimentation control certification course approved by the Commission. 
Changeable Copy Sign/Reader Board: A Sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the Sign Face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the Sign. 
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
City of Woodstock Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or MS4: Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying Stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, City streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural Stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage Structures. 
Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Clinic—Medical: A Building or portion of a Building where patients are not lodged overnight, but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists practicing together. 
Cluster Development: A residential Development which allows the Developer to develop Lots smaller than those specified in the zoning ordinance, provided the overall density and use is maintained. A variety of housing types may be utilized in a cluster Development (may utilize PUD zoning). 
Club, Lodge: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by an association or persons for a social or recreational purpose. 
Common Entrance Sign: A Sign located at the entrance or entrances to a group of structures or a single structure that is situated on a minimum site of five (5) acres, such as a residential subdivision, apartment complex, industrial park, or shopping center. 
Common Open Space: An area of land and/or water within a Subdivision or Development, which is designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants and Owners within the project. 
Commission: The State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Community Development Department: The City of Woodstock's Community Development Department (formerly known as the Planning and Economic Development Department). 
Community Development Director: An agent of the City authorized to permit, inspect, approve or deny construction within the City and designated as the enforcement authority for this Chapter. 
Conditional Use: A use that generally would not be appropriate throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to visual appearance, number, area, height, location, or relation to abutting or nearby uses, would not be injurious to the public, health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted only in zoning districts specified in this Ordinance and are subject to conditions and approval by the Mayor and Council. 
Condominium: A form of Ownership of less than the whole of a Building or system of Buildings under a statute, which provides the mechanics and facilities for formal filing, and recording of divided interests in real property, whether the division is vertical or horizontal. 
Conservation Easement: An agreement between a land Owner and the City of Woodstock or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects Open Space or Greenspace on the Owner's land by limiting the amount and type of Development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private Ownership. 
Construction Activity: Activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in Land Disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Conveyance: Stormwater features designed for the movement of Stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, catch basins, curbs, gutters, storm drains, etc. 
CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Crosswalk: A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrian use, and designed to provide access to adjacent roads and Lots. 
Customary Home Occupation: An occupation, profession or trade customarily carried on by an occupant in a Dwelling Unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the Dwelling Unit for residential purposes. 
Cut: A portion of and surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Cutoff: A luminaire light distribution where the emission does not exceed two and one-half (2.5) percent of the lamp lumens at an angle of ninety (90) degrees above nadir, and does not exceed ten (10) percent at a vertical angle of eighty (80) degrees above nadir. These emission values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
Cutting: The removal of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic from the natural ground surface. Also known as excavating. 
Day Care Center: Any establishment operated by an individual, partnership, society, agency, corporation, institution or group, and licensed by or registered with the State of Georgia as a group day care home or day care center, which enrolls therein for pay, for supervision and care, seven (7) or more children or adults. Such facility may provide supervision, care, education, recreation and specialized programming but does not provide overnight accommodations. 
Density: The number of Dwelling Units per acre of land. Gross density refers to the number of units per acre of the total land area to be developed. Net density refers to the number of units per acre of land devoted to residential use. In no case shall the maximum density for the Development exceed the density permitted in the zoning district. 
Department: The Department of Natural Resources. 
Design Manual, Stormwater Management: The current version of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) will provide the primary guidance for the design and evaluation of Stormwater Management Facilities in the City of Woodstock. A copy of the GSMM can be viewed in the Department of Public Works or can be accessed at www.georgiastormwater.com. 
Design Professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a CPESC with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia Law governing professional licensure. 
Design Standards: The specifications to land Owners or subdividers for the preparation of Plats, both preliminary and final indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as Right-Of-Way, Blocks, Easements, and Lots. 
Designated Hazardous Waste: Any solid waste identified as such in regulations promulgated by Georgia Department of Natural Resources Board. The Board may identify as designated hazardous waste any solid waste which the Board concludes is capable of posing a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed, based on the factors set forth in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.11(a)(3), in force and effect on February 1, 1996, if such solid waste contains any substance which is listed on any one (1) or more of the following lists: 
1.  List of Hazardous Constituents, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 261, Appendix VIII, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; 
2.  Ground-water Monitoring List, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 264, Appendix IX, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; 
3.  List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities, codified as 40 C.F.R. Table 302.4, and all appendices thereto, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; 
4.  List of Regulated Pesticides, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 180, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; 
5.  List of Extremely Hazardous Substances and Their Threshold Planning Quantities, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 355, Appendix A, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; or 
6.  List of Chemicals and Chemical Categories, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 372.65 in force and effect on February 1, 1996. 
Designated Recycling Collection Location: Metal or heavy-duty plastic containers, bins or dumpsters designed for short-term holding of recyclable items such as tin, aluminum, glass and paper (no perishable or food items allowed) for scheduled minimum monthly pickup with no on-premise sorting. The center must be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary fashion and shall be visually screened and maintained and shall be within the Building Setbacks. 
Detention: The temporary storage of Stormwater Runoff in a Stormwater Management Facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention Facility: A detention basin or Structure designed for the detention of Stormwater Runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer: A person who undertakes Land Development Activities. 
Development: Means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, Buildings or other Structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of Impervious Cover, excavation or drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Development Activity: Man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, Buildings or other Structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Development Plats—Preliminary and Final Preliminary: A tentative drawing or map of a proposed Subdivision meeting requirements herein enumerated and showing the proposed layout in sufficient detail, although not completely computed, to indicate unquestionably its workability. 
Development Process Committee: Means the committee composed of those staff members responsible for Development within the City. Specifics of this committee are located in Chapter X of this Ordinance. 
Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
Discharge: The release of treated or untreated Stormwater Runoff or other material to the City of Woodstock MS4. 
Display Surface Area: See Sign Face. 
District: The Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
District or Zoning District: A section or sections of the incorporated area of the City for which the then effective zoning ordinance governing the use of buildings and land is uniform for each class of use permitted therein. 
District Zoning: A section or sections of the City of Woodstock for which the zoning regulations governing the use of Buildings and premises, the size of Yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Downtown District: The area approved on the Downtown District Map, found on the Official Woodstock Zoning Map. 
Downtown District Regulating Plan: The Downtown District Regulating Plan is a supplement to the Official Zoning Map and shall only apply to the Downtown District and identifies street types for the purposes of regulating street and Sidewalk Area requirements. 
DPW: The City of Woodstock Department of Public Works. 
Drainage Easement: An Easement appurtenant or attached to a Tract or Parcel of land allowing the Owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge Stormwater Runoff onto the Tract or Parcel of land subject to the Drainage Easement. 
Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for Stormwater Management, drainage control, or Flood control purposes. 
Drainage System: A conveyance or system of conveyances designed and used for collecting or conveying Stormwater Runoff. 
Dwelling Unit: One (1) or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for residential purposes. 
Easements: A grant by a property Owner for the use of a strip of land by an individual, company or agency for a specified purpose. 
Easy Living Standards: Building guidelines developed by the Easy Living Home Coalition to insure that a house can remain accessible to a homeowner should they ever face a short or long term disability. These standards include: 
a.  A step free entrance into the main floor at either the front or side of the structure, or through the garage; 
b.  A bedroom, kitchen, wheelchair friendly bathroom, and entertaining area all on the main floor; 
c.  Every interior door on the main floor provides a minimum thirty-two (32) inches of clear passage; 
d.  Blocking installed in the bathroom(s) on the main floor to facilitate the future addition of handrails or similar accessibility features. 
Electronic Sign: A Sign whose message may be changed at intervals by computer controller, microprocessor controller or remote control, and whose message is displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma or other similar type of panels or screens, including devices known as commercial electronic message signs and similar devices. 
Elevated Building: Means a non-Basement Building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls anchored so as not to impair the integrity of the Building during a Base Flood event. 
Enforcement Officer: The City of Woodstock Building Inspector or such person designated by the City Council to be responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Ordinance. 
Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and shall also include the painting of Wall and Window Signs. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, BMPs, and requirements in Chapter IV, Section 4.400, paragraph 3 of this Ordinance. 
Existing Construction: Any Structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 17, 1988, the date of the first floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Woodstock. 
Existing Grade: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to Cutting or Filling. 
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Means a Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 17, 1988, the date of the first floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Woodstock. 
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Extended Detention: The detention of Stormwater Runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Extreme Flood Protection: Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from infrequent storm events with a return period of one hundred (100) years or more. 
Family Care Facility: A facility, which provides resident service in a private residence to six (6) or fewer individuals who are not related to the resident household. These individuals are handicapped, aged, disabled or in need of adult supervision and are provided service and supervision with their individual needs. This category includes foster or boarding homes for children, group homes, and family homes. 
Farmlands: Land areas of at least five (5) acres in size on which Land-Disturbing Activities are not undertaken for the purpose of raising crops or livestock. The purpose of this definition is not to include home gardens. 
Fee Simple: Absolute title to land, free of any other claims against the title, which one can sell or pass to another by will or inheritance. 
FEMA: Means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Filling: The placement of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
Final Stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that have been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of a target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished Grade: The final grade or elevation of the ground after Cutting or Filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flag: Flag means any fabric, banner or bunting attached at one (1) or more points such that it hangs loosely containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols and which is used as an official symbol of any government, business, institution or organization. All Flags shall be flown in accordance with United States Code Title 4, Chapter 1, Section 7 (Position and Manner of Display). 
Flashing Sign: An Illuminated Sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when lighting is in use. 
Flood or Flooding: Means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): Means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of Special Flood Hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): Means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of Special Flood Hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This definition also includes Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRMs). 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): Is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the Base Flood. 
Floodplain: Any land areas susceptible to Flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of Flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown in the current land use plan. 
Floodplain, Administrative: Means any land area susceptible to Flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of Flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan. 
Floodplain Management Plan: As specified in Chapter XIII, a Floodplain Management Plan (FMP) must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a Professional Engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who will verify that all designs are consistent with the requirements of Chapter XIII. The FMP shall generally include, but not be limited to, the following: plans drawn to scale of the site in question and the nature, location, and dimensions of existing or proposed Structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage and Stormwater Management Facilities. 
Floodproofing: Means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to Structures which reduce or eliminate Flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, Structures and their contents. 
Floodway or Regulatory Floodway: Means the channel of a Stream or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas of the Floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the Base Flood flow without cumulatively increasing the Base Flood Elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Floor: Means the top surface of an enclosed area in a Building (including Basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Footcandle: A unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a point source of light of one candle, and equal to one lumen per square foot of area. 
Freestanding Sign: A Sign which is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure, whether portable or stationary. Freestanding Signs must meet the standards of either Pole Signs (where allowed) or Monument Signs. 
Frontage: All the property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of a street, or if the street is deadended then all the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
Full Care Facility: Any facility that admits patients on medical referral only for continuous medical supervision and for skilled nursing care and rehabilitative care. 
Full Cutoff: A luminaire light distribution where zero emission occurs at all angles of ninety (90) degrees or greater above nadir, and the emission does not exceed ten (10) percent of total lamp lumens at a vertical angle or eighty (80) degrees above nadir. These emission values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
Functionally Dependent Facility: Means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Future Conditions Flood: Means the Flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on Future Conditions Hydrology. Also known as the one hundred-year Future Conditions Flood. 
Future Conditions Flood Elevation: Means the Flood standard equal to or higher than the Base Flood Elevation. The Future Conditions Flood Elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the Future Conditions Flood. 
Future Conditions Floodplain: Means any land area susceptible to Flooding by the Future Conditions Flood. 
Future Conditions Hydrology: The hydrologic response of a basin in terms of peak flows, hydrographs, and runoff volumes based on the basin being fully developed (full build-out) as shown on the current version of the City of Woodstock future land use map. 
Give-Way Street: A narrow residential street that has two (2) travel lanes and allows on-street parking such that vehicles must yield to oncoming traffic. 
Glare: The sensation produced within the visual field by luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Grading: Altering surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this includes stripping, Cutting, Filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its Cut or Filled condition. 
Greenspace (also see "Open Space"): Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Greenway Trail: A concrete or asphalt trail with a width capable of accommodating pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. The minimum width required is ten (10) feet, unless otherwise determined by the City Engineer. Boardwalks, bridges, and pervious concrete are permitted within the floodplain and stream buffers. 
Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to Cutting or Filling. 
Group Care Facility: A facility, which provides resident services to seven (7) or more individuals for whom one (1) or more are unrelated. These individuals are handicapped, aged, or disabled, are undergoing rehabilitation, or in need of adult supervision and are provided service in accordance with their individual needs. This category includes uses, licensed or supervised by the Federal, State, or County health/welfare agency, such as group homes (all ages), halfway houses, resident facilities, and foster or boarding homes. 
Group Home: A dwelling shared by four (4) or fewer persons, excluding resident owner, (or no more than six (6) persons including the resident owner), who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long term, family like environment in which the resident owner, serving as the primary caregiver to the residents, provides care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential, 
1.  No group home shall be located within two thousand (2,000) feet of another group home as measured at the property line. 
2.  A group home shall be limited to one (1) structure and multiple structures located near one (1) another shall not be considered components of one (1) group home. Each structure shall meet distance requirements. 
The term "group home" shall not include a halfway house, a treatment center for alcoholism or drug abuse, a work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, a home for detention and/or rehabilitation of juveniles adjudged delinquent or unruly and placed in custody of the state, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. The term group home shall also not allow the use of a dwelling as an apartment or duplex. A group home shall not allow use of the dwelling as a home for individuals on parole, probation, or convicted and released from incarceration, for any crimes including child molestation, aggravated child molestation, or child sexual abuse, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-4 or individuals required to register as sex offenders pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. A group home may include a home for the handicapped. As used in this subsection, the term "handicapped" shall mean: 
1.  Having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1) or more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently; 
2.  Having a record of having such an impairment; or 
3.  Being regarded as having impairment. 
However, the term handicapped shall not include current illegal use of or addition to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. 
Habitable Space: Covered and conditioned building floor area utilized for any principal permitted use except parking, storage, digital industry switchboards, power generators, and other relay equipment. 
Health Inspector: The legally designated County Health Sanitarian of the Cherokee County Health Department, or his authorized representatives. 
Height of Building: The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level adjoining the Building to the highest point of the roof. 
Highest Adjacent Grade: Means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, nest to the proposed walls of a Building. 
Historic Structure: Means any Structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic places in States with Historic Preservation Programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or; 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic Preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved State Program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved programs. 
Historic Zone: An area shown on the Downtown District Subareas Map, which has specific requirements that supersede certain other requirements of the Downtown District as amended. 
Hotel/Motel: A Building in which lodging, or food and lodging, are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby and office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. A hotel is open to the transient public and is thus differentiated from a boarding house or a rooming house which are herein separately defined. 
Hotspot: An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in Stormwater. Examples of Stormwater hotspots include: gas/fueling stations, vehicle maintenance areas, vehicle washing/steam cleaning, auto recycling facilities, outdoor material storage areas, loading and transfer areas, landfills, Construction sites, Industrial sites, and Industrial rooftops. 
Human Billboard: Shall include a person or persons who wear or physically hold, move, or spin a sign(s) so as to attract attention or convey information. Also known as human directionals, sign walkers, sign waivers, sign spinners, or sign twirlers. Shall also include costumes intended to attractive attention or convey information. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG): A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Illegal Connection: Means either of the following: 
1.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-Stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the DPW; or 
2.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the City MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the DPW. 
Illicit Discharge: Any direct or indirect non-Stormwater discharge to the City of Woodstock MS4 except as exempted in this Ordinance. 
Illuminated, External: Illumination so arranged that the light source is external to the Sign and directed toward the Sign. 
Illuminated, Internal: Illumination so arranged that the light is contained behind the face of the Sign and no lighting source is directly visible exterior to the Sign. 
Impervious Cover: A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and most concrete or asphalt surfaces. 
Incidental Sign: A Sign of no more than two (2) square feet that serves the purpose of guiding safe traffic movements onto, from or on property, and without which there is an increased risk of incompatible traffic movements or obstructions. Examples of Incidental Signs include but are not limited to "stop," "no parking," "entrance," "loading zone" and other similar traffic related directives. 
Independent Retirement Living: Senior adult housing which consists of attached independent living developments which is composed of individual apartments or condominiums for lease or purchase, with a bedroom, bath, living area and kitchenette, including retirement communities, age restricted housing, and active adult communities. These developments may include limited social or recreational services, but generally lack centralized dining and on site medical facilities or services. 
Individual Sewage Disposal System: A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device other than a public treatment system approved by the Cherokee County Health Department. 
Industrial Stormwater Permit: A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries as defined in 40 C.F.R. Section 122.26(b)(14) which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration: The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inflatable Device: An air or gas filled object which may be of various shapes, made of flexible material, resting on the ground or structure. 
Innovator Space: Space in an existing or new building that is designed to support innovative design, fabrication and wholesale or retail sales of small articles that are unique in design and employ methods of low volume, high value-added production that employ innovative technology and/or artistic skill or meet the definition of Limited Manufacturing that are not hazardous or noxious. 
Inspection and Maintenance Agreement: A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land Development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land Development project. 
Interior Island: A minimum one hundred sixty-two (162) square foot curbed area that includes a canopy tree and no impervious surface. 
Issuing Authority: The Woodstock Community Development Department and the Public Works Department are a joint issuing authority and are certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Joint Sign: A Sign which serves as a common or collective Sign for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same Parcel (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). 
Junk Yard: Any use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles or the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof; the keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk including scrap metal, used paper, or other scrap material, salvaged house, wrecked and structural steel materials and equipment; storage, baling or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, used cloth or rags, used plumbing fixtures, appliances, furniture, and used brick, wood or other building. 
Jurisdictional Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land Development: Any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land Development Activity: Those actions or activities which comprise facilitate or result in Land Development. 
Land Disturbance: Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filing of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land-Disturbing Activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into State Water or onto lands within the State, including but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading excavating, transporting and Filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Chapter IV, Section 4.300, paragraph 5, of this Ordinance. 
Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of Development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, Lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Lease: An agreement by which a property owner conveys, usually for a specified rent, to other persons, permission to erect and maintain a Sign upon his property. 
Light Trespass: Unwanted light emitted beyond the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located, detrimentally affecting residents, vehicle operators and pedestrians, the natural environment, and astronomical observations. 
Limited Use: Principal permitted uses subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  The floor area of an individual tenant or business shall be located at street intersections and not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet and shall have a minimum of twenty (20) feet of Street Facade along both Build-To Lines. 
2.  Uses are limited to bakery—no distribution, barber and beauty shop, coffee shop/cafe, deli, dry cleaning—pick-up/drop-off, grocery with general merchandise store combination, ice cream and yogurt, library branch, newsstand, restaurant/cafe—no alcohol except beer and wine sales, shoe repair, and tailor. 
3.  Limited Uses are restricted to the sidewalk level of a building, and are only permitted when said building includes two (2) or more stories of dwelling units directly above said use. 
A Live/Work Unit , also known as "residential over commercial," is defined as the use of a structure consisting of both a commercial/office and a residential component that is occupied by the same resident. 
Loading Space: A space within the main Building or on the same Lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of a vehicle. 
Local Issuing Authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Local Planning Commission: The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission. 
Lot. See "Parcel". 
Lot Area: The total surface area of land included within Lot lines. 
Lot—Corner: A Lot of which at least two (2) adjoining sides abut their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of two (2) such sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Lot Depth: The average distance from the street line of the Lot to its rear line, measured in their general direction of the side lines of the Lot. 
Lot—Double Frontage: A Lot other than a corner Lot abutting two (2) streets. 
Lot Frontage: That dimension of a Lot or portion of a Lot abutting on a public street. 
Lot—Interior: A Lot other than a corner Lot. 
Lot Lines: The boundary dividing a given Lot from the street, an alley, or adjacent Lots. 
Lot of Record: A Lot which is part of a Subdivision recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office, or a Lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office prior to the date of passage of the Ordinance. 
Lot Width: The width of a Lot at the Building Setback line measured at right angles to the centerline of its depth. 
Lowest Floor: Means the lowest floor of the lowest area, including Basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, Building access, or storage, in an area other than a Basement, is not considered a Building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the Structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Lumen: A Lumen (lm) is the amount of light falling on a one (1) square ft area one (1) foot away from a standard candle, or the quantity of light that leaves a lamp in all directions. 
Luminaire (Light Fixture): A complete fixed or movable lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps and ballasting (when applicable) together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. 
Maintenance: Any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article or to prevent structural failure of such facilities. 
Mall. Any concentration of retail stores and/or service establishments which share customer parking areas and are located within an enclosure having public walkways whereby a customer in one (1) store or establishment may walk to another store or establishment without leaving the enclosure. 
Mansard Roof. Any roof that has an angle greater than forty-five (45) degrees and which derives part of its support from the building wall and is attached to (but not necessarily a part of) a low slope roof and which extends along the full length of the front building wall or three-quarters (¾) of the length of a side building wall. For purposes of this Chapter, a low slope roof shall mean any roof with a pitch less than three (3) inches rise per twelve (12) inches horizontal. 
Manufactured Home: Means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable Structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Marquee Sign. Any Sign attached in any manner to or made a part of a Marquee. Marquee Signs are considered Building Signs. 
Mean Sea Level: Means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the Floodplain. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Mini-Warehouse: A Building in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for storing the excess personal property of an individual or family when such is not with their residence, such as a passenger motor vehicle, house trailer, motorcycle, boat, camper, furniture, limited commercial storage (items of local retail merchants, small contractors, and professionals), and other items of personal property generally stored in residential accessory Structures. No business activities other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises. 
Minimum Floor Elevation: The lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or other placement of any floor including a Basement floor. 
Mobile Home Park: A plot of ground upon which two (2) or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Mobile Home Space: A plot of ground within a Mobile Home Park designated for the accommodation of not more than one (1) mobile home of single-family occupancy. 
Modular Home: A factory fabricated dwelling over thirty-two (32) feet in length and at least twenty-four (24) feet wide designed and constructed without carriage or hitch collar as stationary house construction for placement upon permanent foundation, to be permanently connected to utilities, for year-round occupancy. It can consist of two (2) or more components that can be separated when transported by designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit. Modular homes shall meet the minimum standards for house construction as specified in the Southern Standard Building Code, the FHA-Minimum Property Standards, the State Factory Built Housing Rules, and have a roof with at least a 3/12 pitch. 
Monument Sign: A Freestanding Sign which forms a solid structure from the ground to the top of the Sign. 
Multifamily: A building containing more than one (1) residential unit, excluding townhouses. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, National Geodetic Vertical Datum refers to a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the Floodplain. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit: A permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area wide basis. 
Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or Filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New Construction: Any Structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 17, 1988, the date of the first floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Woodstock. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such Structures. 
New Development: A Land Development Activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Means a Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 17, 1988, the date of the first floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Woodstock. 
NOI: Notice of Intent form provided by the Division for coverage under the State General Permit. 
Non-conforming Sign: A Sign legally existing at the time of erection that could not be built under the terms of this Chapter. 
NOT: Notice of Termination form provided by the Division to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
Non-Conforming Use: The use of a Building, or land existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
Non-Point Source Pollution: A form of water Pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of Pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, Stormwater Runoff, and leaching. Non-Point Source Pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Non-Stormwater Discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of Stormwater. 
Non-structural Stormwater Management Practice, or Nonstructural Practice: Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the Stormwater management report that provides for or enhances Stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other Stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, preservation and enhancement of riparian buffers, open and Greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988: Means the vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the Floodplain. 
Noxious Matter: Material (in gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which is capable of causing injury to living organisms, chemical reactions, or detrimental effects on the social, economic, or psychological well-being of individuals. 
Off-Site Stormwater Facility: A Stormwater Management Facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
Off-Street Loading Space: The area required to load or unload goods or other material plus the necessary driveways and maneuvering area. 
On-Site Stormwater Facility: A Stormwater Management Facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Open Space: Private Open Space and Public Open Space appropriately improved for pedestrian use and amenity not including detention ponds and stream buffers without Greenway Trails or areas used for vehicles, except for incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions only. Open Space shall be exterior and computed as the total square footage of said spaces. 
1.  Private Open Space: Open Space that is private courtyards, lawns, gardens, terraces, or balconies, which restrict access to residents of adjacent development. 
2.  Public Open Space : Park, Plaza, or Greenway Trail that is open to the public during normal city park hours and Sidewalk Area requirements. 
3.  Park: A Public Open Space that provides recreation amenities and gathering places. A Park shall have streets along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter and shall have no more than twenty (20) percent of its area covered with impervious surfaces, with the exception of Greenway Trails. 
4.  Plaza: A Public Open Space that is available for civic and commercial activities, but may have access limited for the purposes of providing outdoor dining areas. A Plaza shall have streets along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter and a landscape consisting of durable pavement, trees and other plant materials. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day to day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outbuilding: An ancillary building located towards the rear of the same lot containing a single-family dwelling or Townhouse. It may be connected to such dwelling by an unheated walkway or breezeway. Outbuildings shall not exceed eight hundred fifty (850) square feet of habitable space, excluding garages, nor shall they exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater, in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility (or site) or, if there is receiving water on site, where stormwater becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overbank Flood Protection: Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank Flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the Floodplain). These measures need to provide peak discharge control of the two (2) through a twenty-five-year storm event such that the Post-Development peak rate does not exceed the Pre-Development rate to reduce overbank Flooding. 
Owner: Means the legal or beneficial Owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, leasee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Owner(s) of Record: The Owner(s) of property as specified on the deed of the Lot of record. 
Parcel: Any piece or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, which is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership, is separately taxable and of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other space as required by the zoning regulations. 
Parking, Commercial: An area or structure dedicated to the temporary storage of automobiles or other vehicles for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours for a fee, operated as the principal use of the property or structure. 
Parking Lot: An off-street facility including parking spaces along with adequate provisions for drives and aisles for maneuvering and getting access, and for entrance and exit designed so as to be usable. 
Parking Space: An off-street space available for parking one (1) motor vehicle and having an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet exclusive of passageways and driveways giving access thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley. 
Patio House: A single-family dwelling in which most, or all, of a Lot is used with yard space combined instead of divided. Front, rear, and side yards are consolidated into one (1) garden area, either partially or completely bordered by rooms or enclosed by walls. 
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
Percentage or Grade: On street center line, means the distance vertically (up and down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance. 
Permit: The Permit, issued by the Development Process Committee required for undertaking any Land Development and/or Land-Disturbing Activity in the City. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pervious Material: Any material allowing the passage of water from the surface into the water table. Pervious materials can be concrete pavers or a variety of commercially available products. Gravel shall not be counted as a pervious material. 
Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Place of Assembly: Auditoriums, assembly halls, places of worship, movie and live theaters, event facilities, banquet halls, recreation or amusement centers with stadium seating or a spectator area, funeral homes. 
Planned Street: Proposed new streets as indicated on the Downtown District Regulating Plan. 
Plat—Final: The final map or drawing and accompanying materials, described in this Ordinance, on which the subdivider's plan of the Subdivision is presented to the Planning Commission for approval and which, if approved by the Commission is recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court. 
Pole Sign: A Freestanding Sign that is mounted on a pole or other vertical support such that the bottom of the Sign Face is more than six (6) feet above the ground and there is no visual obstruction other than the vertical support between the ground and the bottom of the Sign Face. 
Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animals wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or Structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution: The contamination or other significant alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Portable Sign: Any Sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a Sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, Signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, Signs posted on the roofs or trucks beds of vehicles, Signs converted to A- or T-frames; balloons used as Signs, and Signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business for purposes other than signage. For the purpose of this Chapter, Sandwich Signs are excluded from the definition of Portable Signs. 
Portable Swinger Sign and "A" Frame or Sandwich Signs: A Sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof, located on the ground, easily moveable, not permanently attached to the ground and which is usually two-sided. 
Post-Development: The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the Land Development Activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-Application Review: An initial and informal stage of Subdivision review at which the Developer may make known preliminary plan proposals and the City Planning staff or the Planning Commission may respond and/or advise the Developer concerning the Subdivision regulations. 
Pre-Development: The time period, or the conditions that existed, on a site prior to any Land Development and equivalent to the original hydrologic conditions (e.g., natural forest in good condition). 
Premises: Any Building, Lot, Parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Principal Building: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the Parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Principal Use: The specific primary purpose for which land or Building is used. 
Private: Property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state or federal government or any agency or Subdivision thereof. 
Private Street: A street over which the general public has no right of use. 
Procedure: A procedure adopted by City of Woodstock to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this article or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the City. 
Professional Office: Structure wherein services are performed involving predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations, such as law, doctor, optician, audiologist, accounting, tax preparation, real estate, stock broker, architect, engineer, manufacturer representative, professional counselor, land surveyor, political/campaign, telephone sales, travel bureau, and the like. 
Project: The entire proposed Development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Projecting Sign: Any Sign that is affixed at an angle or perpendicularly to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicularly or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted. 
Properly Designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the Land-Disturbing Activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Public Water System: Any water distribution system which has fifteen (15) or more service connections or serves more than twenty-five (25) people. 
Public Works Department or PWD: The City of Woodstock Public Works Department. 
Qualified Personnel: Any person who meets or exceeds the certified education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 as referenced in Chapter IV. 
Recreational Vehicle: Means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and, 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Recycling: Any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw material or products. 
Recycling Processing Facility: A facility engaged in buying, processing and resale or reuse of recyclable materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility. Such facility may involve storage, shipping and receiving of recyclable materials. 
Redevelopment: Any construction, alteration, or improvement exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet of Land Disturbance on sites where the existing land use is already developed as commercial, industrial, institutional, or multi-family residential. Redevelopment excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing Buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate Stormwater Runoff, or cause additional Nonpoint Source Pollution. 
Regional Stormwater Management Facility, or Regional Facility: Stormwater Management Facilities, typically Stormwater ponds, designed to control Stormwater Runoff from multiple properties, where the Owners or Developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Regulation: Any regulation, rule or requirement adopted by the City Council pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
Regulatory Flood: Means the Base Flood. 
Regulatory Flood Elevation: Means the Base Flood Elevation. 
Regulatory Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the latest FEMA Flood Insurance Study and depicted in the latest Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
Rehabilitation Homes: A facility for the treatment of individuals with mental or physical disorders who must be housed in the facility during the term of their rehabilitation. The primary function of the facility shall be to provide the proper community environment to restore those residing in the facility to a state of health, efficiency, and useful, constructive activity. This is distinguished from hospitals, clinics, mental hospitals, sanitariums, etc., in that the function is not the treatment of the chronically ill but rather to facilitate the return of patients to a normal life within the community. 
Rental Unit: A residential use which is contractually conveyed by the owner to a tenant for a specified time and amount of money. 
Reserve Strip: A strip or Parcel of land along, around, or between properties, the purpose of which is to restrict Access. 
Residential Board and Care Facility: A commercial facility which provides residential services for compensation for ambulatory elderly persons, including room and board, limited personal services and planned activities. This is a group living environment with private or semi-private bedrooms and bathrooms, requiring a state operating license and providing meals, housekeeping, laundry and personal care services, with twenty-four-hour staff availability. Medical care, similar to that offered in a nursing home, is not provided. 
Residential Multi-family: A building or portion of a building used or designed to contain two (2) or more Dwelling Units. The terms "multiple-family" and "multi-family" are synonymous. 
Residential—Multi-Family, Rental: A structure or group of structures within a common development or under common management, containing two or more separate Dwelling Units, constructed with the primary purpose of leasing or renting Dwelling Units. This definition includes, but is not limited to apartment complexes and flats. 
Residential—Multi-Family, Fee Simple: A structure or group of structures within a common development or under common management, containing two or more separate individually owned Dwelling Units, constructed with the primary purpose of selling each Dwelling Unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to condominium buildings and flats. 
Residential Single-Family Attached: A building containing a dwelling unit connected along one (1) or more walls to another dwelling unit by a common party wall. 
Residential Single-Family Detached: A building containing one (1) dwelling unit not attached to any other dwelling unit. 
Residential Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk level of a Street Facade. 
2.  Provides Habitable Space for a minimum of the first ten (10) feet in depth behind the Street Facade. 
3.  Provides equally sized vertical windows where the top of which and the bottom of which shall be no higher and no lower than to the top of the door frame and the bottom of door frame. 
4.  Provides windows for a minimum of thirty (30) percent and a maximum of sixty (60) percent of the total Street Facade area, with the facade of each unit being calculated independently. 
5.  Provides an entry stoop or porch at a primary pedestrian Street Facade entrance. 
Re-Subdivision: A change in a map of any approved or recorded Subdivision plat altering the number of Lots incorporated within the confines of the original plat. 
Retail Store: A commercial use or establishment where at least one-half (½) of the sale of goods is made to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not for resale. 
Review Agency: Any so designated agency other than the Planning Commission may review appropriate parts of plat submissions by reason of technical capability, authority, or interest. 
Right-Of-Way: A strip of land designated, reserved, dedicated, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
Riparian: Belonging or related to the bank of a river, Stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Roadway: The actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and drainage facilities including ditches and curb and gutters, which is utilized to transport motor vehicles. 
Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled way consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Roof Sign: A Sign erected and constructed wholly on or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
Rooming House: A Building other than a Hotel/Motel where lodging for five (5) or more persons not of the same family is provided for definite periods and for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods. 
Runoff: Stormwater Runoff. 
Sandwich Sign: See Portable Swinger Sign. 
Sanitary Landfill: An area or site utilized by a public or private entity for disposal of solid waste or refuse in a manner which meets the regulations imposed upon the operation and maintenance of sanitary landfill. 
Sanitary Sewer: A municipal or community sewage collection, treatment, and disposal system of a type approved by the County Health Department. 
Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity; the product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Service Buildings: A Building, housing facilities such as recreational, maintenance, laundry and office Structure necessary to the successful Development and management of a Development. 
Setback: The distance from the property line to the nearest plane of the applicable building, structure, or Sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
Setback, Stream: Means, with respect to a Stream, the area established by Chapter XVII, as extending beyond any Buffer applicable to the Stream. 
Shopping Center: In areas of the City outside the Downtown DT District, two (2) or more retail stores and/or service establishments, or one (1) retail store combined with one (1) or more service establishment, sharing customer parking areas, regardless of whether said stores and/or service establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership. 
Sidewalk Area: Begins at the street curb and consists of a contiguous Sidewalk Landscape Zone, Sidewalk Clear Zone, and Sidewalk Supplemental Zone including intervening driveways. 
1.  Sidewalk Landscape Zone: The portion of a Sidewalk Area adjacent to the street curb and reserved for the placement of trees, groundcover, and street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
2.  Sidewalk Clear Zone: The portion of a Sidewalk Area that is reserved for pedestrian passage and is unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight (8) feet, including but not limited to, steps and stoops, traffic control boxes, and utility structures. The Sidewalk Clear Zone shall be adjacent and between the Sidewalk Landscape Zone and the Sidewalk Supplemental Zone and shall have a consistent cross-slope not exceeding two (2) percent. 
3.  Sidewalk Supplemental Zone: The area between the back of the Sidewalk Clear Zone and the Build-To Line. Adjacent to Storefront Treatments, Sidewalk Supplemental Zones may be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, merchandise display, potted plants, and decorative fountains. Outdoor dining is permitted only when adjacent to eating and drinking establishments. Elements that are prohibited in the Supplemental Zone include: recreational areas and facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts; fences and walls greater than forty (40) inches in height; service elements such as dumpsters, loading docks and similar elements; mechanical features; and parking. Public access may be restricted only for areas adjacent to Residential Treatment, and for outdoor dining areas when adjacent to Storefront Treatments. No element shall be attached to the Sidewalk Supplemental Zone in any way. 
Sign: The term "sign" means and includes every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stroke, stripe, trademark or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public. Also, the above, when near the inside surface of a window in such a way as to be in the view of the general public and used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information to the public. 
Sign Face: That portion of the surface of a Sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the Sign has been erected or placed. The Sign face may be composed of two (2) or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a Sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, including but not limited to, channel letters. 
Sign Height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a Sign structure. The height is measured from the top of the nearest adjacent curb or edge of pavement if a curb does not exist. 
Site: Means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the Development project is located. 
Slope: Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan approved in writing by the District. 
Special Flood Hazard Area(s) (SFHA)/Special Flood Hazard(s) (Also see Area(s) of Special Flood Hazard(s)): Means the land subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of Flooding in any given year. This includes all Floodplain and Flood prone areas at or below the Base Flood Elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all Floodplain and Flood prone areas at or below the Future Conditions Flood Elevation, and all other Flood prone areas as referenced in Chapter XIII of this Ordinance. All Streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the Area of Special Flood Hazard delineated. 
Spot Light Illumination: Illumination which comes from lamps, lenses or devices designed to focus or concentrate the light rays of the source. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or in combination with installing temporary or permanent Structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a Building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include excavation for a Basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory Buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as Dwelling Units or not part of the main Building. For a Substantial Improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a Building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the Building. 
State General Permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for Stormwater Runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
State Waters: Any and all rivers, Streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Storage Yard: The keeping, in an unroofed area of any goods, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
Storefront Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk level of a Street Facade of flat roofed buildings. Buildings with gabled roofs shall use Residential Treatment. 
2.  Provides Habitable Space for a minimum of the first twenty (20) feet in depth behind the Street Facade. 
3.  Provides a street level facade consisting of: 
a.  A non-glass base or knee wall below all windows beginning at grade and extending to a point no less than eight (8) inches but not more than twenty-four (24) inches above the Sidewalk Area at the Build-To Line. Knee wall may be waived when directly abutting a private patio. 
b.  A combination of glass display windows and doors covering a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the built portion of the Build-To Line beginning at the top of the bulkhead or knee wall, to a height not less than ten (10) feet and not more than twelve (12) feet above said Sidewalk Area at the Build-To Line below the base of the window. Such glass shall provide views into display windows that have a minimum depth of two and one-half (2.5) feet into and are accessible from the building interior for retail uses only. 
c.  Primary pedestrian entrances on the Street Facade recessed a maximum of seven (7) feet from the exterior facade, remain unlocked during normal business hours, and have a surface area that is a minimum of seventy (70) percent glass. All other doors located along street frontage shall be of a character that matches with the surrounding downtown area. 
d.  A glass transom located along the Street Facade of a structure above the glass display window and entry door shall have a minimum height of twenty-four (24) inches and a maximum height of thirty-six (36) inches. 
e.  Provides no length of facade exceeding twenty (20) feet without intervening glass display windows or glass doors. 
4.  A non-glass sign band area located above the glass transom having a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches. The sign band area is the area between the top of the transom window and cornice line. 
5.  A cornice line above the sign band a minimum height of eight (8) inches. 
6.  Street address numbers, a minimum of six (6) inches in height located above the primary pedestrian entrance. 
7.  Sidewalk level drop ceiling, if at a lower elevation than the top of the window, shall recess a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the window opening for retail uses. 
8.  Finished ceiling height shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet. Exterior height of single story buildings shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet as measured at top of parapet. Parapet must enclose all sides of the roof. 
Street Facade: The exterior wall of a building, not including extruding structures such as porches, stoops or bay windows, that is located along the Build-To Line or street without an intervening building or Street Wall. 
Street Facade Frontage: The percent of Street Facade required along the Build-To Line. 
Streets and Sidewalks: A strip of land or access way subject to vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian traffic that provides direct or indirect access to property including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, sidewalks, terraces, trails or other thoroughfares. 
Street Wall: A wall no less than seventy-five (75) percent opaque built along the Build-To Line and co-planer with the Street Facade, often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the street. Street Walls shall be a minimum of three and one-half (3½) feet in height, and constructed of a material matching the adjacent Street Facade or dense evergreen hedge. Street Walls shall be discontinued no more than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. The Street Wall shall have other individual openings not exceeding four (4) square feet in area at height of less than three and one-half (3½) feet. 
Stormwater: Stormwater Runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater Better Site Design: Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques as described in the Stormwater Management Design Manual that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for Nonstructural Stormwater Management. Stormwater Better Site Design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and Greenspace, reducing Impervious Cover and using natural features for Stormwater Management. 
Stormwater Management: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of Stormwater Runoff. 
Stormwater Management Design Manual: The current version of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) will provide the primary guidance for the design and evaluation of Stormwater Management Facilities in the City of Woodstock. A copy of the GSMM can be viewed in the Department of Public Works or can be accessed at www.georgiastormwater.com. 
Stormwater Management Facility: Means constructed or natural components of a Stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions. 
Stormwater Management Measure: Means any Stormwater Management Facility or Nonstructural Stormwater Practice. 
Stormwater Management Report: A document to be prepared for every project and sealed by a Professional Engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia describing the nature of Stormwater issues and management strategies associated with the site. The purpose of the report shall be to formulate a plan to manage Stormwater in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, including but not limited to the requirements set forth in the GSMM, so that Stormwater Runoff hazards are not created, existing runoff-related problems are not exacerbated, and Stormwater quality is not adversely effected, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the Property being developed. 
Stormwater Management System: The entire network of natural and constructed facilities and practices for the storage, treatment, and conveyance of Stormwater Runoff. 
Stormwater Quality Site Development Review Tool: A spreadsheet tool available from the Public Works Department specifically designed to meet the unified sizing and water quality performance criteria outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. Use of the tool is one (1) of the pre-construction review requirements for New Development and Redevelopment in the City. 
Stormwater Retrofit: A Stormwater Management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no Stormwater Management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the Stormwater Management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater Runoff: The direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a Stormwater conveyance system or other concentrated flow during and following a precipitation event. 
Story, Half (½): A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and floor surface not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. 
Story: That portion of a Building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it, provided that a room, suite, or story, with more than one-half (½) of its height below grade shall not be considered a story for the purposes of height regulations, and provided further, that a room, suite, or story, having part but not more than half of its height below grade shall be considered a story for the purpose of height regulations only if said room, suite, or story shall be subdivided and used for business, or shall be used for dwelling purposes by other than a member of the household or a janitor, servant, or watchman employed on the premises. 
Stream(s): Any Stream, beginning at: 
1.  The location where the normal Stream flow has wrested the vegetation. The normal Stream flow is any flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from the groundwater that enters the Stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into Streams; or, 
2.  A point in the Stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or, 
3.  Where evidence indicates the presence of a Stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the Public Works Department may require field studies to verify the existence of a Stream. 
Stream Bank(s): The sloping land that contains the Stream channel and the normal flows of the Stream. 
Stream Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of State Waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Stream Buffer Protection Area: With respect to a Stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and Setbacks applicable to such Stream as designated in Chapter XVII. 
Stream Channel: The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the Stream. 
Streamer. A long narrow strip of material used for ornament or decoration. 
Stream Protective Covenants: Contracts made between private parties or conditions recorded with an approved Plat or otherwise recorded in the land records of the County in which the property is located and running with the land, specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed, or improved with the view to protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Stream Setback: Means, with respect to a Stream, the area established by Chapter XVII, as extending beyond any Buffer applicable to the Stream. 
Street: A right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as Street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, alley, or otherwise. 
1.  Arterials: These roads are designed to carry rapid, continuous traffic to major magnets within the urban area. Routes will usually pass through or near the heart of the city, connecting residential, commercial, industrial and public activity areas. 
2.  By-Pass: A highway designed for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic between highways and widely separated parts of the urban area. By-passes generally have limited or controlled access and are usually grade-separated at railroads and major crossings. 
3.  Collector Streets: These Streets bring traffic to arterials, or inter-connect arterials. They provide for relatively easy movement at moderate speeds from homes and businesses to arterials. 
4.  Local Streets: These Streets provide direct access to abutting properties. 
5.  Alley or Service Drive: A minor access way used for service access, or property access under specified circumstances, to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a Street. 
6.  Marginal Access Street: A residential Street parallel and adjacent to major thoroughfares or arterial Streets and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
7.  Cul-de-Sac: A local Street or road with only one (1) outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
8.  Half-Street: A Street or road adjacent to a Subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed Subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property Owner. 
Street Frontage. The distance for which a lot line of a parcel adjoins a public or private street, from one (1) lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street. 
Streetlight. A light usually mounted on a pole and constituting one (1) of a series spaced at intervals along a public street or highway. 
Street Line or Right-Of-Way Line: A dividing line between a Lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected which required location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. The term shall include such things as gasoline pumps, signs, mobile homes, and other portable vehicles or Structures from which products are vended, and similar objects. However, for use in Chapter 13, Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a Building such as bearing walls or bearing partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
Structural Erosion and Sedimentation Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization Structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural Stormwater Control: A Structural Stormwater Management facility or device that controls Stormwater Runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. Criteria for the design and construction of these devices can be found in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more Lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building Development, and includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. For the purpose of this Ordinance the definition of a Subdivision is broken down into three (3) subcategories as follows: 
1.  Exempt Subdivision of Land: Divisions of land which have the following characteristics are exempt from the Subdivision regulations as set forth in this Ordinance: 
a.  Intra-family transfers if no new public streets are involved as long as the Lot is recorded and the deed transferred simultaneously; or 
b.  Sale of property to the, abutting land Owners. 
2.  Minor Subdivisions of Land: Divisions of land containing six (6) or less Lots fronting on an existing road, not involving any new or improved public or private road and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.  Major Subdivisions: All Subdivisions not classified as exempt or minor Subdivisions. 
Substantial Damage: Means damage of any origin sustained by a Structure whereby the cost of restoring the Structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the Structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement: Means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a Building, taking place during a ten-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the Building prior to the improvement. The market value of the Building should be: a. The appraised market value of the Building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or b. In the case of damage, the value of the Building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes Structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the Building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the Building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a Building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the City of Woodstock and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Parks or Subdivisions: Is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of these streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Suspended Signs. A Sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
Swimming Pools: An outdoor swimming pool shall be any pool or open tank not located within a completely enclosed Building and containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than one and one-half (1½) feet. 
Temporary Sign. Any Sign that is used only temporarily and not permanently mounted. 
Tobacco Specialty Shop: Any premises dedicated to the display, sale, distribution, delivery, offering, furnishing, or marketing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia including but not limited to the following: pipes, punctured metal bowls, bongs, water bongs, electric pipes, e-cigarettes, e-cigarette juice, buzz bombs, vaporizers, hookahs, and devices for holding burning material. Lighters and matches shall be excluded from the definition of tobacco paraphernalia; provided, however, that any grocery store, supermarket, convenience store or similar retail use that only sells conventional cigars, cigarettes or tobacco as an ancillary sale shall not be defined as a "Tobacco Specialty Shop" and shall not be subject to the restrictions of Chapter VII Performance Zoning Standards. 
Top of the Stream Bank: Means the point on a Stream's cross-section defined by the bank full elevation or the highest point in elevation immediately adjacent to the Stream channel, whichever is greater. 
Tourist Courts: Land occupied by one (1) or a group of two (2) or more detached, semidetached or multiple unit Buildings; containing single guest rooms and suites of rooms with or without kitchenettes and equipment, with automobile parking space and incidental utility Structures, which are in connection therewith, all of which is used or designed for, but not necessarily limited to, use primarily by automobile transients, for which daily, weekly, or monthly rates are available. 
Tourist Court or Motel Apartments: Accommodations within a motel Building or Buildings which feature one (1) or more rooms with cooking facilities designed for, but not necessarily limited to, automobile transients on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis, where everything for the guests' convenience, except food, clothing and medical supplies is furnished as part of the charge. 
Townhouse: Attached single-family residential structure in which no residential unit is directly above or below another residential unit. 
Toxic Material: Materials (gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which are capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction even when present in relatively small amounts. 
Travel Trailer: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent-trailer or other similar vehicular or portable Structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation, recreation, or other trips and provided with sleeping accommodations. 
Travel Trailer Park: A parcel or area of land designed and equipped to accommodate travel trailers for short periods of time, not to extend fourteen (14) days. 
Tri-Vision Sign. A Sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three (3) different Sign messages in rotation. For purposes of this Chapter, a trivision Sign is not a Changeable Copy Sign. 
Trout Streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the Department of Natural Resource's rules for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6, available at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining pollution of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Uniformity Ratio: A higher level of illumination in relation to a lower level of illumination within a given target area. A value for either the maximum-to-minimum ratio or the average-to minimum ratio may be required. For example, if the average-to-minimum uniformity ratio is 4:1 for the given target area, the lowest level of illuminance is no less than one (1) divided by four (4) (twenty-five (25) percent) of the average level of illuminance. 
Usable Floor Space: Floor space used for retail sale or display includes permanent outdoor-sales, but excludes outdoor motor vehicle sales areas. 
Use, Principal: The primary purpose for which a Lot is occupied and/or used. 
Variance: A modification of the strict terms of this Ordinance granted by the City Council where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing the conditions peculiar to the property such as irregular Lot size, topographic or other characteristics of the land and not as the result of any action on the part of the property Owner, literal enforcement of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Such modification may not authorize a principal or accessory use of the property, which is not permitted within the Zoning District in which the property is located. 
Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the Stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
• Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
• Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
• Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vehicle for Hire: Any motor vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used. Such term does not include vehicles regulated by the state public service commission. For the purposes of this article, vehicles for hire shall mean taxicabs and sedans. 
Vehicle for Hire Company: An establishment offering to transport passengers for a fee in any motorized or animal drawn vehicle, the charges for which are determined by agreement, mileage or by the length of time for which the vehicle is engaged and also described is a taxi or limousine service. 
Violation: An act of breaking or disregarding an ordinance or law. However, for use in Chapter 13, a Violation is the failure of a structure to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by the community's floodplain management ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Wall Sign: Any Sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall or printed on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on which it is mounted; provided, however, said Wall Sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. 
Warehouse: A Building provided for the purpose of depository or securing of goods, wares or merchandise. 
Water Quality: Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Water Quality Protection: Required for all Developments to improve the quality of Storm Runoff from the Development site. Stormwater management systems (which can include both Structural Stormwater Controls and better site design practices) must be designed to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site according to the specifications of the Stormwater Management Design Manual. Additionally, runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the Public Works Department must be adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, Stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed: The land area that drains into a particular Stream. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wholesale Establishment: A use or establishment where at least one-half (½) of the goods for sale will not be bought for direct consumption by the buyer, but will be resold. 
Window Sign: Any Sign placed inside or upon a window. The display of merchandise shall not be construed as a window sign, nor shall any sign located more than 12 inches back from the interior surface of the glass." 
Yard: An Open Space on the same Lot with a Building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a Structure from the ground upwards, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, Front: An open, unoccupied space on the same Lot with a principal Building, extending the full width of the Lot and located between the street line and the front line of the most protruding portion of the Building projected to the side lines of the Lot. 
Yard, Rear: An Open Space on the same Lot with a principal Building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory Building, extending the full width of the Lot and located between the rear lines of the most protruding portion of the Building projected to the side lines of the Lot. 
Yard, Side: An open, unoccupied space on the same Lot with a principal Building located between the side of the most protruding portion of the Building and the side line of the Lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 10-13-14(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. of 3-23-15(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. of 5-18-15(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. of 7-27-15(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. of 1-25-16(1); Ord. of 2-8-16(1); Ord. of 9-12-2016(2), §§ 1—3; Ord. of 9-12-2016(3), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 0003-2017, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-17; Ord. of 10-9-2017(1), § 1; Ord. of 12-15-2017(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 5697-2019, §§ 1, 2, 3-25-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted October 13, 2014, repealed the former Ch. II, and enacted a new Ch. II as set out herein. The former Ch. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 9-12-2011(1), § 1(Exh. A). 

Chapter III - LAND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 12, 2016(4), § 1(Exh. A), repealed the former Ch. III, §§ 3.100—3.106, 3.200, 3.201, 3.300—3.302, 3.400—3.405, 3.500—3.503, 3.600—3.603, 3.700—3.709, 3.800, 3.801, 3.900—3.905, and enacted a new Ch. III as set out herein. The former Ch. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted June 8, 2015, § 1(Exh. A). 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

3.100. - Administration. 
This chapter shall be administered by the City Development Process Committee and Community Development Department. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.101. - Purpose, Objective and Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to provide a consistent and orderly process for the development of property within the City, ensuring that both private and public infrastructure are constructed to industry and professional standards, as adopted by the City Council. Additionally, the processes set forth herein seek to minimize the financial and social risk to the City associated with incomplete infrastructure and developments left partially constructed as witnessed through the defaults of the Great Recession. In sum, this chapter seeks to fulfill the plans of the City, set forth by the City Council through comprehensive planning, studies, and policy documents, to ensure the vision is realized in the physical development of the City. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.102. - Recording of Plats. 
No plat of a subdivision of land within the City shall be recorded by the Clerk of Superior Court of Cherokee County unless the plat has received minor or major plat approval or is an exempt subdivision of land as defined in this Ordinance. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties specified within this chapter of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.103. - Erection of Buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the City unless the street giving access thereto has been conditionally accepted as a public street or approved as a private street in accordance with this chapter. This provision excludes model homes permitted for construction through other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.104. - Violations and Remedy. 
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as provided by law. Further, the City shall have the right to withhold building permits and certificate of occupancy wherever there exists a violation of any provision of this Code or any provision of the Code of Woodstock, Georgia, or the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN 

3.200. - Suitability of the Land. 
Land which the Development Process Committee finds to be unsuitable for development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which would be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of inhabitants of the land and surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the Development Process Committee, upon recommendation of any staff assistant serving the Development Process Committee and/or other governmental representative, if any, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as will not involve such a danger. 
Where the proposed development is in an area designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as a potential flood prone area the developer must comply with all of the provisions of Chapter XIII of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.201. - Conformance to Applicable Rules and Regulations. 
In addition to the requirements established in this Ordinance, all subdivision plats shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, or regulations, including, but not limited to: 
1.  All applicable provisions of Georgia law, regulations, or policy; 
2.  Any adopted plans of the City of Woodstock; 
3.  The rules of the Cherokee County Public Health Department; 
4.  The rules, as applicable, of the Federal Highway Administration or Georgia Department of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a non-local highway; and 
5.  Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above rules or with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.202. - Self-Imposed Restrictions. 
If the developer places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by this chapter, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be recorded, along with the final subdivision plat or at the release of any sureties posted with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.203. - Monuments. 
The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required herein and as approved by a licensed surveyor. Monuments shall be located and set as follows: 
1.  Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections and at the beginning and ending points of curves. 
2.  The external boundaries of the subdivision shall be monumented in the field by monuments of stone or concrete not less than four (4) feet in length; not less than four (4) inches square of five (5) inches in diameter; and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded. These monuments shall be placed not more than two thousand four hundred (2,400) feet apart. 
3.  All lot corners shall be marked by iron rods, pipe, or pins at least eighteen (18) inches long and five-eighths (0.625) inch in diameter. 
4.  The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pins at least eighteen (18) inches long and five-eighths (0.625) inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least eighteen (18) inches long. Such pins shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream and lot line, with a meander line established not less than twenty (20) feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
5.  All monuments and pins shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a surveyor or an engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering prior to the time the Development Process Committee recommends approval of the final plat or release of the surety where bond is made in lieu of improvements. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.204. - Name of Subdivision. 
The names of the subdivision must have approval of the Development Process Committee. The names shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in Cherokee County. 
Streets or roads that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing named streets, shall bear that name. The names of new streets and roads shall be subject to the approval of the Development Process Committee and shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names used in Cherokee County, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place, or court. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.205. - Access. 
Unless private streets are approved in accordance with the provisions below, access to every major subdivision shall be provided over a public street, including public sidewalks where sidewalks are contemplated or required, dedicated to the City and providing access for ingress and egress and access to all utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, (except in approved septic system developments), stormwater, electricity and, where natural gas is intended to be used, natural gas, to the lots and structures to be located thereon. 
Private streets and sidewalks may be permitted by the City if an easement plan is submitted to the City and approved granting access to all roads, parking areas, utilities, and any additional infrastructure deemed to be used by the general public or the owners of parcels in the development to the other parcels of the development and the streets and sidewalks unless specifically waived by the Community Development Department as being unnecessary for the reasonable development and use of the property. 
Access to a subdivision of two (2) parcels or less can be provided by way of an easement provided the conditions outlined below are followed. 
1.  No more than two (2) separate parcels of land may obtain access from an easement. 
2.  The deed of each parcel which is accessed by the easement must contain a clause which states that the access is from an easement that will not be maintained by the City. 
3.  In the event that a third lot is proposed to be developed off of an easement the road must become a public road and developed to the road standards specified in this chapter. 
4.  An access easement must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width and have a four (4) inch gravel, or paved surface twelve (12) feet wide. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.206. - Community Assets. 
In all subdivisions all natural features such as large trees, and water courses, historical spots, and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property should be labeled on any proposed plats and site plans. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.207. - Special Provisions Governing Homeowner Associations. 
Any development within the City having a homeowners' association should notify the City and register the officers and covenants of the homeowners' association at the time that the homeowners' association is turned over to the neighborhood residents from the project developer. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.208. - Special Provisions Governing Unit Ownership (Condominium) Subdivisions. 
1.  General Provisions. Whenever a developer, the sole owner, or the co-owners of a building or buildings expressly declare through the submission of a master deed, lease, or plat their desire to submit their property to regime wherein there is established a horizontal property regime, each such condominium or property regime created for the purpose of sale or transfer of real property is subject to the provisions of these standards. 
2.  Submission of Plat Required. Prior to the sale of transfer of any property incorporated in the property regime, the developer, sole owner, or co-owners of such property shall submit to the Development Process Committee and obtain their approval of the subdivision plat of such property in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.209. - Multiple/Mixed Use Developments, Industrial and Commercial Land Subdivisions. 
The platting procedures for these types of development are the same as for other land developments, though the development standards and design may vary. The developers of such proposals are urged to consult early with the staff of the Development Process Committee to coordinate plan and plat preparations properly. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.210. - Stormwater, Utility and Street Improvement Standards. 
Improvement standards and specifications for all stormwater infrastructure are located in Chapter XIV of this Ordinance. 
Improvements standards and specifications for all sewer utility infrastructure are located in Chapter VIII of this Ordinance. 
Improvement standards and specifications for all roadway and street, sidewalks, trails and miscellaneous infrastructure are located in Chapter XV of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE III. - LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

3.300. - Land Development Permits (LDP). 
Prior to commencing any site work on a site that has a disturbed area of greater than one-tenth (0.1) of an acre (4,356 square feet). Land development permits (LDP) for such work shall be applied for and obtained from the Community Development Department. Land development permits shall only be issued in conjunction with approved site plans, according to Article VIII of this chapter. 
Projects that have a disturbed area of less than one-tenth (0.1) of an acre may be required to adhere to the land development process at the discretion of the Community Development Department. 
A land development permit may include all the work or only a specific phase or phases of the project according to the scope of the permit when issued and the approved site plans on file. 
An LDP issued by the City may include the following: 
1.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control Permit. An erosion and sedimentation control permit is required for any project which disturbs more than one-tenth (0.1) acre (4,356 square feet). When a notice of intent (NOI) is required by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, the NOI shall be filed no less than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the issuance of an erosion and sedimentation control permit by the City. A copy of the NOI shall be provided to the City by the permit holder upon request. 
2.  Clearing and Grubbing Permit. A clearing and grubbing permit is required for any project which disturbs more than one-tenth (0.1) acre (4,356 square feet). 
3.  Stormwater Management Facility Permit. A stormwater management facility is required for any project that includes the construction, modification, or alteration of a stormwater management facility. This includes but is not limited to detention ponds, underground vaults and water quality enhancement devices. 
4.  Underground Infrastructure Permit. An underground infrastructure permit is required for any project that includes the construction, modification or alteration of an underground stormwater, water and sanitary sewer system. This includes but is not limited to piping. 
5.  Pump Station Permit. A pump station permit is required for any project that includes the construction, modification or alteration of a sanitary sewer pump station. 
6.  Above-Ground Infrastructure Permit. An above-ground infrastructure permit is required for any project that includes the construction, modification, or alteration of roadways and associated infrastructure. This includes but is not limited to roadway, curb, gutter, catch basins and sidewalks. 
7.  Multi-Use Trail Permit. A multi-use trail permit is required for any project that includes the construction, modification, or alteration of multi-use trails (greenprints) within existing or proposed public right-of-way, or any multi-use trail located within an existing or proposed easement to be maintained by the City. This shall not include any multi-use trail that is located outside existing or proposed public right-of-way, or which is not maintained by the City. 
The fees for land development permits shall be subject to the most current fee schedule, which is held on record at the Office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1) 
3.301. - Pre-Construction Meeting. 
Prior to the issuance of land development permits, a pre-construction meeting is required to be held between the City and the contractor for the proposed work. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.302. - Inspections. 
Inspections for all site work are conducted by the Public Works and the Community Development Departments. Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Public Works and the Community Development Departments. Authorized representatives of the City shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
A list of all required inspections is held on file with the Public Works and the Community Development Departments and is available upon request. 
All work not in accordance with the approved site plans and the ordinance of the City, including but not limited to the City Land Development Ordinance, shall be corrected by the contractor in a timely manner. Corrections not made in a timely manner shall result in charging of violation fines according to the most current fee schedule and a stop work order may be issued by the City. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work within the scope of the project shall cease until the work has been corrected to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department and Community Development Department. 
Any violations associated with erosion and sedimentation control measures are specifically addressed in Chapter IV of the City Land Development Ordinance. 
A final inspection of all construction shall be made before conditional acceptance of the work and before the start of the one (1) year maintenance period. The completed work shall be checked for compliance with the approved site plans and the regulations of the City, including but not limited to the City Land Development Ordinance. All unacceptable work shall be corrected. If the work has been satisfactorily completed and all requirements of this chapter have been completed, a letter of conditional acceptance shall be issued by the Public Works and the Community Development Departments. 
Within the last thirty (30) days of the maintenance period outlined in Section 3.503, an inspection for final acceptance shall be made. The work shall be corrected and upon acceptance, the Public Works Department shall issue a letter of final acceptance. Any sureties subject to expiration prior to final acceptance must be extended until final acceptance of the site by the City. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.303. - As-Builts Required. 
Prior to the conditional acceptance of any work, as-builts shall be provided to the City for all improvements which are to become publicly maintained. This includes but is not limited to a stormwater management facility and the design engineer's certification of the facility. Three (3) sets of hard copies shall be provided to the City along with CAD files. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION LOT DESIGN STANDARDS 

3.400. - Previously Approved Subdivisions. 
1.  Unexpired Preliminary Approval. The approval granted on any preliminary plat prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall remain in force and effect for the time period stipulated by the regulations under which the approval was first granted. 
2.  Expired Preliminary Approval. In any instance in which the period of preliminary approval, within a twenty-four (24) month time period, shall have passed with some portion of the subdivision not having received final approval, and the applicant wishes an extension of the preliminary approval, the Development Process Committee may: 
a.  Permit the remaining portion of the subdivision to be constructed and to receive approval under provisions set forth in the regulations whereby preliminary approval was originally granted; or 
b.  Stipulate that the plat is null and void and that a new plat be presented subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
In making this determination, the Development Process Committee shall consider all pertinent facts available to it, including reviewing phases individually. The current state and active pursuit of construction and development activities within the subdivision shall be given due consideration in the course of the Development Process Committee's deliberation of the question. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.401. - Lots. 
All lots, which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a subdivision, or combination of parcels, shall comply with the following design standards unless the zoning standards for the area are more stringent in which case the more stringent standards shall take precedence: 
1.  Lot Lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. 
2.  Jurisdictional Limits and Lot Lines. Lots shall not be divided by City or County boundary lines. 
3.  Lot Frontage Arrangements. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with direct abutting access to an existing public street or to an approved street contained within the proposed subdivision. Each lot must front for at least eighteen (18) feet upon an approved street or road. (See Panhandle or Flag Lots below.) 
4.  Adequate Building Sites. Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements, buffers, or building setback lines required by this Ordinance and any existing ordinance as is appropriate. 
5.  Panhandle or Flag Lots. "Panhandle" or "flag" lots, of required width and area will be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than twenty (20) feet wide and the panhandle access shall be no more than three hundred (300) feet long. Not more than two (2) such panhandle access points shall abut each other, and if so combined, the width of each panhandle may be reduced to not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
6.  Lot Grade to Street Grade. Any lot whose natural grade at the building line is twelve (12) feet or more above the finished grade of the street on which it fronts, may be required to be provided with an approved access way to the lot from other than the street upon which it fronts. 
7.  Setback Lines. The building setback lines shall conform to the zoning standards for the area as outlined in the Land Development Ordinance. 
8.  Lot Width. The minimum lot width at the building setback line shall be as outlined in the applicable zoning district if specified. 
9.  Lot Area. Subdivision lots which are served by individual water and individual on-site sewage management systems shall have a minimum lot size as outlined in Table I. The lot area of subdivision lots having central water and sewer shall be as established in the appropriate zone district. 
10.  Commercial and Industrial Lots. Except as established in the zoning standards of this Ordinance, size, shape, and arrangement of commercial and industrial lots, where platted and classified as a subdivision as herein defined, shall be subject to the approval of the Development Process Committee. 
11.  Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of building so as to conform to the minimum building setback requirement on both streets. 
12.  Lot Remnants. Lot remnants shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
TABLE I 
MINIMUM LOT SIZES FOR SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE, IN SQUARE FEET, UTILIZING CENTRAL WATER AND SEPTIC TANK SYSTEMS 

 
*Refer to Appendix II. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.402. - Easements. 
Easements shall be provided in subdivisions for the following purposes: 
1.  Utility Easements. When it is found to be necessary and desirable to locate public utility lines in areas other than the street right-of-way, or outside any private roadway, easements shall be shown on the plat for such purposes. Such easements shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width and shall be centered over the primary water and/or sewer lines if applicable. 
2.  Water Course and Drainage Easements. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, or stream, appropriate provisions shall be made to accommodate storm water and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. Such easements shall conform substantially to the lines of said water course and be of sufficient width or construction, or both, as to be adequate for the purpose. Easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet width centered on the drainage way. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE V. - SURETY FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

3.500. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide surety to the City that required public infrastructure improvements shall be performed and maintained according to the ordinances of the City for future public acceptance and maintenance. An applicant should complete all public infrastructure improvements prior to recording a final plat, however, in lieu of completion a surety may be posted for the following: aboveground infrastructure, sidewalks, landscape, stormwater management facilities, pump station, and erosion control, at the discretion of the Public Works Department and Community Development Department. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.501. - Surety Modification Requirements During National and Local Economic Distress. 
During any period of national or local economic distress, Mayor and City Council may modify surety requirements, declaring an economic emergency by resolution in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
Mayor and City Council may choose to declare an economic emergency based on any one (1) of the following indicators: 
1.  The number of permits issued for single family residential units declines by thirty (30) percent or more during two (2) separate and consecutive quarters in a twelve (12) month period; or 
2.  The number of certificates of occupancy issued for single family residential units is thirty (30) percent or higher than the number of permits issued for single family residential units during two (2) separate and consecutive quarters in a twelve (12) month period; or 
3.  Impact fee revenue declines fifteen (15) percent or more during two (2) consecutive quarters or thirty (30) percent or more within a twelve (12) month period; or 
4.  Real and personal property taxes decline twenty (20) percent or more during a twelve (12) month period. 
By declaring an economic emergency, Mayor and City Council may include the following provisions as circumstances dictate: 
1.  Immediate suspension of the acceptance of bonds as a form of surety for public infrastructure improvements; 
2.  In communication with the applicant, set forth a schedule for the completion of required public infrastructure improvements; 
3.  Authorizing the withholding of certificates of occupancy, building permits, final plat recording, and site plan approval to ensure the timely completion of public infrastructure improvements; 
4.  Any modifications to this chapter necessary to complete the installation of public improvements and minimize the risk of default. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.502. - Guarantee of Improvements, Installation Required. 
Before approving any subdivision phase or land development plat for recording, the Development Process Committee shall require that the City be assured by means of proper financial security that the improvements required by this chapter will be installed in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of this chapter. 
Surety required by this chapter shall stand as security for compliance with all City ordinances, other laws, covenants, stipulations, conditions and resolutions applicable to the subdivision or land development for which it is filed. 
In any case, no construction of buildings or sale of any individual lot or condominium unit within a subdivision or land development shall take place unless: 
1.  There is on file, with the City, current duly executed and approved surety; or 
2.  All rough grading is complete and all required public improvements, utilities, streets, drainage facilities, sewers and any street lights have been completed and accepted by the Development Process Committee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.503. - Improvements to be Provided by the Applicant. 
The applicant for a subdivision shall have the primary responsibility to ensure installation of all improvements required by this chapter, unless the Development Process Committee specifically approves certain improvements being made the responsibility of future purchasers of individual lots. 
The Development Process Committee shall make such inspections of the required improvements at such intervals as may be reasonably necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. The reasonable cost of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivision or land developer. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.504. - Forms of Surety. 
Surety established for the completion of required public improvements (performance surety) and maintenance of completed public improvements shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Except for roadway infrastructure, including the final topping of asphalt, the surety shall be secured by any of the following: 
a.  A bond which shall be subject to approval and acceptance by the Director of Community Development on forms approved by the City Attorney; or 
b.  An escrow account designated and maintained by the City; or 
2.  All roadway infrastructure improvements, including the final topping of asphalt, shall only be guaranteed with funds provided to an escrow account, designated and maintained by the City. 
3.  Such approved surety shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of any improvements which may be required within the date fixed in the development schedule for the completion of such improvements. It is the responsibility of the developer to ensure that such surety remains in effect during the entire time period of construction of improvements. The Development Process Committee may withhold or suspend the issuance of permits if such surety lapses. 
4.  Acceptable bonds shall be rated by standards set forth by Mayor and City Council from time to time and posted with an approved institution or entity authorized to conduct such business within the state of Georgia. 
At any point, the Development Process Committee, the Planning Commission, or City Council, may require that evidence be provided that such institution or entity has adequate and sufficiently secure assets to cover the surety. 
5.  Designated City officials shall be the authorized signatory on any account in which the escrow funds are held. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.505. - Completion of Unapproved Improvements. 
The developer shall satisfactorily complete any required improvements that the City determines are not satisfactory or complete. Upon completion, the applicant may request approval in conformance with the procedures specified herein. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.506. - Amount of Surety. 
The amount of the surety to be posted for the completion of the required improvements shall be equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of completion at the time the improvements would otherwise be installed. 
The cost estimate of the improvements shall be established by engineer's estimate, subject to review and approval by the Director of Public Works and Director of Community Development. 
Inflation. If the developer posting the surety requires more than one (1) year from the date of posting the surety to complete the required improvements, the amount of the surety may be increased by a maximum of an additional ten (10) percent for each one (1) year period beyond the first anniversary date from the posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one (1) year period by using the above procedure. 
Inspection Fees. The amount of surety may also be required to include five (5) percent of the estimated cost of completion of the work to guarantee payment of inspection fees and related engineering costs. 
Multi-Year or Multi-Stage Development. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Development Process Committee, and/or the City Council may authorize submission of final plans by phases/stages of development subject to such requirements or improvement guarantees concerning future improvements as it finds necessary for the proper functioning of each phase and for the eventual development as a whole. Such phasing may also be approved through an agreement and negotiations with the Development Process Committee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.507. - Time Limits. 
All performance sureties submitted according to this chapter shall include at least one (1) of the following: 
1.  Surety documents that lack an expiration date stating that the funds shall be released only upon approval by the City. 
2.  Surety documents that do contain an expiration date include a clause which states that the surety shall automatically renew and funds shall not be released until approval by the City. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.508. - Notice by Developer of Work on Improvements. 
1.  The developer or his/her representative shall provide a minimum of three (3) day notice to the City prior to beginning each major phase of construction, in order to allow the scheduling of inspections. 
2.  When an improvement has been completed, the developer shall notify the City and request release of related surety in writing by certified mail. The developer shall send a copy of the letter to the City Manager and the Director of Community Development at the same time. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.509. - Certificates of Occupancy and Completion of Improvements. 
A final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued and a structure shall not be occupied unless all principal buildings have been inspected and approved by the building official. No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the structure is completed as approved with service by all required utilities and with all access on to a street completed to required standards. 
In addition, all external projects related to a development must be completed before the final plat is recorded or if phased, the last final plat. This includes, but is not limited to roadway connections, trails, traffic signals, etc. A timeline for the completion of these external projects shall be based on the size of the project and set by the Development Process Committee, and/or the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.510. - Schedule of Improvements, Release of Surety. 
In a residential subdivision, once eighty-five (85) percent of the fee simple units fronting a street are constructed or once the traffic count on any roadway proposed as a public improvement exceeds five hundred (500) vehicles per day, all incomplete infrastructure improvements shall be installed, including but not limited to asphalt topping, sidewalks, stormwater infrastructure, landscaping, and lighting. 
Upon completion of improvements, the Public Works Department will inspect and verify the satisfactory completion of each improvement in compliance with approved plans and the Land Development Ordinance. Upon approval by the Public Works Department of the satisfactory completion of the improvement, the applicant will be notified and the 12-month maintenance period will begin, in accordance with Section 3.511. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.511. - Maintenance. 
A maintenance surety in compliance with Section 3.504 at a minimum amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or any amount equal to at least ten (10) percent of the actual construction improvement total cost, whichever is greater, shall be posted with the City by all subdividers or developers where street or other improvements are made and offered to the City for acceptance and maintenance as detailed in this chapter. 
Twenty-five (25) percent of the actual construction improvement total cost or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is greater, shall be posted with the City by all subdividers or developers where street or other improvements are made requiring bridges, box culverts, or pipes with diameters equal to or exceeding forty-eight (48) inches, and offered to the City for acceptance and maintenance. 
Once notified by the Public Works Department of satisfactory completion, the improvements will enter a twelve (12) month maintenance period and the surety will remain posted. 
Should a subdivider or developer elect to complete and install all public infrastructure improvements and not post a performance surety, a maintenance surety shall be established prior to recording a final plat at a minimum amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or any amount equal to at least ten (10) percent of the actual construction improvement total cost, twenty-five (25) percent of the actual construction improvement total cost or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is greater, shall be posted with the City by all subdividers or developers where street or other improvements are made requiring bridges, box culverts, or pipes with diameters equal to or exceeding forty-eight (48) inches. The maintenance surety shall guarantee all improvements against defects in design, material and workmanship and further guarantee that all such improvements shall be maintained in first class condition for the required period and faithful performance by the subdivider or other person of all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.512. - Maintenance Term and Procedures. 
The subdivider or developer shall maintain all improvements in the subdivision to be dedicated to the City for a minimum of twelve (12) months from the date of written notification by the City commencing the twelve (12) month maintenance period of such improvements and inspection and approval by the Public Works Department of the method of installation. No dedication of improvements shall be accepted by the City until the expiration of twelve (12) months from such date and inspection and determination by the Public Works Department at the expiration of such time that all the improvements are in first class condition and meet all specifications and requirements under this chapter and Land Development Ordinance. 
At the end of the maintenance period, the Public Works Department may inspect the development, and shall inspect at the written request, submitted at the end of the tenth month of the maintenance period or thereafter prior to expiration of the maintenance period, by the subdivider or developer. If the improvements to be dedicated are free from defects and comply with City specifications and requirements under this chapter, dedication of the improvements shall be accepted by the City. The subdivider or developer shall be notified in writing of the acceptance and any surety shall be released. 
If upon inspection the Public Works Department determines that work or repairs are needed in order for the improvements to meet City specifications or requirements, the subdivider or developer shall be notified in writing by the department of the deficiencies, failure to comply or violations. Thereafter, the subdivider shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of such notification to correct such deficiencies, noncompliance or violations. If the deficiencies, noncompliance or violations are not corrected within such time, then the surety shall be forfeited and called upon up to the cost of the repairs or the total amount of the surety. Should the amount of the surety be inadequate to pay for the cost of correcting the deficiencies, noncompliance or violations, then the subdivider shall pay any and all costs beyond bond coverage. 
The subdivider shall pay to the City for each inspection, subsequent to the initial inspection provided under this section, a reinspection fee in an amount set from time to time by resolution of the City Council to defray the cost of reinspection. A copy of the schedule of reinspection fees shall be maintained by the Community Development Department. 
If a period of eighteen (18) months elapses from the commencement of the maintenance period for any subdivision and defects, noncompliance or violations still exist to the extent that the subdivision has not been accepted by the City, the Community Development Department, is authorized to withhold the issuance of any and all permits or to refuse inspection to any subdivider or person on the project in dispute or any other project in which the subdivider or person may have a financial interest, or both, who violates or fails to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.513. - Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements. 
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final site plan or final plat, or in the event of the bankruptcy of the owner or developer, the City is hereby granted the power to elect to enforce any surety posted under this chapter by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. This may include taking all actions necessary to obtain money under said surety, including, but not limited to calling bonds, seizure of escrow funds, revocation of building permits and prosecution under this chapter. 
Rate of Construction. Failure of a developer to construct streets and other public improvements reasonably at the same time or prior to the construction of the buildings served by those streets or public improvements, and at the same rate in time at which buildings are completed, shall be a violation of this Ordinance and a cause for default of the surety. 
All required public infrastructure improvements shall be completed within two (2) years from the record date of the final plat. The City Council reserves the authority to grant an extension, upon written request by the applicant. At the conclusion of the two (2) year period and any extensions granted by City Council, should public improvements remain incomplete in accordance with the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance, the applicant is in default and all remedies within this section may be exercised. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.514. - Completion by the City. 
If the proceeds of such security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the City may at its option install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the money necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.515. - Proceeds for Installation of Improvements. 
The proceeds from use of the security and/or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such security and closely related administrative expenses. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VI. - PLAT TYPES 

3.600. - Plat Approval for Minor Subdivisions. 
Minor subdivisions of land, regardless of zoning district, are classified as divisions of and containing six (6) or less lots fronting on an existing road; not involving any proposed public infrastructure improvements, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter. The following procedures are required to secure subdivision approval of minor subdivisions: 
1.  Submit a plat in compliance with the Land Development Ordinance and provisions of this chapter accompanied by a legal description. 
2.  Submit applicable review fees. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.601. - Plat Approval Procedure for Major Subdivision. 
Major subdivisions of land are classified as all divisions of land not classified in Section 3.600. Such divisions shall include but not be limited to subdivisions of seven (7) or more lots or subdivisions of any size requiring any new or improved road. The subdivider shall follow the procedure described below in order to secure major subdivision plat approval: 
1.  Pre-application conference on the subdivision with the City staff, generally including a sketch plat, and discussion of the proposed area(s) to be subdivided. 
2.  Submit the necessary information to the appropriate departments, authorities or agencies for their review and preliminary approval. 
3.  Submittal of a preliminary plat prepared in accordance with this chapter for Development Process Committee approval. 
4.  Securing the approval of the required public improvements or an acceptable surety. 
5.  Submission of a final plat prepared in accordance with this chapter for Development Process Committee approval. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.602. - Official Submission Date. 
The subdivider shall submit the major subdivision plat to the Community Development Department a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the meeting of the Development Process Committee at which the subdivider desires Development Process Committee action. This time is necessary for an administrative review of a plat. The subdivider is encouraged to submit his plat as early as possible so that if during the review process a deficiency is found the subdivider may be notified and can correct the deficiency before the Development Process Committee meeting. 
The Development Process Committee shall review each plat submitted to it. The Development Process Committee shall, within thirty-one (31) days after submission of the plat by the developer conditionally approve, or disapprove the plat by a vote. The failure of the Development Process Committee to act upon a plat within the prescribed time shall be deemed a denial of the plat. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VII. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

3.700. - Application Submission Procedure. 
The purpose of a sketch plat (see illustration number 1) and the pre-application conference with the Community Development Department is to permit the subdivider to discuss the concept and proposed design. The Community Development Department at the time can point out any factors, which may have an impact on the proposed development and to advise the subdivider of various possibilities before substantial amounts of time and money have been invested in a very detailed proposal, which may contain elements contrary to this Land Development Ordinance. 
The subdivider shall file with the Development Process Committee a preliminary plat. The failure of the subdivider to satisfy the requirements of this section with full and correct information shall be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with Section 3.702 and: 
1.  Be presented to the staff of the Development Process Committee; 
2.  Be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) copies of the preliminary plat and supporting documentation; and 
3.  In the event that the subdivider plans to secure approval of his subdivision layout by the Federal Housing Administration, it is suggested that such approval be secured prior to the submission of a preliminary plat to the Development Process Committee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.701. - Preliminary Plat Review Procedure. 
The subdivider is encouraged to have a pre-application conference with the Community Development Department to understand which departments will need to review and approve various elements of the preliminary plat. The Community Development Department will coordinate the review of the plat along with making their own review. 
After the preliminary approval comments from the various departments and agencies have been received by the Community Development Department, they shall notify the subdivider not less than five (5) days before the meeting of the time and place where the Development Process Committee shall review the plat and take action thereon. The Development Process Committee may approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval of the plats submitted. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.702. - Specifications for Preliminary Plat. 
The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor, landscape architect or civil engineer. Depending on the magnitude of the proposed development, it may be necessary to show the required information on more than one (1) sheet. The plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one hundred (100) feet to an inch and include where applicable: 
1.  Proposed subdivision and street names; 
2.  Name and address of subdivider; 
3.  Preliminary plat certificates, Section 3.600; 
4.  Graphic scale, north point, date, total acres being subdivided and zoning district; 
5.  A location map including all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and all land immediately adjacent, extending three hundred (300) feet therefrom, or of that directly opposite thereto, extending three hundred (300) feet from the street frontage of such opposite land. The lot pattern of surrounding development shall be shown within that area located within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed development; 
6.  The location and dimensions of all exterior boundaries lines, existing rights-of-way, easements, streams, drainage structure, buildings, lakes, etc.; 
7.  Topography by contours: 
a.  For land that slopes less than approximately two (2) percent show spot elevations at all breaks in grade along all drainage channels or swales and at selected points not more than one hundred (100) feet apart in all directions; 
b.  For land that slopes more than approximately two (2) percent: 
i.  If the ground slope is regular show contours with an interval of not more than five (5) feet, or 
ii.  If the ground slope is irregular show contours with an interval of not more than two (2) feet, and 
c.  Elevations shall be tied to a bench mark which is approved by the City; and 
8.  The proposed layout and dimensions of lots, street, recreation areas, easements (whether public or private); and 
9.  The calculations used in determining the drainage area and size of each drainage tile shall be submitted as an attachment to the plat. 
10.  Labeling of utilities and all public infrastructure for dedication to the City. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A) 
ARTICLE VIII. - SITE PLAN 

3.800. - Pre-Application Procedure. 
A pre-application meeting will be required to be held between the applicant and the Community Development Department prior to the submission of any land development plans, including but not limited to preliminary plats and site plans. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.801. - Application Submission Procedure. 
The applicant shall file with the Community Development Department site plans in accordance with the standards within this chapter and set forth by the Community Development Department. Fees required for submission and resubmission are subject to the most current fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.802. - Site Plan Review Procedure. 
The failure of the developer to satisfy the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the Development Process Committee with full and correct information shall be cause for disapproval or refusal to review the site plans. 
The Development Process Committee shall review the site plan and issue a determination of approval or denial within thirty (30) business days of submittal. If the site plans are denied, the Development Process Committee shall provide a list of comments to be addressed by the applicant upon resubmission of the site plans. The applicant must respond to each comment and specify on which page of the site plans the changes appear. 
The failure of the City to act on any completed submission of site plans within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the plans shall be deemed a denial of said site plans. 
The applicant may resubmit a revised site plan in the event that the original document is denied by the Development Process Committee. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
After the site plans have been approved, the applicant shall provide approved hard copies to the Community Development Department upon request. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.803. - Specifications for Site Plans. 
Unless otherwise instructed by the Community Development Department, six (6) complete sets of site plans shall be submitted for review, accompanied by a complete electronic copy on CD or USB drive. Complete sets means all required sheets, accompanied by other documents including but not limited to hydrological studies, traffic studies, etc., in compliance with this chapter and the Land Development Ordinance. Each resubmittal shall comply with the same requirements. Partial, incomplete or unassembled submittals shall be rejected. 
Below is a list of the specification requirements that need to be included within every site plan. This checklist should be included in ALL construction plans that will be submitted to the City. 
CHECKLIST FOR CONSTRUCTION PLANS: 
DATE: 
PROJECT NAME: 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (brief): 
LOCATION: 
DEVELOPER: 
ENGINEER: ______ PHONE #: __________ 
Please return this checklist and red lined copy of plans when revised plans are submitted. Checklist marks to be interpreted as follows: 
__________ O.K. _________ Revision Required __________ Not Applicable 
__________ Additional Information Required 
ALL PLANS MUST INCLUDE: 
A. GENERAL 
□ Name of Developer 
□ Owner or Developer's: Name, Address, and Phone Number 
□ Graphic Scale 
□ Scale no less than one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet 
□ North point, identified as magnetic, true or grid 
□ Date 
□ Location sketch and show land lot lines 
□ Acreage to be subdivided 
□ Stamped by Surveyor or Engineer—All drawings 
B. EXISTING CONDITIONS 
□ Topographic map showing contour interval of no more than two (2) feet. Soil Survey required prior to final submittal for Health Department. 
□ Zoning Classification of property to be subdivided and adjoining properties. 
□ Deed record names of adjoining property owners or subdivision. 
□ If re-subdivision, copy of existing plat with proposed re-subdivision superimposed thereon. 
□ Location of: Streams, lakes and swamps. Label with names. 
□ Delineate lakes subject to flooding from past history of flooding or by hydrological calculation: One hundred (100) years. 
□ Location of adjoining property lines. 
□ Location of existing buildings on property to be subdivided. 
□ Location and right-of-way of adjoining streets, roads or railroads, on or adjacent to property: pavement width. 
□ Location of utility lines and/or adjacent property. Specify if lines are in easement or right-of-way. Show transmission towers. 
□ Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts, etc. on or adjacent to property. Grades and inverts of sewers shown. 
□ Acreage of each drainage area affecting property: off-site. 
□ Elevations based on mean sea level: where public water or sewer to be installed. 
□ Source of elevation datum. Show on-site bench mark. 
□ Boundary information: Bearing and distances, property tie-down. 
□ Hydrology study. 
C. PROPOSED CONDITIONS 
1. STREETS: 
□ Detail entrance street with dimensions of the turning radii to be twenty-five (25) foot minimum radius back of curb. 
□ Proposed names or designations. 
□ Acceleration/deceleration lanes at entrance if applicable. 
□ Continuation of existing streets: where possible. 
□ Typical road section for proposed roads. 
□ Sidewalks are required of developments. 
□ No half-streets. 
□ No three (3) street intersections. 
□ Angle between the centerlines at intersections greater than or equal to seventy-five (75) degrees. 
□ Minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet for curved streets at intersections. 
□ Minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet for reverse curves. 
□ Street jogs at intersections offset at least one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
□ Curb and gutter shall be required on all paved streets except residential subdivision of five (5) acres or larger. 
□ Minimum right-of-way: 

 
□ Minimum pavement width: 

 
Or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer and/or the Downtown District Standards 
□ Maximum Grades 

 
□ Minimum Horizontal Curve Radius 

 
□ Minimum Sight Distances 

 
(Note: Sight distance is measured between points two (2) feet above road centerline). 
□ Alley right-of-way twenty (20) feet minimum. 
□ Maximum two-to-one (2:1) slope indicates on road cross section. 
□ Curb and gutter indicated. 
□ Pavement: Plant mix, triple surface treatment or concrete. 
□ Profile of proposed street showing existing and finished grades. 
□ Minimum ten (10) foot shoulder for utility installation. 
□ Street grades and elevation check. 
□ Adequate stationing information shown: plan and profile. 
□ Street lighting. 
2. LOT LAYOUT: 
□ Scaled lot dimensions. 
□ Building setback line, or build to line in downtown. 
□ No lots fronting major U.S. highways. 
□ No lots divided by corporate boundary lines. 
□ No double frontage lots. 
□ Lot lines at ninety (90) to street or radial. 
□ Corner lots large enough to conform to minimum building setback on both streets. 
□ All lots front or abut public street, unless the street stays private. 
□ Minimum lot width. 
□ Minimum lot areas. 
□ Block Lengths: one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet maximum, four hundred (400) feet minimum. 
□ Minimum block width sufficient for two (2) tiers of lots. 
3. STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: 
□ Detail or reference DOT structures. 
□ Drainage area and flow indicated to all inlets and cross drains. 
□ Design flood frequency and method of calculations of runoff indicated. 
□ Inlet and outlet elevations: pipe slope, profiles required. 
□ Station: size and length of pipe. 
□ Minimum pipe cover. 
□ Concrete headwalls or flare sections on smaller diameter pipe on inlet and outlet. 
□ Minimum design floods. 
□ Catch basins located at low points of streets. 
□ Erosion and sediment control measures shown. 
□ On-site stormwater detention design. 
□ Drainage easement along watercourses and for pipes and ditches out of road right-of-way. Recommended drainage easements on all lot lines. 
□ Flood plain reference. 
4. WATER DISTRIBUTION: (NOTE: Moratorium on 1120 and above) 
□ Pipe size. 
□ Material of construction. 
□ Minimum cover: forty-two (42) inches. 
□ No lot farther than five hundred (500) feet: measured in the street: from a fire hydrant: residential. 
□ Fire hydrant and water service shall be installed within three hundred (300) feet of proposed structures. 
□ Meters shown for each lot. 
□ Utility easement: minimum twelve (12) feet wide: where waterline located out of road right-of-way. 
□ Tie-ins with existing lines indicated. 
□ Thrust restraint indicated. 
□ Note: Compaction equipment to be used on all pipes and services under pavement. 
□ Tape and wire all plastic pipes and services. 
□ Provide gate valve and minimum of thirty-six (36) feet of pipe with removable plug at end of line in phased development. 
□ Ductile iron pipe over all X-drains, stream crossings and road crossings. 
5. SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: 
□ Minimum diameter of eight (8) inches. 
□ Minimum cover: four (4) inches under roadways and three (3) feet off street. 
□ Minimum slope in feet for eight (8) main is 0.40%. 
□ Drop manholes required if greater than one (1) foot differential in invert and incoming pipe. 
□ Manhole spacing normally at three hundred fifty (350) feet, at grade changes, at alignment changes and at all intersections. 
D. URBAN DESIGN PLAN: 
□ Building elevations which shall be appropriately scaled and identify materials and color schemes. 
□ Lighting plan showing a photometric survey, which conforms to Ch. 15 or Ch. 19 in the LDO, and cut sheets showing proposed fixtures and poles which must be compliant with Ch. 15 and Ch. 19 of the LDO. 
□ Tree preservation plan including all requirements from Ch. XII of the City of Woodstock's Land Development Ordinance and be signed/stamped by a registered landscape architect. 
E. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS: 
□ Any and all other requirements as determined by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IX. - FINAL PLAT 

3.900. - Prerequisites to the Submission of a Final Plat. 
Before a final plat is submitted to the Community Development Department or review one (1) of four (4) criteria must have been met. These criteria are: 
1.  No public improvements are necessary on the part of the subdivider; 
2.  The proposed public improvements which were approved in the preliminary plat have been completed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
3.  A surety has been posted with the Community Development Department; 
4.  All necessary improvements for access, utilities and storm water have been completed for the area defined by the final plat if they are to be maintained in part or total as private. All underground power and gas service (if used) shall be run for a minimum of twenty (20) lots, or the entire phase, whichever is less, prior to plat sign-off by the Development Process Committee. Power and gas are not required to be "active" at time of final plat, but line must be stubbed for each unit/building. Phone and cable are not required to be installed as prerequisite to final plat sign-off. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.901. - Public Road Dedication. 
In all major subdivisions as defined in this chapter the City shall require that the following items be completed for any and all road dedications to the City: 
1.  All plats shall clearly state that the right-of-way(s) as referenced on the plat are dedicated to the City. 
2.  Performance sureties shall be posted according to this chapter. 
3.  The subdivider, at its sole cost and expense, must provide the City with a road dedication deed as well as a current attorney's certificate of title or current title policy for all roads to be dedicated. Said certificate or title policy shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney, and shall show that the property which is the subject of the road dedication deed is free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. 
4.  Upon submittal of these items to the City and approval of the plat, deed(s) and requisite title documents, the Development Process Committee shall review the dedication documents, certify that the requisite dedication process has been satisfied and authorize recording of the plat and applicable dedication deed(s). 
5.  Upon acceptance by the Development Process Committee and subsequent recording of the plat and road dedication deed, the roads as referenced on the plat vest with the City, and the City will be deemed to have accepted the road dedication deed without further action by the Mayor and Council. 
6.  Notwithstanding the foregoing recording of the plat and requisite road dedication deed, the subdivider shall remain responsible for maintenance of all roads until the final road acceptance process has been satisfied according to Section 3.405. 
7.  No dedication of a road may be withdrawn unless the City Council refuses to accept the road for future maintenance after being requested to do so as set forth in Section 3.405. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.902. - Application Procedures, Requirements. 
The subdivider shall file with the Community Development Department a final plat. The failure of the subdivider to satisfy the requirements of this section with full and correct information shall be cause for disapproval of a final plat. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with this article and: 
1.  Be presented to the staff of the Development Process Committee within two (2) years from the date of the preliminary plat was approved, and meet all of the requirements outlined in this article. 
2.  Be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) complete sets of the final plat and all supporting documentation required in this article. 
3.  Be submitted a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the meeting of the Development Process Committee at which the subdivider desires Development Process Committee action. 
4.  All private and public infrastructure must be installed as outlined in Article V, or surety posted. The subdivider must contact the Public Works Department for an inspection of the site to evaluate the completion of construction. Subdividers must complete all non-surety bound construction prior to the approval of a final plat. 
5.  All planned open space and common areas with the scope of the final plat area must be completed prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.903. - Specification for Final Plats, Combination Plats, and Condominium Plats. 
This section governs all specifications of final plats for property subdivision, including combination plats for assemblages of property, and condominium plats. 
The final plat shall be prepared by a surveyor, landscape architect or civil engineer who is licensed to practice in Georgia, affixing the respective seal, signed and dated. The plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one hundred (100) feet to an inch and shall include: 
1.  Name of subdivision and street names; 
2.  Name, address and license number of surveyor; 
3.  Be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible material to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet on a sheet or sheets not exceeding seventeen (17) by twenty (20) inches; 
4.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings and indication whether bearing shown are calculated from angles turned or taken from compass readings; 
5.  Location of tract (land district and land lot) giving total acreage; 
6.  Location sketch; 
7.  Index map where more than one (1) sheet is required to present plat; 
8.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street intersections or bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments (not less than three (3)) which shall be accurately described on the plat; 
9.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one (1) to five thousand (5,000). The error of closure shall be stated on the plat; 
10.  City, county or land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision; 
11.  Street center lines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data, width of roadway, right-of-way width, and easement width and whether public or private; 
12.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners; 
13.  Building setback lines, any zoning buffers, with dimensions, or note indicating none required, as applicable; 
14.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; 
15.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements; including slope easements, and public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserve by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners; 
16.  Accurate location, material description of monuments and markers; 
17.  Places for final plat certificates and statements as specified in Article VI (a separate plat cover sheet for all but the Development Process Committee certificate is recommended); 
18.  Declarations of covenants and restrictions applicable to the subdivision; and 
19.  A copy of the deeds for dedication of public areas to the appropriate public agency(s), if applicable; 
20.  Zoning information including the current zoning district and all applicable zoning conditions, variances, and/or conditional use permits. The adopted ordinance, or final letter in the case of variances, shall be provided on the final plat; 
21.  Certificates for the final plat shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Owner's acknowledgment: 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the City of Woodstock for the use of the public forever, all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places hereon shown for the purpose and consideration herein expressed. 

 
b.  Engineer's certificate: 
It is hereby certified that all engineering requirements of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance have been fully complied with. 

 
c.  Surveyor's certificate: 
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is a true and correct survey made on the ground under my supervision, that the monuments have been placed as shown hereon, and is to the accuracy and specifications required by the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance. 

 
d.  Final Plat approval by the City of Woodstock Development Process Committee: 
This plat having been submitted to the City of Woodstock Development Process Committee and having been found to comply with the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance, including but not limited to Article III Land Development Standards, along with any applicable approved zoning conditions or variances, now therefore is approved for recording in the office of the clerk of superior court of Cherokee County, Georgia. This final plat approval does not constitute the final acceptance by the City of Woodstock of the improvements proposed to be dedicated to the City. 

 
e.  Certificate of approval of water system: 
I hereby certify that the water system outlined on the final subdivision plat entitled, "___" has been installed in accordance with the requirements of the City of Woodstock, or surety has been filed to guarantee said installation. 

 
f.  Certificate of approval of sewer system: 
I hereby certify that the sewer system outlined on the final subdivision plat entitled, "___" has been installed in accordance with the requirements of the City of Woodstock, or surety has been filed to guarantee said installation. 

 
g.  I hereby certify: 
(1)  That all designated streets and drainage structures on this final plat have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the specifications of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance, or 
(2)  That surety has been filed to guarantee said installation. 

 
h.  Certification of county health officers (only on plats to be served by septic tanks): 
This plat has been approved for individual septic tank systems, and individual septic tank permits will be issued on receipt of individual plat plans, showing the septic tank system in a suitable place on the lot. (Not binding after three (3) years.) 
Dated this _______________ day of ________/________/________, 19_________. 

 
i.  Final plat revisions: 
Revisions to the recorded final plat shall be approved by the Chairperson of the Development Process Committee. All changes shall be noted on the recorded plat with a statement of what revisions were made. 
Sample: "This plat supersedes the plat recorded in Plat Book _________, page ________. The revisions made are: ____ 

 
Revision of an approved plat shall be submitted to the subdivision administrator with a fee in the amount established by the board of commissioners per plat for approval and recording. 
22.  In addition to the above requirements, condominium plats shall also include: 
a.  Limits of ownership; 
b.  Finished floor elevation of each floor in each building; 
c.  Copies of floor plans and elevations with the finished floor elevation labeled to match plat and site plan (as applicable). 
d.  Must contain a verified statement, sealed by a Georgia registered architect or professional engineer, certifying that such plat fully and accurately depicts the layout, location, ceiling and floor elevations, unit numbers and dimensions of the units, as built. 
23.  Three (3) sets of as-builts (full-size sheets), including CAD files provided electronically. 
24.  Any and all other requirements as determined by the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department may waive some of the above requirements wherein public infrastructure is not included as part of the subdivision of property. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.904. - Final Plat Approval. 
Once the final plat review is complete, having addressed all comments issued by the Development Process Committee departments, the applicant shall submit three (3) final sets for execution. Thereafter, the plat will be placed on the agenda of the Development Process Committee for consideration. Upon approval of the Development Process Committee, the Chairperson of the Development Process Committee and Public Works Director will affix respective signatures on the three (3) final plat sets, enabling recording of the final plat with the Cherokee County Clerk of Courts. 
Upon recording the final plat, the applicant shall submit no fewer than thirteen (13) copies of the recorded final plat to the Community Development Department, accompanied by electronic copy on CD or USB drive. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.905. - Vacating of Plats. 
Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premise, at any time before the sale of any lot described therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the plat or part of the plat to be vacated. The same procedure, which is followed for the approval of a minor subdivision, shall be followed for the vacation of the plat. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged, or approved, and duly recorded or filed; the instrument shall operate to void the recorded plat and divest all public rights in the public ways and public grounds and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. When any lot or lots have been sold the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided only if all the owners of lots in such platted area join in the execution of such writing with approval from the City Council required. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.906. - Dedication and Acceptance. 
Once a plat is recorded, any improvements dedicated to the City may not be withdrawn except in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. Upon final acceptance at the end of the maintenance period, all dedicated improvements shall be deemed accepted by the City without further action. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter IV - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A), repealed the former Ch. IV, §§ 4.100—4.1000, and enacted a new Ch. IV as set out herein. The former Ch. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 7-12-2010(2). 

4.100. - Title. 
This Ordinance will be known as "City of Woodstock, Georgia, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.200. - Definitions. 
All defined terms throughout this chapter are capitalized, and the definitions are contained in Chapter II of this Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.300. - Exemptions. 
This Ordinance shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work fences, and other related activities which result in soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in Section 4.400 of this Ordinance and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provision of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout Streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such Buffer zone, no Land-Disturbing Activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal Stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the Buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout Stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are Streams into which no other Streams flow except for springs, the Buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a small Buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of Section 4.400 of this Ordinance and the Buffer zones provided by this Section shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority. 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to chickens, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer as established in Section 4.400, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (o) and (p) of this Ordinance, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of an acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any State waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent Streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1 through 7, 9 or 10 of this Section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any County or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or State Tollway Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the State General Permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the State General Permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violation shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the State General Permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.400. - Minimum Requirements for Erosion and Sedimentation Control Using Best Management Practices. 
1.  Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this Ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Sections 4.400.2 and 4.400.3 of this Ordinance. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities, and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES General Permit. Construction site operators must control waste, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
2.  Minimum Requirements/BMPs. 
a.  Best management practices as set forth in Section 4.400, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Ordinance shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of Best Management Practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (b) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge or stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
b.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where Best Management Practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any State General Permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
c.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any State General Permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
d.  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
e.  The Local Issuing Authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in Section 4.400, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (o) and (p), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
3.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this Chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the State general permit; and Best Management Practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
a.  Stripping of vegetation, regarding, and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
b.  Cut-fill operation must be kept to a minimum; 
c.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
d.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented; 
e.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
f.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
g.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
h.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
i.  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of Continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
j.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
k.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
l.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
m.  Grading equipment must cross flowing Streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
n.  Land-Disturbing Activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Section 4.400.2b of this Ordinance. 
o.  Except as provided in paragraph (p) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal Stream flow or wave action, or from the normal pool surface elevation for ponds and lakes, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream that (1) under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; (2) has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; (3) for which ground water is not a source of water; and (4) for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted, as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet, established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12 of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
1.  No Land-Disturbing Activities shall be conducted within a Buffer and a Buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all Land-Disturbing Activities on the construction site are completed. Once the Final Stabilization of the site is achieved, a Buffer may be handed thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the Stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may hand thin or trim vegetation in a Buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the Stream bed; and 
2.  The Buffer shall not apply to the following Land-Disturbing Activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the Stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the Buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented; (a) Stream crossings for water lines; or (b) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
p.  There is established a fifty-foot Buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal Stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any State Waters classified as "trout Streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and Streams classified as trout Streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot Buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the Buffer requirement for any adjacent trout Streams. The Director may grant a variance from such Buffer to allow Land-Disturbing Activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such Buffer: 
1.  No Land-Disturbing Activities shall be conducted within a Buffer and a Buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all Land-Disturbing Activities on the construction site are completed. Once the Final Stabilization of the site is achieved, a Buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the Stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a Buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the Stream bed; and 
2.  The Buffer shall not apply to the following Land-Disturbing Activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, with twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the Stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the Buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (a) Stream crossings for water lines; or (b) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
4.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Sections 4.400.2 and 4.400.3. of this Ordinance. 
5.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 003-2017, §§ 3, 4, 7-10-17) 
4.500. - Application/Permit Process. 
1.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this Ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
2.  Application Requirements. 
a.  No person shall conduct any Land Disturbing Activity disturbing one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of an acre or greater within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Woodstock, Georgia without first obtaining a Permit with the City of Woodstock, Georgia to perform such activity and providing a copy of the NOI submitted to EPD, if applicable, to the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
b.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Woodstock, Georgia and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in this Chapter. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provision of Section 4.400, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Ordinance. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four (4) copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
c.  A fee shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. The fee shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the fee schedule for the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
d.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the State General Permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the Permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a Local Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction. 
e.  Immediately upon the receipt of an application and plan for a Permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variance required by Section 4.400, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (o) and (p) and bonding, if required as per Section 4.500, paragraph 2, subparagraph (g), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
f.  If a permit applicant has two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this Ordinance Section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date filing of the application under consideration, the Local Issuing Authority may deny the permit application. 
g.  A bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable Letter of Credit, of any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit is required, unless a variance has been granted by the City of Woodstock's Environmental Manager and is submitted at the time of issuance of the Land Disturbance Permit. If applicant does not comply with this Ordinance or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an Ordinance or statute specifically providing for a hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
3.  Plan Requirements. 
a.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 4.400, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Ordinance. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological, and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local Ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
b.  Data required for Site Plan shall include all the information required form the appropriate Erosion. Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted (see documents section of www.gaswcc.org ). 
4.  Permits. 
a.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
b.  No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the District and the Local Issuing Authority has been affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this Ordinance, any variance required by Section 4.400, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (o) and (p); are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section 4.500, paragraph 2, subparagraph (g); are met and all regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
c.  Any land-disturbing activities by a Local Issuing Authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the Division shall enforce such requirements upon the Local Issuing Authority. 
d.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
e.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this Ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
f.  The Local Issuing Authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 003-2017, §§ 5, 6, 7-10-17) 
4.600. - Inspection and Enforcement. 
1.  The City of Woodstock will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the State General Permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that the person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this Ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Ordinance. 
2.  The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
3.  The City of Woodstock shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in the Ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
4.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of Issuing Authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representation while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
5.  The Districts or the Commission or both shall periodically review the actions of Counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The District of the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any County or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the County's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The Districts or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
6.  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county of municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.700. - Penalties and Incentives. 
1.  Failure to Obtain a Permit for Land-Disturbing Activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this Ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person may be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Issuing Authority. 
2.  Stop-Work Orders. 
a.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this Ordinance, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violations is not corrected within five (5) days the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
b.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
c.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
d.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a Stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his/her designee, have been or are being discharged into State waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his/her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
3.  Bond Forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in Land-Disturbing Activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one (1) under the provision of Section 4.500, paragraph 2, subparagraph (g). The Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it to compliance. 
4.  Monetary Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this Ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this Ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this Ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of County Ordinances, any Magistrate Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this Ordinance under County Ordinances approved under this Ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation, or failure, or refusal to comply continues shall be separate violation. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.800. - Education and Certification. 
1.  Persons involved in Land Development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any Land-Disturbing Activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, as per O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(a)(1), dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission in consultation with the Division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.  For each site on which Land-Disturbing Activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the State General Permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of Erosion and Sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever Land-Disturbing Activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any Land-Disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of Development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the State General Permit. 
3.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a State General Permit but otherwise requiring Certified Personnel on site may contract with Certified Personnel to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
4.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of Land-Disturbing Activities for a site has met the certification requirements of Paragraph (1) of Subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in Land-Disturbing Activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in Paragraph (4) of Subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.900. - Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review. 
1.  Administrative Remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification, or grant with condition of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to an appeal as outlined in Chapter 10, Section 10.162 of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order, as it relates to this Chapter, may appeal in writing, as outlined in Chapter 10, Section 10.162, of this Ordinance. 
2.  Judicial Review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Issuing Authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Cherokee County. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 003-2017, § 7, 7-10-17) 
4.1000. - Effectivity, Validity, and Liability. 
1.  Effectivity. This Ordinance shall become effective on the 1st day of July, 2010. 
2.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
3.  Liability. 
a.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this Ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this Ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
b.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
c.  No provision of this Ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter V - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The regulations and standards herein established are made for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. They are designed to promote desirable living conditions; to sustain the stability of neighborhoods; to protect property again blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to prevent overcrowding of land; to secure safety from fires, flooding, and other dangers; and to lessen congestion in the streets. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL INFORMATION 

5.200. - Location, Site, and Design Criteria. 
1.  Application of Article. The provisions of this article shall apply to all mobile home parks throughout the City of Woodstock. Before an applicant initiates any construction or development of a proposed mobile home park, or expansion of an existing mobile home park, said applicant shall first submit a proposed mobile home park plan to the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission pursuant to the requirements of Article IV of this chapter. The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission will subsequently review and recommend approval or disapproval of the proposed mobile home park, as specifically provided in the following sections of this chapter. 
2.  Park Planning, Site Design, and Development Criteria. All mobile home parks shall be planned, designed, and developed to meet or exceed conditions and factors conducive to the creation and maintenance of a healthful and safe residential environment. This should be done in such a manner that the quality of the overall environment is optimized and the amenities, facilities, services, and conveniences for the residents are maximized. To achieve these conditions, the design of the park should also be adaptive to the tract of land and its surroundings, especially with respect to topography, trees and vegetation, visual conditions, adjacent land uses, structures and activities. In border to meet these goals, objectives, and purposes, all mobile home parks shall meet or exceed the criteria contained in this chapter. 
3.  Site Grading and Drainage. Mobile home parks shall be properly graded and drained to provide adequate drainage of each space and the entire park. Any necessary drainage improvements shall be installed according to plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. 
4.  Minimum Mobile Home Space and Yard Requirements. In order to ensure adequate space for privacy, normal and emergency access, natural light, air, and human circulation, and a healthy and safe environment, the following area and yard requirements shall be provided for each mobile home space in a park. 
a.  Minimum of sixty (60) feet in width with a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet per individual mobile home space. 
b.  There shall be a twenty-foot side yard and a twenty-foot clearance between mobile homes, including mobile homes parked end to end. 
c.  No mobile home shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any building or street within the park, or twenty-five (25) feet of any public right-of-way and any boundary line of the park. 
5.  Improvements to Mobile Home Spaces. 
a.  Each mobile home space in a park shall have a permanent concrete pad to support the mobile home. The size of the pad shall be equal in length and width to the size of the mobile home located upon it. 
b.  The chassis of each mobile home shall be affixed securely to the concrete pad, which shall meet minimum requirements of the Georgia State Building Code. 
c.  Each mobile home space shall be clearly delineated on the ground with permanent markers such as steel pipes at the intersection of lot lines. Each space shall be given a lot number and marked accordingly to be visible from the street providing access thereto. 
d.  The base of the mobile home shall be covered with appropriate skirting, in conformity with the exterior material of the unit. 
6.  Parking. Each mobile home space shall be provided with two (2) off-street paved parking spaces. Such spaces shall be provided on or adjacent to each mobile home space. 
7.  Signs. Any sign must conform to the requirements and provisions contained in Chapter VI of this Ordinance. In addition: 
a.  The park may be identified by one (1) sign located at the primary entrance to the park site, not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area for the purpose of denoting the name of the mobile home park. 
b.  One (1) sign, not to exceed one (1) square foot in area, may be permitted for each mobile home. Said sign shall indicate only the name and address (or lot number) of the occupant of the mobile home. 
c.  No sign shall be located so as to impede vehicular visibility at any intersection of streets or the intersection of driveways and streets. 
8.  Streets, Utilities, and Refuse Collection. All mobile home parks shall provide street maintenance, utilities, and refuse collection facilities that shall be used by all mobile homes within the park. The quality, design, and location of all such systems shall be done in such a manner so as to maximize the health and safety of occupants and users, and shall conform to the following: 
a.  Streets and Access. All mobile home parks shall be provided a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park, and shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
1.  All internal mobile home park streets shall be constructed with a base and pavement surface which meets the minimum standards of Woodstock Subdivision Regulations. All streets shall be paved to a minimum uniform width of twenty-four (24) feet from back of curb to back of curb. 
2.  All streets within the mobile home park shall be maintained in a good state of repair by the owner of the park. 
b.  Street Lighting. All interior drive and walkways within the mobile home park shall be lighted at night with electric lamps spaced at intervals of no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet. Such lighting shall meet the minimum requirements of the Georgia State Building Code. 
c.  Electrical Supply. Each mobile home space shall be provided with an electrical outlet supplying a minimum of 120/240 volts AC to one hundred (100) amperes. All outlets and connections shall be grounded and weather-proofed, and installations shall meet the requirements of the Georgia State Electrical Code. 
d.  Water Supply. All mobile home parks shall be required to provide an adequate, safe, and porable supply of water that is easily accessible for maintenance and meets the following minimum requirements. 
a.  All mobile home parks shall connect to an existing public water system that is adjacent to or nearby the mobile home park. 
b.  Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least one (1) water riser located and arranged to permit convenient attachment to the mobile home. Riser pipes shall extend at least four (4) inches above grade and have a minimum inside diameter of three-fourths inches. 
e.  Sewage Disposal and Treatment. All mobile home parks shall be required to connect to an existing approved public sewer system that is adjacent to or nearby the mobile home park. All mobile home spaces shall be provided with at least a three (3) inch diameter sewer riser pipe which shall extend from the sewer connection to at least four (4) inches above the ground in a vertical position. When lots are unoccupied, the risers shall be securely capped. 
9.  General Requirements. 
a.  Service Buildings. Service buildings such as shelters, restrooms, management offices and storage facilities are permitted in each mobile home park, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Such buildings and their parking areas shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the gross land area of the park; 
2.  All service building shall be required to conform to the Georgia State Building Codes. 
b.  Minimum Size of Mobile Homes. No mobile home shall be placed in a mobile home park which has less than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet of floor space or does not contain a built-in bathroom with water closet, lavatory and shower or tub which are in working condition. 
c.  Maintenance of Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Spaces. All mobile homes shall be maintained in a good state of repair and the area shall be kept clean and free from refuse, rubbish, glass bottles, or other unsightly materials. 
Unoccupied mobile home spaces shall be kept clear of debris, and shall not be used as temporary storage or damaged mobile homes, automobiles under repair, appliances, or other similar items. 
d.  Mobile Home Storage. The temporary storage of mobile homes intended for sale or repair shall be confined to mobile home sales lots or warehouses which are separated from the residential areas of the mobile home park. 
10.  Mobile Homes on Individual Lots. 
a.  After the effective date of this Ordinance, any existing mobile home on an individual lot may be continued and maintained. 
b.  No existing mobile home on an individual lot shall be relocated to another site or lot vacated by an existing mobile home. 
11.  Mobile Home Parks. Any mobile home parks existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance within a period of three (3) years. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

5.300. - Enforcement and Penalties. 
1.  Development Permits Required. It shall be unlawful to develop, construct, locate, operate, expand, or enlarge any mobile home park, or mobile home on a tract of land outside of an approved mobile home park without first obtaining a mobile home development permit from the Woodstock Building Inspector's Office. 
2.  Inspection of Mobile Home Parks. 
a.  The Health Officer and/or Building Inspector are hereby authorized and directed to make annual inspections to determine the condition of mobile home parks located within the City of Woodstock. 
b.  The Health Officer and/or Building Inspector shall have the power to enter at reasonable time upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
c.  The Health Officer and/or Building Inspector shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the mobile home park. 
d.  It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the Health Officer and/or Building Inspector free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. 
e.  It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such mobile home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this Ordinance, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provision of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

5.400. - Administration of Ordinance. 
The administration of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission. The provisions of this article are intended as legal guidelines and requirements for the establishment and operation of the administration of this Ordinance. 
The review and decision of the Planning Commission and City Council shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XI of this Ordinance. 
1.  Permits for Mobile Home Parks. In order to obtain a development permit for a mobile home park, the applicant shall first submit an application and plan to the City Staff according to the following procedures: 
a.  Pre-Application Review. Prior to the submittal of a preliminary plan for the development of a mobile home park, the applicant shall meet with the City Staff for a review of the location, slope, and nature of the proposed mobile home park. 
b.  Submission of Preliminary Plan. Prior to issuance of a land-disturbance or construction permit, the developer shall submit a preliminary plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance to the City Planning staff, at least ten (10) business days prior to the regular meeting date of the Planning Commission. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to scale or one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and include the following information: 
□  Name of proposed park: as well as the name and address of owner and developer; 
□  Date prepared, north arrow, land lot lines, angles, bearing and distances, location and dimensions of proposed streets, mobile home lots, easements, buildings, parking, recreation areas, yards, and other open spaces; 
□  The boundary line of the tract to be developed with accurate linear and angular dimensions; 
□  Sketch or city map showing general location of the proposed mobile home park; 
□  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet; 
□  The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipe, and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on that portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed, and any other pertinent characteristics of the land; 
□  Names of adjoining subdivisions or the names of record: as well as all adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land; 
□  Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information required by the County Health Department, the City Engineer, and City Building Inspector to determine the water, sewer, electricity, refuse collection, and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance; 
□  The location, dimensions, and treatment of all required buffer or screening areas; and 
□  Other information required by the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission to insure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.  Approval/Disapproval of Preliminary Plan. The Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days from the date that the completed application is submitted for review, to recommend to the Woodstock City Council approval or disapproval of the preliminary plan for the proposed mobile home park. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within thirty (30) days shall be deemed approval of such plan. 
4.  Submission of Final Plan. Approval of the preliminary plan by the Woodstock City Council shall authorize the developer to proceed with actual construction and development of the proposed mobile home park. Upon completion of all required improvements, and certification by the City Clerk that surety in a sufficient amount to assure completion of all required improvements has been received, the developer shall submit copies of a final plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission. The final plan shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan and shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall follow the procedures in Chapter XI for review and approval of the final plan. 
The final plan shall also include the following: 
a.  Certification by a registered engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the plan; 
b.  Certification by the Cherokee County Health Department that the water and sewerage systems fully meet the requirements of the Health Department; 
c.  Certification by the City Engineer that all streets and storm drainage improvements have been installed, and surety provided therefore, according to the plan; and 
d.  Certification of approval by the Chairman of the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission. 
5.  Approval of Final Plan. Within thirty (30) days after submission of the final plan together with all required supporting data and certifications, the Planning Commission shall review and approve or disapprove the plan. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within thirty (30) days shall be deemed approval of such plan. 
6.  Development Compliance. At least one hundred (100) percent of each phase of all planned spaces, as well as all streets, utilities, and other required improvements necessary to serve them pursuant to these regulations must be completely constructed according to the mobile home park plan approved by the Planning Commission before the fist mobile home location permit will be issued. 
Failure of the developer or applicant to construct this minimum phase within two (2) years after approval by the Planning Commission shall cause such approval to expire. 
ARTICLE V. - FACTORY-BUILT BUILDINGS/MANUFACTURED HOMES 

5.510. - Definitions. 
Component: Any assembly, subassembly or combination of parts for use as a part of a building, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and fire protection systems and other systems affecting health and safety. 
Industrialized Building: Any structure or component thereof, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to or destruction thereof. 
Installation: The assembly of an Industrialized Building on a site, and the process of affixing the Industrial Building, component or system to land, a foundation, footings or an existing building. 
Manufacture: The process of making, fabricating, constructing, forming or assembling a product from raw, unfinished, or semi-finished materials. 
Manufactured Home: Class I means a single-family dwelling unit that is constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and bears insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or one, if constructed prior to applicability of such standards and insignia requirements, was constructed in conformity with the Georgia State Standards in effect on the date of manufacture. 
Class II means a unit meeting the requirements of a Manufactured Home Class I and in addition, bears an insignia of the Southern Standards Building Code Congress International (SSBCCI) of Birmingham, Alabama. 
Modular Home: A factory-manufactured single-family dwelling which is constructed in one (1) or more sections and complies with the definition of "Industrialized Building". 
Site: The entire tract, subdivision or parcel of land on which the Industrialized Building or Manufactured home is installed. 
System: Structural, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or fire safety elements, materials or components used separately or combined for use in a building. 
5.520. - Manufactured Homes: Class I. 
1.  Zoning. No Manufactured Home, Class I, shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in the City of Woodstock, except one zoned for mobile home parks, except that such units may be located for sale upon a site properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity. 
2.  Notification to Purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of this class to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the zoning requirements of paragraph (1) above, and this notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser at the time of any sale that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. 
Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller for a minimum of three (3) years from the date of sale, and shall be produced for inspection at any tie between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays established by the City, through any authorized agent appointed by the Woodstock City Manager upon request by the City for inspection. 
5.530. - Manufactured Homes: Class II. 
1.  Zoning and Permits. No manufactured home of this class shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in the City of Woodstock, except one zoned for mobile home parks, except that such units may be located for sale upon a site properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity, unless the following requirements are met: 
a.  An application shall be filed with the City Planning Department for a permit to allow such installation, use and occupancy for single-family purposes on any site zoned for single-family use. Such application shall be on forms specified by the City and shall include such information as is reasonably necessary for evaluation of the request. Such permit must be obtained prior to transportation of the unit to the site. 
b.  In addition to the information requested on the application form, the following documents shall be filed with the application: 
1.  Complete set of design plans as approved by SSBCCI, which should also include a drawing depicting each elevation of the exterior appearance of the unit. 
2.  Plat of the proposed site prepared by a surveyor or engineer registered in the State of Georgia, showing at a minimum, the exterior boundaries of the site, the proposed location of the unit on the site, and side, front and rear setbacks of the unit as proposed to be located measured from the exterior boundaries of the site: 
3.  A fee in an amount determined by the Mayor and City Council and on file in the Planning Department and with the City Clerk; and 
4.  A certificate from an inspector selected or approved by the City certifying that the unit was manufactured in accordance with the SSBCCI approved plans and the building codes in effect for the City at the time of filing the application for the permit (for example: building, heating, air conditioning, plumbing, electrical and other codes). 
c.  The permit herein required shall be in addition to all other permits or requirements of the Ordinances, rules and regulations of the City. 
d.  No action on a request for permit shall be considered by the Mayor and City Council until: 
1.  A sign is posted on the proposed site for a period of no less than fifteen (15) days stating the request action and the date, time and place for the hearing; and 
2.  A hearing is conducted by the Mayor and City Council. 
e.  No permit shall be issued unless the unit, when completely installed as a single-family dwelling unit, will be compatible with the adjacent and surrounding area, especially in size, exterior appearance, front, rear, and side setbacks, and will have no adverse effect upon the value of adjacent property and the surrounding area and will not otherwise be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the City. 
No unit shall be installed on any site unless and until any permit herein required is granted and unless and until all permits for any on-site work to be performed (site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation or any other on-site work) have been obtained from the City. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the City, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections required for on-site work. Such fees shall not exceed the amount charged for similar inspections and/or permits on conventionally-built structures. 
f.  In addition to obtaining the above permit and prior to occupancy, every such unit which is installed shall be installed on a permanent foundation, which is permanently enclosed and shall have all wheels, axles and hitches removed. 
g.  No unit shall be installed upon any lot or parcel of land which forms a part of a platted subdivision for which a plat has been approved by the City and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Cherokee Superior Court. 
2.  Notification to Purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of this class to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the requirements of zoning or the necessity to obtain a permit as set forth in section 5.530.1. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser prior to closing, which such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller and subject to inspection in the same manner as such statements are required to be retained for Class I units. 
5.540. - Industrialized Buildings. 
1.  Permits Required. No industrialized building shall be installed on any site unless and until all City permits for any on-site work to be performed (site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation or any other on-site work) have been obtained. 
2.  Permit Fees. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the City, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections and/or permits on conventionally-built structures. 
3.  Insignia Requirements. No industrialized building shall be installed or occupied in the City unless it bears an insignia of the Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia indicating Georgia State approval pursuant to the Acts of the General Assembly. 
4.  Zoning. No industrialized building shall be erected on any site in the City, nor used for any purpose, unless the site is properly zoned for mobile home parks and unless all other requirements of zoning (setback requirement, building size, etc.) and other ordinances of the City are met, which are applicable to the zoning classification for the site or for the installation. 
5.  Other Ordinances. This chapter does not eliminate the necessity of complying with any Ordinance, Rule or Regulation of the City which relate to matters addressed, investigated and approved by the State of Georgia through its Department of Community Affairs resulting in the issuance of its insignia. 
6.  [Notification of requirements.] It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of any Industrial Building to notify any potential purchaser of these requirements prior to completion of any sale. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each at the time of completion of a sale, which such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained and open for inspection the same as for a Manufactured Home Class I, above. 
5.550. - Violations. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or loss of business license of any seller. In addition, any manufactured home or industrialized building erected, constructed, parked, occupied, or used in violation of the terms of this chapter shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued, and such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this State, and the industrial building or manufactured home shall be instantly removed from the site. 
In addition, the terms of this chapter may be enforced by the City or proper City authority authorized by the City Manager by injunction or otherwise. This right to injunctive relief is cumulative and is not to be construed as curtailing the right of any person, firm or corporation, resident, property owner, or other enforcement of this Ordinance or of such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the City in pursuance of this Ordinance. 
Chapter VI - SIGN STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 13, 2017, repealed the former Ch. VI, §§ 6.1.1—6.1.5, 6.2.1—6.2.8, 6.3.1—6.3.3, 6.4.1—6.4.15, 6.5.1—6.5.6, 6.7.1—6.7.8, and enacted a new Ch. VI as set out herein. The former Ch. VI pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

6.1.1. - Findings, Purpose and Intent. 
(a)  The City of Woodstock finds that Signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, Signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of Signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of Signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing Sign owners for visibility of their Signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the Sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
(b)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of Signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of Signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the City, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the City's citizens. 
(c)  The purposes of this chapter are to encourage the effective use of Signs as a means of communication within the City; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of Signs on nearby public and private property; to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.1.2. - Interpretation Generally. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter, but defined in other City ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinances. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Chapter, article and section headings or captions are for reference only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this chapter. 
Any Sign permitted under this chapter to contain commercial expression may also include noncommercial expression. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.1.3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter and other Sign regulations contained within the Land Development Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in Chapter II. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.1.4. - Authority for Provisions. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, the Charter of the City of Woodstock, the general police powers of Woodstock and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.1.5. - Applicability. 
Signs shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created and maintained in accordance with the physical standards outlined in this chapter and other applicable provisions of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 

6.2.1. - Computation of Sign Area. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 6.2.1, the area of a Sign Face shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, color, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the Sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets other regulations of the City and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
(b)  Area of Multi-Faced Signs. The area of Signs with more than one (1) Sign Face shall be computed by adding together the area of all Sign Faces visible from any one (1) point. When two (2) Sign Faces are placed back to back, so that both faces are parallel, and when such Sign Faces are part of the same Sign structure and are not more than forty-two (42) inches apart, the Sign Face area shall be computed by the measurement of the larger of the two (2) faces. 
(c)  Area of Monument Signs. The computation of the Sign area of a Monument Sign shall include the entire monument structure, as measured from the top to ground and side to side, including the base of the Sign, upon which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements occur. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.2. - Signs Allowed Without Permit. 
The following Signs are allowed on property without obtaining a permit and with the permission of the property owners or the property owner's agent and are not included in the maximum allowable signage on a parcel: 
(1)  Address numerals not exceeding four (4) inches in height in residential districts or eight (8) inches in height in commercial and industrial districts. 
(2)  Flags, provided that no Flag shall exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area in any residential zone or sixty (60) square feet in area in any commercial or industrial zone and shall not be flown from a pole, the top of which is higher than twenty-five (25) feet in any residential zone or forty (40) feet in height in any commercial or industrial zone. The number of Flags allowed shall not exceed four (4) per parcel. Any Flag not meeting any one (1) or more of these standards shall be considered a banner and shall be subject to regulation as such. 
(3)  Any Sign/traffic control device erected by or at the direction of the State of Georgia, any county or any municipality that is necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.3. - Mixed Use Districts. 
Those properties zoned as mixed use under the City zoning regulations shall follow residential district standards for residentially used portions of the development and commercial standards for commercial portions of the development. Where a mix of uses occurs within a single building, such as residential over office or storefront use, the commercial standards of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.4. - Private Signs Erected on Public Property. 
(a)  No person shall erect a Sign on public property other than the governmental entity responsible for such property or public utility companies or contractors occupying or working on public property pursuant to governmental contract or franchise. Such public utility companies and contractors occupying or working on public property shall be limited to temporary traffic control signage meeting state specifications for on-going work in street rights-of-way and necessary signage to identify fixtures for public safety response in the event of emergency. 
(b)  Any Sign erected or installed on public property in violation of this section shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation and removal by the City without notice. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person posting such a Sign the full cost of removal and disposal of the Sign. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.5. - Prohibited Signs. 
(a)  No Sign shall be erected or continued to be displayed at the intersection of any street or any public right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control Sign, signal or device; or which makes use of the words, "STOP," "LOOK," "DANGER" or other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(b)  No Sign shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock. 
(c)  No Sign shall be placed on any utility pole, light pole, telephone pole, street Sign or similar utility fixtures except as permitted within this chapter. 
(d)  No person shall erect, operate or use any attraction device or Sign that contains a beacon of any type and/or contains a spotlight providing direct illumination to the public. 
(e)  Roof Signs. 
(f)  Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road or adjoining property by a person of normal hearing. 
(g)  Signs displaying any obscene message as obscenity is defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(h)  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part thereto; Signs attached in any manner to any fire escape. 
(i)  Bandit Signs or any other temporary Signs with the exception of those permitted under Chapter XX of the Land Development Code. 
(j)  No person shall erect, operate or use any pennants, streamers, air or gas filled device as a Sign, except as permitted within this chapter. For the purpose of this Chapter, a balloon twelve (12) inches in diameter or less shall not be considered an air-filled device, except as provided under Chapter XX. 
(k)  No person shall erect attraction devices or continue the operation of any such Signs that revolve, rotate, move or simulate movement or action; provided this restriction does not apply to tri-vision Signs meeting the standards of this Chapter in which the mechanical movement of panels to form new messages conforms to operational standards of state law. 
(l)  No person shall use a vehicle or trailer in such manner as to attempt to circumvent the regulations of this chapter. Vehicles driven and parked within the City limits which are regularly used in the course of business or that are driven to and from a place of business may contain identifying information on the vehicle and may be parked in lots serving the identified business, provided that such vehicle is regularly used for transportation unrelated to signage. Vehicles parked on property located in the City for indefinite periods of time (or moved temporarily and then returned to the same or similar location) and not regularly used in the course of business that contain identifying information shall be considered portable Signs. The use of vehicles to travel the streets and highways conveying billboards or Signs as displays to the traveling public are specifically prohibited. 
(m)  Animated Signs. 
(n)  Electronic Signs, except as provided under Section 6.4.8. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Cross reference— Prohibited Temporary Signs, § 20.204. 
6.2.6. - Owner's Permission Required for Erection of Signs. 
No Sign shall be placed on any property without first obtaining the written consent of the owner or owner's agent of the property. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.7. - Compliance With Technical Codes and Zoning. 
(a)  All Signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, altered, relocated or modified within the City shall conform with the requirements of the building and electric codes adopted by the City. Where the provisions of the building or electrical code and this Chapter conflict or overlap, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  All Signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the City shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the City. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.8. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All Signs erected or posted in the City shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes and in conformance with this chapter, at all times. Except for Banners, Flags, Sandwich Signs (where permitted) and those Signs that may be erected without permit, all Signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
(b)  All Signs and the premises surrounding them shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds and overgrown grass. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 

6.3.1. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to all properties zoned single-family residential, properties used for single-family residential occupancy, and townhomes, as well as properties in mixed use or overlay districts designed for single-family residential occupancy. Institutional uses located in single-family residential zones and multi-family residential uses are governed by Article IV, rather than this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.3.2. - Setback Requirements. 
Signs must be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the pavement edge and be erected in such a manner as to not obstruct the view of motorists or pedestrians. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.3.3. - Common Entrance Signs. 
(a)  The location and size of the structure upon which the Common Entrance Sign will be mounted is subject to approval by the Community Development Director, who will approve such structure upon the dual criteria of construction safety and traffic safety. 
(b)  The maximum Sign Face area of a Common Entrance Sign is thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(c)  Banner may be allowed when attached to a common entrance Sign in accordance with the regulations outlined in Section 20.305 of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES 

6.4.1. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to all properties zoned for commercial, institutional, industrial and multi-family use, as well as properties in mixed use or overlay districts designed for such uses. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.2. - Street Numbering to be Displayed. 
(a)  Freestanding Signs located within one hundred (100) feet of a public or private right-of-way shall display the street address of the property. Within a commercial center where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest street address numbers shall be identified. This section shall not apply to any Freestanding Sign where the Sign is located on a second street frontage for property which has more than one (1) street frontage. 
(b)  Street address numbers shall be of contrasting colors against the background. Numbers shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height except for properties designated within the downtown zoning district. Upon property designated within the downtown zoning district, numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches and a maximum of eight (8) inches in height. In the Downtown District, the street numbers may be placed on an awning, the building itself or any other highly visible place. Numbers shall be visible from both directions of travel along the street. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.3. - Restrictions on Future Pole Signs. 
(a)  No new Pole Sign shall be erected. 
(b)  No existing Pole Sign shall be extended in height. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.4. - Height, Size and Number Limits for Freestanding Signs. 
All Freestanding Signs shall be Monument Signs, except as provided Article V and in Chapter XXI of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(a)  Sign Area for Monument Signs shall only be permitted under the following conditions, not exceeding: 
(1)  One hundred twenty (120) square feet for malls, shopping centers, office parks, industrial parks and other shared commercial and industrial multi-tenant spaces. 
(2)  Eighty (80) square feet for single tenant buildings on a parcel, including single institutional uses. 
(b)  Monument Signs shall be limited to one (1) Sign per Parcel per Street Frontage. Where a Parcel has Street Frontage on more than one (1) street, a Monument Sign shall be allowed on each Street Frontage. 
(c)  No Monument Sign shall be erected to a height greater than twelve (12) feet for multiple tenant properties or eight (8) feet for single tenant properties. 
(d)  All Monument Signs are required to have a distinct supporting base upon which the monument Sign is affixed. The supporting base shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches in height, as measured from the top of the footing of the Monument Sign. No Monument Sign base shall be constructed of vinyl, EIFS, metal, or wood. Monument Sign bases shall be faced with decorative masonry or cementitious materials. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.5. - Setback Requirements for Freestanding Signs. 
(a)  Freestanding Signs shall be located outside of any public right-of-way and be setback no less than fifteen (15) feet from the pavement edge and at least fifty (50) feet from any Parcel designed or intended for single-family residential use. 
(b)  No Freestanding Sign shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.6. - Awning Signs. 
Awning Signs shall not project above the parapet wall and shall not project beyond the building face by more than four (4) feet. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.7. - Projecting Signs. 
Projecting Signs shall be supported by overhead supports and shall leave a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance over any sidewalk or walkway. Supports for Projecting Signs shall be set at a perpendicular angle to the building and parallel to the plane of the ground. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.8. - Changeable Copy Signs. 
(a)  Any Sign on which the message changes more than eight (8) times per day shall be considered an Animated Sign and not a Changeable Copy Sign for purposes of this chapter. Each rotation or change among two (2) or more messages shall be considered a change of message subject to the eight (8) change per day limitation; provided that tri-vision billboards meeting the definitions of this chapter are not considered Changeable Copy Signs and are subject to the regulations of Section 6.4.6. 
(b)  Changeable Copy Signs are permitted as an integral part of freestanding and Wall Signs in commercial, office and industrial zoning districts, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The Changeable Copy portion of the Sign shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the overall maximum Sign area of the Sign to which it is attached. 
(2)  The total Sign area of the combined Sign (Freestanding or Wall Sign plus changeable copy board) shall not exceed the overall size limitations imposed by this chapter. 
(3)  Changeable Copy Signs erected in combination with Freestanding or Wall Signs must be on the same pole, post or standard or within the same frame as the principle Sign. 
(4)  Electronic Signs are specifically prohibited as Changeable Copy Signs, except as provided under subsection (c) below. 
(5)  No Changeable Copy Sign shall be programmed or utilized in such a manner as to flash or simulate movement. 
(c)  Electronic Signs. Changeable Copy Signs may be Electronic Signs, used in accordance with the following provisions and legal non-conforming changeable copy Signs shall not be converted to an Electronic Sign except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  The following shall apply to all Electronic Signs: 
i.  Electronic Signs shall only be incorporated into Freestanding Signs as the Changeable Copy Sign, adhering to all provisions set forth under this article. All other applications of Electronic Signs are expressly prohibited, including but not limited to as Building, Wall, or Canopy Signs. 
ii.  Only commercially zoned property fronting Highway 92 within the Parkway Overlay District are eligible for the use of Electronic Signs. Electronic Signs must be located on a property/lot with at least 200 feet of public road frontage and cannot be within 200 linear feet of another Electronic Sign. 
iii.  Electronic Signs shall contain static messages only, and shall not have movement nor flashing on any part of the Sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the Sign, nor shall such Sign have varying light intensity during the display of any single message. Message changes shall occur instantly with no visible transition. 
iv.  Electronic Signs must operate within brightness levels as established in this article. A certification of brightness provided by a qualified and independent contract is required for the issuance of the permit. 
v.  Each Sign must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness of the display as the natural ambient light conditions change. 
vi.  Each individual static message must be displayed for not less than 60 seconds. 
vii.  Electronic Signs located on non-residentially zoned property may not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.20 foot candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at a distance of 125 feet. 
viii.  If the Electronic Sign is located in the line of sight of a residentially occupied structure on a residentially zoned property, such Electronic Sign shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.1 foot candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at the nearest portion of such residential structure. 
ix.  The owner of said Electronic Sign shall provide to the Community Development Director, information for a 24-hour contact able to turn off the Electronic Sign promptly if a malfunction occurs. If, at any time more than 20 percent of the digital display lights malfunction or are no longer working, the owner of said Electronic Sign shall turn off the electronic display until repairs are made. 
x.  In the course of processing a complaint, the Community Development Department may request a certification of the brightness (under measurement conditions) by an independent contractor (if such has not been certified within the preceding twelve (12) months). If this investigation and certification indicates that the electronic Sign exceeds the brightness levels specified in this article, the owner of the Sign, within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by the Community Development Department, shall turn off the Sign until the brightness of the Sign is corrected to comply with this Article at owner's expense. 
xi.  Any electronic Sign whose face or structure is physically removed for whatever cause must alter the Sign to comply with this Ordinance. 
xii.  No electronic Sign shall utilize, house or contain any interactive features or components, or function as an interactive or Animated Sign. 
xiii.  Notwithstanding any provisions otherwise providing for variance to the terms and limitations in the Land Development Code, the limitation on the frequency by which the image on an Electronic Sign may change shall not be subject to variance other than by amendment to this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.9. - Signs on Windows and Doors. 
(a)  Signs may be painted on or affixed to glass surfaces of windows and doors. Such Signs are subject to permit requirements as other signage. Such Signs shall leave at least seventy (70) percent of the glass unobscured. 
(b)  Temporary Signs may be placed inside premises in non-residential areas without first securing a permit, provided such window Signs leave at least fifty (50) percent of the window glass unobscured. Any such temporary Sign shall be maintained in good condition, free from tears, tatters, or discoloration. Torn, soiled or out of date temporary Signs in windows shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.10. - Incidental Signs and Campus Signs. 
Incidental Signs conforming to the definition in LDO Chapter II, Definitions, and to the standards of this chapter may be erected on private property. Incidental Signs shall have a Sign Face area no larger than two (2) square feet, and Incidental Signs that are attached to the ground, rather than a building, shall be no taller than four (4) feet. No more than two (2) such Signs shall be located at a driveway entrance and shall be placed in such a manner as to not constitute a traffic hazard. Each Parcel is limited to a maximum of four (4) Incidental Signs. Parcels larger than fifteen (15) acres may have up to eight (8) Incidental Signs. 
An academic, commercial, or institutional campus of three (3) acres of more may install campus signs as long as the Signs are not readily visible from a public right-of-way. Examples of campus signs include most any Signs meant for the exclusive use by patrons on private property, including but not limited to the following purposes: directional, informational, etc. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.11. - Marquee Signs. 
Marquee Signs are allowed only in conjunction with indoor movie theaters and live performance theaters. Marquee Signs shall be attached to the outside wall of the affected building. Marquee Signs are subject to the size and location restrictions of building Signs. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.12. - Drive-thru Windows. 
Any parcel containing a restaurant where food is delivered at a drive-thru delivery point other than on the front side of the building is permitted two (2) additional Freestanding Signs, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Only two (2) Signs serving the drive-thru delivery system shall be permitted. 
(2)  The Signs are restricted to the side or rear yard of the restaurant. 
(3)  No such Sign shall exceed forty-five (45) square feet in Sign area nor six (6) feet in height. 
(4)  The stacking lane (drive-thru lane) shall begin a minimum of eighty (80) feet from the Sign. 
(5)  Lettering on the Sign may not be legible from any distance off the Parcel for which it is approved. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.13. - Building Signs. 
(a)  Where a building houses more than one (1) business, Building Signs shall be limited in number to one (1) Sign per business on each wall, with a limit of two (2) Building Signs per business per building. The Sign Face of any one (1) Building Sign shall be no more than ten (10) percent of the total store frontage, not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet. 
(b)  Where a building houses only one (1) business, a maximum of two (2) Building Signs may be placed on one (1) wall, but no more than four (4) Building Signs may be placed on the entire building. The Sign Face of any one (1) Building Sign shall be a maximum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet or ten (10) percent of the area of the wall on which they are located, whichever is less. 
(c)  Wall Signs shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the surface upon which they are mounted. 
(d)  The upper edge of a Wall Sign mounted on a mansard roof may project more than eighteen (18) inches so long as the Sign is perpendicular to the ground. 
(e)  Building Signs that are Illuminated, Internal, are limited to channel letter style signage only, except that an internally illuminated graphic representation, such as a logo or image, may be included as part of a channel letter style Sign, provided the graphic representation does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the square footage of the overall Sign of which it is a part. Channel letter style Signs may include a non-illuminated backer board, the area of which shall be included in the computation of Sign Face area. Awning and Canopy Signs that are Illuminated, Internal, are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.14. - Signs on Light Poles. 
(a)  Within areas of the LI, GC, SL-C, and any FBC zoning classifications, Signs or Banners may be permitted to be placed on light poles, such Signs or Banners shall be permitted on no more than fifty (50) percent of light poles on each Parcel. 
(b)  Light pole Signs or Banners shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of the front property line of a Parcel. 
(c)  Each light pole shall be limited to two (2) back to back Sign faces, no larger than ten (10) square feet in size. 
(d)  Signs or Banners shall be constructed and maintained with durable materials, meet required wind load regulations and maintain a minimum clearance from the ground of six (6) feet. Signs or Banners shall be placed on the light pole via a permanent support structure meant for the placement of a Sign or Banner. 
(e)  Both the owner of any given light pole and the owner of the property upon which the light pole is located must give their consent for the installation of any Signs or Banners on light poles. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.15. - Streetlight Banners. 
(a)  Within areas of the LI, GC, SL-C, and any FBC zoning classifications, Banners may be permitted to be placed on Streetlights located within rights-of-way. 
(b)  Banners shall be made of flexible material, be no larger than ten (10) square feet in size, meet required wind load regulations and maintain a minimum clearance from the ground of eight (8) feet. 
(c)  Both the owner of any given Streetlight and the owner of the property upon which the Streetlight is located must give their consent for the installation of any Banners on said Streetlight. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE DOWNTOWN DISTRICT 

6.5.1. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article is applicable to areas that are zoned Downtown District. 
(b)  The requirements of this article supersede other ordinances, codes and laws of the City of Woodstock, Georgia only so far as they exceed the requirements of those documents or as specifically stated herein. Compliance with these guidelines does not negate any responsibility to comply with other ordinances and codes not superseded by this article, including all provisions of this chapter not explicitly revised by this article. 
(c)  Unless specifically identified in sub-area regulations or allowed as of right without permit, the types, number and size of Signs permitted within the Downtown District shall be as indicated in the "Downtown Sign Table." Also allowable are Temporary Signs, as regulated in LDO Chapter XX, Temporary Signs. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.2. - Downtown Sign Table. 

 
* Monument Signs are permitted on a street frontage where an existing building facade as of July 11, 2006 is setback more than twenty (20) feet from the property line. Monument Signs are limited to a maximum Sign Face area of thirty-two (32) square feet and are not to exceed five (5) feet in height. Monument Signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the sidewalk clear zone. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.3. - Building Sign Regulations. 
(a)  Each business shall be permitted a maximum of three (3) Building Signs. A Building Sign shall be allowed on any building frontage facing a street, alley or parking area. 
(b)  No more than two (2) Building Signs shall be placed on any one (1) frontage, however when a building faces a street at least one (1) Building Sign is required on that frontage. 
(c)  The maximum allowable square footage of each Building Sign shall be calculated by multiplying the linear frontage of the building or suite by one and one-half (1½), with a maximum square footage per Sign of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(d)  Canopy Signs shall not be Internally Illuminated. When a Canopy Sign is used in conjunction with a Wall Sign, the Canopy Sign shall not be larger than six (6) square feet. 
(e)  Marquee Signs are permitted only in conjunction with indoor movie theatres or a live performance theater. The size of the Marquee Sign shall be no larger than eight (8) square feet for each screen built or a maximum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet. 
(f)  Projecting Signs shall be at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk area, public right-of-way or parking area and at least fourteen (14) feet above an alley it faces. Such Sign shall not extend more than four (4) feet from the building wall or be located less than one (1) foot from the street curb line 
(g)  Shingle Sign shall mean a type of Projecting Sign that reads on two (2) sides and is located between eight (8) and twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk area and affixed or installed perpendicularly to a building wall in such a manner to read on both sides and perpendicularly to such wall. Each business shall be permitted one (1) Shingle Sign which shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. A Shingle Sign is considered independent of and additional to the number of Building Signs permitted. 
(h)  Wall Signs shall be located at least eight (8) feet above grade and shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the surface upon which they are mounted; provided, the upper edge of a Wall Sign mounted to a Mansard Roof may project more than eighteen (18) inches so long as the Sign is perpendicular to the ground. 
(i)  Building markers shall be permitted when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials. Maximum size allowed is eight (8) square feet. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.4. - Freestanding Sign Regulations. 
(a)  Freestanding Signs shall be located entirely on private property and a minimum of ten (10) feet from the sidewalk clear zone. 
(b)  No Sign shall be placed on the surface of the sidewalk clear zone and in addition, no Freestanding Sign shall be placed above the sidewalk clear zone. 
(c)  Nostalgic Signs shall not be considered a Pole Sign. Nostalgic Signs shall mean Signs which are historic in style including hanging Signs and/or wooden Signs supported by two (2) posts, or decorative metal Signs supported by one stanchion. Nostalgic Sign materials are limited to metal and wood and shall not be internally illuminated. 
(d)  Outdoor menu boards are allowed on parcels approved for restaurants with drive-thru windows and under the following conditions: 
(1)  Only one (1) outdoor menu board shall be permitted per business. 
(2)  Display surface area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(3)  Menu boards shall not be visible from Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, or Arnold Mill Road. 
(e)  A Sandwich Sign or Portable Swinger Sign may be no larger than thirty inches by forty-eight inches (30" × 48") on each side and must be placed on the property where the business is located in the sidewalk landscape zone or the sidewalk supplemental zone as long as it does not impede pedestrian traffic and is located a minimum of thirty (30) inches from the face of the curb and fifteen (15) feet from point of intersection of street curb lines. Each business shall be permitted one (1) Sandwich Sign which shall be removed at the end of each business day. Where a sidewalk landscape zone does not exist per the requirements established in the Downtown District standards, a Sandwich Sign may be placed within three (3) feet of the facade of the building but must meet all other requirements contained in this subsection (e). 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.5. - Sign Material Regulations. 
When regulated by Section 6.5.2, Signs shall be of quality design, construction, color and materials consistent with the design of the building and/or development. This includes glass, masonry, wood, natural stone, ornamental metalwork, and ceramics. Paint and metal gilt work are also acceptable. "Faux" materials such as "Sign foam," vinyl and plastic are prohibited. Vinyl lettering affixed to a Sign with otherwise conforming materials may be permitted with staff approval. Signs painted on cloth awnings are permissible. Mixed media are permitted, including reverse illuminated letters and etched or cutout solid materials, illuminated from behind. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.6. - Streetlight Banners. 
Within areas of the DT-CBD and DT-RO zoning classifications, Banners may be permitted to be placed on Streetlights located within rights-of-way. The Banners shall be made of flexible material, be no larger than eight (8) square feet in size, meet required wind load regulations and maintain a minimum clearance from the ground of eight (8) feet. Both the owner of any given Streetlight and the owner of the property upon which the Streetlight is located must give their consent for the installation of any Banners on said Streetlight. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

6.7.1. - Permits; Procedures. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a Permit under provisions of this chapter, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any Sign within the City without first obtaining a Sign Permit from the Department of Community Development. 
(b)  Applications for Permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Tax Parcel ID and address of building, structure, or parcel to which or upon which the Sign is to be attached or erected. In the absence of a street address, a method of location that is acceptable to the Community Development Director shall be used. 
(3)  Two (2) accurate drawings showing the position of the Sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other Signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). 
(4)  One (1) accurate drawing to scale of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment of the Sign to the Building or ground. The drawing shall be an engineered structural drawing designed to the International Building Code and shall specifically include the size of the Sign area, overall height of the Sign, location of the Sign installation and its relation to existing rights-of-way and all driveways, a site distance diagram, and, if a Pole Sign or Monument Sign, any protective devices or landscaping around the base of the Sign. 
(5)  Name, address, telephone number and business license number of the person erecting the Sign. 
(6)  Written consent of the owner or lessor of the Building or land to which or upon which the Sign is to be erected. 
(7)  The location and size of all other Signs on the parcel upon which the Sign is to be erected. 
(8)  The size of the Parcel on which the Sign is to be erected and the length of the street frontage for the street to which the Sign is oriented. 
(9)  If the Sign is to be lighted, an application for electrical permit meeting all standards of the City's electrical code. 
(10)  The value of the Sign. 
(11)  Such other information as the City shall require to show full compliance with this and other ordinances of the City. 
(c)  No review of the specific content of any proposed Sign shall be made or required. 
(d)  For Signs shared by more than one (1) person or entity, the property owner or Sign contractor shall secure a permit for the Sign structure and the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the structure as well as for removal of individual Sign panels identifying uses which no longer exist within the Building or Buildings covered by the shared Sign. In addition to the Permit required for a shared Sign structure, a separate Permit shall be required for each entity shown on the Sign which shall be obtained by the owner, his tenant, an authorized agent, or the Sign contractor. 
(e)  Each application for Permit shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fees. Fees for Permits shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
(f)  Upon the filing of an application for a Permit, the Community Development Director or his designee shall examine all plans and specifications submitted, including electrical wiring and connections, and the premises upon which the Sign is proposed to be erected. The plans shall be reviewed for zoning compliance by the Department of Community Development and review by other officers and employees of the City may be obtained on an as-needed basis. Such review shall be completed within thirty (30) business days of submission of a completed Sign application. If it appears from review of the Permit application and inspection of the site that the proposed Sign is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances and laws of the City, the Community Development Director shall issue a Permit upon payment of Permit fees no later than thirty (30) business days from receipt of the completed application. 
(g)  The City shall deny Permits to applicants who submit applications for Signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a Permit granted by the City for the erection of a Sign. Should it be determined that a Sign Permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a Permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the Community Development Director shall revoke the Permit. Should the Community Development Director deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the Permit application on or before thirty (30) business days after the City received the completed application. Alternatively, the City may personally serve the Sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the application. The failure of the City to act on any completed Sign application within thirty (30) days after the City's receipt of the application shall be deemed a denial of said application. Any applicable denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
(h)  No Permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after the applicant is given ten (10) days written notice containing a statement of the reasons for the denial of the permit application or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of any provision of this chapter, or other applicable ordinances, state or federal law regulating Signs, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(i)  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision to the Mayor and City Council, provided such appellant files a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) business days of the Community Development Director's notice. Such appeal shall be considered by the Mayor and City Council for the City of Woodstock, Georgia at a regular meeting within ninety (90) days from the date that the written notice of appeal is received by the City Manager. The City Manager shall select the meeting date and give the appellant written notice of the appeal hearing date, after the City's receipt of the written notice of appeal. The Mayor and City Council shall issue a written decision to the applicant no later than thirty (30) days following the close of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the Mayor and City Council to affirm the decision of the Community Development Director or to overrule the decision of the Community Development Director and grant or continue the permit for which appeal is taken shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant in the same manner as the original notice to deny or notice of revocation. Such decision shall constitute a final determination by the City of Woodstock. 
(j)  In the event an applicant whose permit has been denied or a permit holder whose permit has been revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the Mayor and Council, such applicant or permit holder may petition for Writ of Certiorari to the Superior Court as provided by law. 
(k)  Any person commencing work on a Sign before securing the necessary Permit from the Community Development Department shall be subject to double Permit fees under the Permit fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.2. - Permit Expiration. 
A Sign Permit shall become null and void if the Sign for which the Permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made of permit fees for Permits that expire due to failure to erect a permitted Sign; provided that where an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted Sign but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one (1) six-month extension may be granted by the Community Development Director on the duration of the permit. Where a permit has expired for failure to erect the Sign, if an individual later desires to erect a Sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of resubmission. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.3. - Display of Permit. 
The owner of the Sign shall be responsible for maintaining the permit for every Sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this Ordinance. Such Permit shall be kept on the premises served by the Sign and shall be exhibited promptly upon request of city officers and employees. Additionally, the Sign Permit number shall be affixed to every Sign for which a Permit has been issued by the Sign company installing the Sign; such number shall be in no less than one-inch characters. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.4. - Non-conforming Signs. 
(a)  Signs that, on the effective date of this Ordinance, were approved and legally erected under previous Sign restrictions, and that became or have become a Non-conforming Sign with respect to the requirements of this Ordinance, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
(1)  No increase in size of the Non-conforming Sign shall be permitted. 
(2)  Existing Signs which were legally erected and which have become Non-conforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this Ordinance due to road widening may be moved to meet the setback requirement of this Ordinance but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. 
(3)  In all zoning districts, Signs which were: 
a.  Illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances; 
b.  Made of paper, cloth or non-durable materials (except standard informational Signs); or 
c.  Located in the public right-of-way (except as permitted by this Ordinance) shall be prohibited and shall be removed by the owner. 
(b)  Upon failure to comply with any requirement of this section, the Community Development Director or his authorized agent may cause the removal of such Sign at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  A Non-conforming Sign shall not be replaced by another Non-conforming Sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on Nonconforming Signs shall be permitted. 
(d)  Minor repairs and maintenance of Non-conforming Signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the Sign shall be permitted except to make the Sign comply with the requirements of this Ordinance; provided that Signs damaged by fire or act of God may be restored to original condition. 
(e)  Each Non-conforming Sign shall be registered within ninety (90) days of the enactment of this Ordinance by the Sign owner, and if it is determined that such Non-conforming Sign was legally erected under the prior ordinance, then a Sign Permit shall be issued to the Sign owner without charge. Should the owner of a Non-conforming Sign fail to register such Sign with ninety (90) days from the enactment of this Ordinance, such failure to register shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and such person shall be subject to citation in Municipal Court. 
(f)  Existing Signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county ordinance which would become Non-conforming under this Ordinance upon annexation by the City shall be allowed to remain, provided such Sign shall be registered with the City within ninety (90) days of annexation. 
(g)  The Community Development Director shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this section. Notices of violation shall be provided to the Sign owner in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.7.7. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.5. - Inspections. 
The Community Development Director or his designee shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and Non-Conforming Sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of Signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the Sign Owner. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.6. - Signs Requiring Removal. 
(a)  Traffic hazards. Any Sign constituting a traffic hazard or a menace to the motoring public or pedestrians, as determined by the Community Development Director in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall be removed as provided in Section 6.7.7. 
(b)  Abandoned Signs. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any Sign that is located on property that becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three (3) months or longer, or any Sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent Signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. Sign panels from abandoned Signs shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which the Sign is located within the time frame specified in this subsection. The supporting structure of an abandoned Sign shall be subject to the Non-conforming use provisions of Section 6.7.4. It shall be considered adequate compliance with this Section for Sign panels and channel letters of abandoned Signs to be removed, provided the owner of the Sign or owner of the premises supplies a protective cover that protects exposed electrical components from exposure to the elements. 
(c)  Dangerous, dilapidated or defective Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any Sign that is in a dangerous, dilapidated or defective condition. Any such Sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the Sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective Sign, the Community Development Director shall proceed as described in Section 6.7.7. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.7. - Removal Procedure. 
(a)  The Community Development Director shall cause to be removed any Sign that he determines endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or electrically or structurally defective Sign or a Sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this chapter. The Community Development Director shall prepare a written notice that shall describe the Sign and specify the violation involved. The notice shall state that if the Sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within twenty (20) business days, the Sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  All notices by the Community Development Director shall be personally served or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date received if hand delivered or otherwise on the date delivered as shown upon the return receipt of the U.S. Postal Service. 
(c)  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the Sign is located, the owner of the Sign, and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the Sign or on the premises. 
(d)  Any person having an interest in the Sign or the property may appeal the determination of the Community Development Director ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice. Appeals will be handled as provided in Section 6.7.1(i) and (j). 
(e)  If the person to whom notice is directed fails to take corrective action within the time period prescribed, or if on appeal the City affirms the decision of the Community Development Director and the person fails to take corrective action or remove the offending Sign within the time period prescribed, then the Community Development Director shall proceed to have the Sign removed or corrected to bring such Sign into compliance with this chapter or to remove any unsafe condition. 
(f)  When it is determined by the Community Development Director that the Sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety and contact cannot be made with the Sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served prior to removal. In such emergency situation, the Community Development Director shall document the unsafe condition and may correct the danger, with all costs being charged to the Sign owner or the property owner. 
(g)  If it shall be necessary for the Community Development Director to remove the Sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, the Community Development Director may sell or salvage any material derived in the removal. He may sell the same at public or private sale at the best price obtainable and keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the cost of removal to be charged to the Sign owner or property owner. Any proceeds in excess of the cost of removal shall be returned to the Sign owner, if known, or if unknown, shall be deposited in the City Treasury and maintained for benefit of the owner for a period of three (3) years. At the end of three (3) years, all unclaimed proceeds shall become the property the City. Where the proceeds derived from such sale are less than the costs of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the Sign is located. Such lien shall be collectable in the same manner as City property taxes. 
(h)  Any Sign removed by the Community Development Director pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. The cost of removal of the Sign by the City shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as City property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the City in connection with the Sign removal. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.8. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances from the regulations of this chapter shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Where the proximity of existing Signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible, due to spacing requirements, for a Sign of the type sought; or 
(2)  Where visibility of a conforming Sign from the proposed street and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed Sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, Signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
a.  Placement of the Sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; 
b.  Such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and 
c.  The variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(b)  Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow a greater number of Signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. No variance shall transfer to a new owner or occupant of the property. 
(c)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this chapter by use of variances granted by the City shall be granted only upon a finding of hardship as previously defined. Hearing on such variances shall be noticed using this same time frames and notice requirements as for appeals under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.9. - Waivers. 
(a)  Waivers from the regulations of this chapter for reasons other than hardship shall be considered by the Development Process Committee, with recommendation to the Planning Commission, and to the Mayor and City Council. The application deadline for waivers shall be the first Friday of each month, and the waiver case shall be heard at the Planning Commission and City Council meetings for the following month. The Mayor and City Council shall render a final decision on waivers using the criteria set forth below. Fees assessed for Sign waiver applications shall be the same as for Sign variances. 
(b)  Waiver Evaluation Criteria. Each waiver requested will be evaluated by the DPC, Planning Commission, and Mayor and City Council using these criteria: 
1.  Are the proposed Sign(s) visually compatible with the character of the surrounding area? 
2.  Are the proposed Sign(s) of a consistent size and scale to existing Signs in the immediate area? 
3.  Are the proposed Sign(s) reasonably scaled to the size of the subject structure and/or premises? 
4.  Do unusual circumstances exist that warrant granting this waiver? 
(c)  No Sign waiver shall transfer to a new owner or occupant of the Parcel. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter VII - PERFORMANCE ZONING STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1, adopted February 12, 2018, repealed the former Ch. VII, Art. I, §§ 7.200, 7.201, 7.300—7.304, Art. IV, 7.500—7.521, 7.600—7.609, 7.710—7.732, 7.810—7.899, 7.910—7.933, and enacted a new Ch. VII as set out herein. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Chapter X, Land Development Ordinance, Administration and Enforcement; Chapter XVII, Land Development Ordinance, Stream Buffer Protection. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
There is hereby adopted, ordained, and enacted into law this Ordinance to wit, the Woodstock Zoning Ordinance, and the zoning classifications stated therein for the use of property in the incorporated area of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
There is hereby adopted a Land Use Map captioned "Official Woodstock Zoning Map," which shall bear the signature of the Mayor of the City of Woodstock, Georgia together with the attest of the City Clerk and the Seal of the City, which Map shall be kept under the custody of the Clerk of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. Said Official Zoning Map shall be maintained for public inspection during normal business hours at Woodstock City Hall. The "Official Woodstock Zoning Map" is incorporated into this resolution by express reference. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE 

7.200. - Short Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Woodstock, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish minimum standards for the use of the land and improvements thereon in the City of Woodstock, Georgia. The purpose of this Ordinance is not intended as an infringement upon the liberty of one to use his land as he chooses, but instead it is intended as a protection of freedom, and to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of property. The Ordinance provides a means by which the right to the full enjoyment of property use can be protected against the prejudicial influence of other uses, which do not constitute a nuisance. 
The Ordinance will serve as a tool of the City to bring about efficient land use management by establishing minimum standards such as lot size, buffers, setback from right-of-way and density per acre for land development. The use of this tool will enable the City of Woodstock, Georgia, to avoid overcrowding and congestion, and prevent overloading of the systems that provide water, sewage disposal, traffic circulation, police and fire protection, and other public services. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL INFORMATION 

7.300. - Zoning Districts. 
7.301. - Establishment of Districts. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Woodstock, Georgia, is divided into the following districts: 
CV Civic District 
This district is intended for government-owned properties outside the Downtown District. All government-owned properties not otherwise zoned are deemed Civic District, and shall continue to be zoned Civic District upon any transfer to any private person or entity. 
DT Downtown District 
This district is intended to allow continuation of traditional development patterns. The uses allowed in this district are those that will benefit from close proximity of uses and foster a pedestrian oriented environment. 
DT-CBD Central Business District 
Permits a mix of retail, office, and residential uses in mixed-use buildings. Maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. Individual restaurant and retail uses shall be limited to eight thousand (8,000) square feet; some exceptions apply and are listed in the Principal Permitted Uses Table. 
DT-CV Downtown Civic 
This district is intended for government-owned properties in the Downtown District. 
DT-CMU Commercial Mixed-Use 
Permits a mix of retail, office, and residential uses in mixed-use buildings at a scale and intensity greater than that permitted in the DT-CBD. 
DT-GC General Commercial 
Permits a mix of uses that are a scale and character compatible with regional serving and highway-oriented developments. 
DT-LR Low-density Residential 
Permits single-family residential uses and accessory dwelling units. No dwelling units shall be located above or below another dwelling unit. Maximum of six (6) residential lots per acre. Minimum lot size of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. 
DT-VLR Very Low-density Residential 
Permits single-family residential uses and accessory dwelling units. No dwelling units shall be located above or below another dwelling unit. Maximum of two (2) residential lots per acre. Minimum lot size of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
DT-MR-A Medium-density Residential A 
Permits single-family and multifamily residential uses and limited uses. Maximum of nine (9) dwelling units or single-family lots per acre. Minimum lot size of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
DT-MR-B Medium-density Residential B 
Permits single-family and multifamily residential uses and limited uses. Maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units or single-family lots per acre. Minimum lot size of one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
DT-OS Downtown Open Space 
This district is intended for property dedicated to recreational and passive open space in the Downtown District. No commercial or residential uses are permitted other than parking. 
DT-RO Residential/Office 
Permits primarily office and residential uses. Non-office and non-residential establishments are limited to the first floor and a maximum of three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet, except athletic club and facilities. Maximum of eight (8) dwelling units per acre. Uses located within historic residential structures within the historic zone are exempt from size limits requirements. 
GC General Commercial District 
This district is intended to provide suitable areas for a variety of commercial sales and service activities which generally serve the wide area uses, located along the major thoroughfares to concentrate commercial activities. Strip development is discouraged. 
HI Heavy Industrial District 
Industrial operations of all types that do not pose a liability for the community are permitted. This district should be accessible to railroads and major highways. Residential and retail uses are prohibited. Natural barriers or buffers are required to separate these uses from residential districts. 
LI Light Industrial District 
Light industrial operations, limited to business parks and warehouses, but prohibiting residential uses. Limited manufacturing establishments that do not use large quantities of water or emit excessive noise, odors, dust, vibrations, or fumes may be permitted. 
OS Open Space 
This district is intended for property to be used for recreational and passive open space outside the Downtown District. No commercial or residential uses are permitted. 
NC Neighborhood Commercial District 
Limited retail activities, personal services and professional offices are encouraged to serve the general needs of a residential neighborhood. Development in this zone is regulated for compatibility with surrounding residential areas. Strip development is discouraged. 
OSI Office Space and Institutional District 
Office parks, including medical or professional buildings and institutions, such as a college or university are permitted. Limited related retail business and service activities may be permitted. Residential, industrial and manufacturing uses are prohibited. 
PUD Planned Unit Development 
This zone classification has been discontinued for future rezonings. 
R-1 Single-family Residential District 
Single-family detached residential development at the lowest density and moderately high minimum heated area requirements with or without central sewer. 
R-2 Single-family Residential District 
Single-family residential development, at a low density and moderately low minimum heated area requirements. Central sewer system is required. 
R-3 Medium Density Residential District 
Residential development at moderate density and moderately low minimum heated area requirements. Central sewer system is required. 
R-4 High Density Residential District 
Residential development at high density and moderately low minimum heated area requirements. Central sewer system is required. 
RR Railroad District 
This district includes all of the railroad right-of-way. The only allowable uses within this district are railroad infrastructure and signage, which signage is required by Federal, State or City law or regulation, utility infrastructure and easements and transportation infrastructure. 
RD Rural District 
This district is intended to protect existing agricultural, farming and forestry uses and to preserve the peace and quiet. Any uses which would bring frequent patrons or traffic are prohibited. Very low residential use, limited to one (1) dwelling unit per five (5) acres may be permitted. 
SL Senior Living 
This district is intended to allow for the development of detached, attached and multi-family dwelling units and associated services limited to those persons age fifty-five (55) and older. 
SL-A Senior Living A 
Permits single-family detached residential units with a base density of no more than four (4) dwelling units per acre. 
SL-B Senior Living B 
Permits single-family attached residential units with a base density of no more than six (6) dwelling units per acre. 
SL-C Senior Living C 
Permits multi-family residential units and limited uses with a base density of no more than twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.302. - District Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the districts established in Section 7.301 of this article are hereby established as shown on the "Official City of Woodstock Zoning Map." The "Official Woodstock Zoning Map" shall be signed by the Mayor of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, and certified by the City Clerk as being the official copy and shall be kept on display in City Hall. Maps and descriptions of approved amendments to the Official Map shall be displayed adjacent to the official copy until such time as the official copy is updated. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.303. - Interpretation of Zoning Map. 
Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the Zoning Map accompanying this Ordinance, there is uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any zoning district boundary as shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of the zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.304. - Development Standards Applying to All Districts. 
The following general development standards shall apply to all districts outlined in this Ordinance: 
1.  Minimum Acreage Requirement. New residential developments outside the Downtown District shall have a minimum acreage/assemblage requirement of eight (8) acres. 
a.  Projects which involve an annexation are exempt from this requirement. 
b.  For projects proposed on less than eight (8) acres, including the addition of phases to existing developments, the applicant may pursue a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Land Development Ordinance. 
c.  For acreage requirements inside the Downtown District, see Section 7.721. 
2.  Critical Mass for Redevelopment Requirement. Redevelopment of more than two (2) existing lots in a platted subdivision on the same Land Disturbance Permit is prohibited unless a critical mass of eighty (80) percent or more contiguous lots in the subdivision are acquired and assembled, leaving the remaining twenty (20) percent of the lots as one intact subdivision. For the purposes of this section, lots are considered contiguous if they share more than half of the length of the adjoining property line for each adjacent parcel that is to be considered contiguous. The phasing of redevelopment over several LDPs as a way to subvert this section is prohibited. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a platted subdivision is a subdivision of residential lots for which a subdivision plat has been recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office of Cherokee County. 
3.  Buildings Under Construction. Nothing in this Ordinance shall require any change in the construction or intended use of a building, which is legally under construction or for which a building permit has been issued at the effective date of this Ordinance. 
4.  Use of Land. No land shall be used for a purpose which is not permitted in the district in which it is located. Outdoor display of goods for sale at retail establishments is prohibited, except for Garden/Landscape Supply - Retail, Consumer Fireworks Retail Stands - Temporary, and Junk/Salvage Yard uses, where permitted. Properties within the DT-CBD zoning district are exempt from this requirement concerning items displayed in Sidewalk Supplemental Zones. 
5.  Use of Structure. No structure shall be erected, use converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in conformance with this Ordinance. 
6.  Lot Reduction Prohibited. No parcel of land existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements of the zone district in which said lot lies. 
7.  Use of Substandard Lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, such lot may nonetheless be used as a building site provided that said lot requirements are not reduced below the minimum specified in this Ordinance by more than twenty (20) percent. If, however, the owner of two (2) or more adjoining lots with insufficient land dimensions decides to build on or to sell off these lots, he must first combine said lots to comply with the dimensional requirements of the Ordinance. Any lot requiring dimensional waivers below the twenty (20) percent minimum forth in this section may be approved by the City Council provided that further decreased dimensional requirements shall conform as closely as possible to the required dimensions. 
8.  Vision Clearance. In all districts no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half (2½) feet and ten (10) feet above the finished grade of streets shall be erected, permitted, or maintained within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets or railroads. 
9.  Joint Open Space Not Permitted. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading required about or in connection with any building for the purposes of complying with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. Nor shall right-of-way easements for streets and roads be considered a part of a lot or open space, or front rear, or side yard for the purpose of meeting yard requirements. 
10.  Homeowners Association. Any new residential subdivision of more than three (3) residential units shall be required to have an incorporated Homeowners Association. 
11.  Condominium Owner's Association - Any new Residential - Multi-Family, Fee Simple development must create and be governed by an association formed in accordance with the Georgia Condominium Act, O.C.G.A. 44-3-70 et seq., now and as amended. 
12.  Corner Lots. A lot of which at least two (2) adjoining sides abut their full lengths on a public street. Said corner lot shall provide the minimum front yard setback for each street for the district in which the lot is situated. Rear setbacks for corner lots may be reduced to no less than the minimum side yard setback for the district in which the lot is situated. 
13.  Double Frontage Lots. This provision relates to lots having frontage on two (2) streets, but not located on a corner. This type of lot is not permitted in new subdivisions. However, if the lot was in existence prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, the minimum front yard shall be provided on each street in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
14.  Average Front Yard Requirements. The setback requirements of this Ordinance shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on already built upon lots located wholly or in part within two hundred (200) feet on each side of such lot and within the block and zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback of such a lot may be less than the requirement setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots. However, in no case shall setbacks be less than twelve (12) feet. 
15.  Code Requirements. All structures shall meet the requirements of all adopted codes in effect including, but not limited to, Building Code, Plumbing code, Electrical Code, Fire Prevention Code, and Housing Code. Where such codes exceed the minimum requirements of this Ordinance, the stricter provisions shall apply. 
16.  Fire Safety Requirements. Accessibility for firefighting equipment on an all-weather surface shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with Standards for Water and Sewer in Chapter VIII of the Land Development Ordinance. 
17.  Zoning to Apply When Lot is Divided by Zoning District Boundary Line. In the event that a district boundary line on the Zoning Map divides a lot of record held in one (1) ownership on the date of passage of this Ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this Ordinance for the district in which each such parcel is located; however, that if the property owner of such a lot so desires, he may extend a use allowed on the greatest portion of said lot one hundred (100) feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements. 
18.  Side and Rear Yards May Not Be Required Next to Railroad. Within any non-residential district, the Planning Commission in its review of the site plan my waive the side and rear yard requirements when adjacent to the railroad rights-of-way if they determine the waiver will not adversely affect the area. 
19.  Permitted Encroachment of Yards and Setbacks. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, chimneys, gutters, and fire escapes may project no more than three (3) feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways, which are or may be used for access for service and/or emergency vehicles; provided, however, that in the case of automobile service stations, motels, and similar uses which service the motoring public canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkway within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line. 
20.  State Department of Transportation Approval. All entrances or exits of any street or drive from or to any State highway shall be approved by the State Department of Transportation prior to the construction of such street or drive, or in the issuance of any building permit for any improvement to be served by such street or drive. 
21.  Accessory Use Requirements. The following requirements apply to accessory uses and structures regarding yard requirements: 
a.  Such structures shall not be permitted in any required front yard; 
b.  Where a corner lot adjoins in the rear of residential use, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building or closer than five (5) feet to the rear property line; 
c.  No garage nor other accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to a side or rear lot line; 
d.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory; 
e.  Filling station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided; however, that they are not less than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way; 
f.  Accessory uses in an apartment development may include but shall not be limited to, laundry facilities for the convenience of residents. All accessory structures in an apartment development shall be of construction equal to and compatible with the principal use structures and shall meet principal use setback requirements; 
g.  Swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence of a minimum height of five (5) feet with all gates containing a self-closing, positive latch device to insure that the pool is enclosed at all times. 
h.  Satellite dish antennas shall be prohibited on the roofs of structures and in the front yards. When the dishes are placed in the side yard they shall meet the side yard setback requirements of the respective zone districts. 
22.  Lighting Strips, Lighting Injection Modules, LEDs or other continuous or connected series of lights shall not be used to outline individual windows, glass curtain walls, large glass sheets, doors, signs, or other architectural features of the building exterior. Rope or other connected series of lights intended for use as temporary holiday decoration shall be exempt from this section between the months of October and January. 
23.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018; Ord. No. 5202-A-2018, § 1, 7-9-2018; Ord. No. 5305-2018, § 1, 8-27-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONE DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE V. - USE DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS 

7.500. - Purpose. 
The following provisions apply to each of the zoning districts. In addition, requirements are contained within the District Development Standards and in other articles that apply to some or all of the zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.501. - Permitted and Prohibited Uses. 
A Permitted Use is allowed within a zoning district by this Ordinance and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. If a use is not permitted within a zoning district by this Ordinance and is not eligible for consideration under a Conditional Use Permit, that use shall be considered a Prohibited Use. If the Zoning Administrator determines, in their sole discretion, that a use cannot be equated to a similar Permitted or Conditional use, then that use shall be considered a Prohibited Use. Decisions made by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 10.162. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.502. - Conditional Use Permit. 
A Conditional Use Permit (CUP) may be applied for a use that generally would not be appropriate throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to the visual appearance, number, area, height, location, or relation to abutting or nearby uses, would not be injurious to the public, health, safety, appearance or general welfare. A CUP may be applied for only in zoning districts and for uses identified by this Ordinance and are subject to conditions, which may be imposed by the Mayor and City Council, and final approval by the Mayor and City Council through a Public Hearing process. 
Upon issuing a conditional use permit, City Council may choose to attach the conditional use permit to a tax parcel, individual commercial suite or unit, or corporate entity, with or without successors. A conditional use permit is nontransferable to another location. 
See Article IX for Non-Conforming Use Regulations for Conditional Uses. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.503. - Conditional Use Permit Review Criteria. 
The Mayor and City Council may grant a Conditional Use Permit for the uses enumerated in Section 7.505 of this article. The granting of a Conditional Use Permit is conditional upon the site plan considered by the Mayor and City Council and are subject to the following process and review procedure: 
1.  All applications for Conditional Use Permits shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning, and Public Hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as applications for Public Hearings are conducted. 
2.  The Mayor and City Council may grant Conditional Use Permits for limited periods of time based upon the criteria set forth in Section 7.503(3). 
3.  In addition to district regulations, the Mayor and City Council shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a Conditional Use Permit, whether to limit the time such Conditional Use is allowed and whether to restrict the Conditional Use to a particular owner or party: 
a.  Whether or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the surrounding area in which the proposed use will be located. 
b.  Whether or not the use is otherwise compatible with the surrounding area. 
c.  Whether or not the use proposed will result in a nuisance as defined under state law. 
d.  Whether or not quiet enjoyment of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
e.  Whether or not property values of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
f.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations. 
g.  Whether or not the site or intensity of the use is appropriate. 
h.  Whether or not special or unique conditions created by the use are consistent with the purpose, intent and goals of the Comprehensive Town Plan. 
i.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation. 
j.  Whether or not adequate controls and limits are placed on commercial and business deliveries. 
k.  Whether or not adequate landscape plans are incorporated to ensure appropriate transition between adjacent or nearby properties. 
l.  Whether or not the public health, safety, welfare or moral concerns of the surrounding neighborhood will be adversely affected. 
m.  Whether the application complies with any applicable specific requirements set forth in this chapter for Conditional Use Permits for particular types of uses. 
n.  Whether the applicant has provided sufficient information to allow a full consideration of all relevant factors. 
o.  Whether the Conditional Use requested emits or creates unusual odors which would warrant use of an odor elimination/attenuation system as recommended by industry standards. 
4.  In all applications for a Conditional Use Permit the burden shall be on the applicant both to produce sufficient information to allow the Mayor and City Council fully to consider all relevant factors and to demonstrate that the proposal complies with all applicable requirements and is otherwise consistent with the policies reflected in the factors enumerated in this chapter for consideration by the City. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.504. - Zoning District Descriptions. 
The City has established the following zoning districts as part of the general zoning code. The Use/Zoning District Matrix in Section 7.505 applies to all uses within the following zoning districts: 
1.  General Districts: General Commercial (GC), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Light Industrial (LI), Heavy Industrial (HI), Office Space Institutional (OSI), Single-family Detached Residential (R1, R2), Single-family Attached Residential (R3), Multifamily Residential (R4), Rural District (RD). 
2.  Downtown District: Central Business District (DT-CBD), Commercial Mixed Use (DT-CMU), General Commercial (DT-GC), Residential Office (DT-RO), Medium Density Residential (DT-MRA, DT-MRB), Low Density Residential (DT-LR), Very Low Density Residential (DT-VLR), Open Space (DT-OS). 
3.  Senior Living District: Single-family Detached Residential (SL-A), Single-family Attached Residential (SL-B), Multifamily Residential (SL-C). 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.505. - Use/Zoning District Matrix. 
The following Use/Zoning District Matrix identifies the uses which are permitted in each zoning district and uses which are eligible for a Conditional Use Permit. Permitted uses are marked with a "P" and uses eligible for consideration under the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit are marked with a "C". 
Additional development regulations or standards may further restrict uses marked with a "*" and a corresponding number. Refer to Section 7.506 for notes regarding these regulations. 
Uses in which additional development regulations or regulatory permits are required are marked with a "R". Refer to Section 7.506 for these definitions or regulations. Further, additional development regulations may be required in the District Development Standards for the zoning district that the property is located in. 

 
(Ord. of 12-15-2017(1), § 3; Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018; Ord. No. 5202-C-2018, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-2018; Ord. No. 5305-2018, §§ 2—6, 8-27-2018; Ord. No. 5503-2018, §§ 1—5, 11-26-2018; Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
7.506. - Additional Development Regulations Required. 
Where a use is conditional or permitted in Section 7.505, but is marked by a "*" and corresponding number, there are additional development regulations required as noted below: 
1.  P*1—Uses marked by this designation are limited to a maximum floor area of eight thousand (8,000) square feet. Bar/tavern uses shall be prohibited in any zoning classification with the Historic Overlay (HO) applied to it. No outdoor storage or sales is permitted. 
2.  P/C*2—Ridgewalk Overlay Requirements. Uses with this designation are exclusive to the Ridgewalk Parkway Overlay District. Additionally, unless otherwise stated, uses with this designation are limited to a maximum square footage of eight thousand (8,000) square feet. Uses identified with a "C" denotes that a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is required. Uses in excess of the maximum square footage requirements may seek a CUP, as well. 
Additional requirements are as follows: 

 
1  MTB - Multi-Tenant Building 
3.  P*3—Uses marked by this designation shall have no drive-thru facility. 
4.  P*4—Uses marked by this designation shall have no drive-thru facility visible from any public street. 
5.  P*5—Uses marked are limited to a maximum floor area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Any such use in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall have the ability to receive a conditional use permit for the use in an existing building. 
6.  P*6—Uses permitted by right by this designation are required to be located on a floor of a building which is not directly adjacent to a publicly accessible street (i.e., these uses may be allowed on upper floors of a building or in the basement of a building which fronts onto an alleyway). In the DT-CBD category, this restriction is limited to those buildings which front directly on Main Street between Noonday/Fowler Street and Kyle Street, East Main Street, Chambers Street, Arnold Mill Road and Fowler Street. Uses marked by this designation shall be available on a floor of a building directly adjacent to a publicly accessible street through the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
7.  P*7—Residential Single-Family Detached shall be permitted by right within the R3-A district only. Residential Single-Family Attached shall be permitted within the R3-B (duplex) and R3-C (townhome) districts only. 
8.  P/C*8-All residential uses (except Senior Living), as governed by the Use/Zoning District Matrix, Section 7.505, within the DT-CBD, DT-CMU, DT-GC, and DT-RO districts shall not front or provide direct access to an A or C Street (see Street Types Table in the Downtown District Standards); except however within DT-HO. Residential uses are allowed on upper floors or in basements of a building fronting any street type. 
a.  For DT-CBD and DT-CMU, the base density of twelve (12) DU/ac can be increased up to forty (40) DU/ac maximum, using any combination of the following bonus incentive procedures: 
i.  Vertical mixed-use structure—Twenty (20) percent DU/ac (Dwelling Units per Acre) increase. 
ii.  Provision of open space above the twenty (20) percent minimum requirement—One (1) percent DU/ac increase per one thousand (1,000) square feet of open space up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet maximum or twenty (20) percent DU/ac increase maximum. 
iii.  Structured parking with parking spaces available to the public at no charge—One (1) percent DU/ac increase per one (1) parking space. 
iv.  Professional office space—Ten (10) percent DU/ac increase per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of professional office space. 
v.  Mayor and City Council reserve the right to increase density above forty (40) DU/ac on a case by case basis, depending on the compatibility of the project with adopted plans, considering the following elements: economic impact, regional significance, amenities provided to the community, and public infrastructure improvements. 
vi.  Once site plans are submitted to the Community Development Department utilizing any one (1) of the above bonus incentives, the Community Development Director will brief the Mayor and City Council, reviewing the project plan at the next available City Council Meeting. 
b.  Residential, Single-Family Attached is a Conditional Use in all districts where it is permitted. The following criteria shall be used for evaluating Conditional Use Permit proposals for Attached product, in addition to the criteria listed in Section 7.503—Conditional Use Permit Review Criteria: 
i.  Whether or not the proposed location and site is appropriate for a townhome product, and whether the property could have a higher and better use. 
ii.  Whether or not the proposal includes a mix of housing types and/or price points. 
iii.  Whether commercially zoned property is proposed to be converted to a primarily residential use. 
iv.  Whether the proposal includes innovative or unique design. 
v.  Whether the proposal includes the construction of street connections and/or Greenprints Trail connections. 
9.  P/C*9—The following uses: sexually oriented businesses, spa establishment, bodywork therapy, massage therapist, massage therapy establishment, pawn shop/dealer in precious metals and gems, tattoo parlor/body piercing, have additional regulations and/or regulatory fees governed by the Code of Woodstock. Tattoo parlor/body piercing shall only be permitted as an ancillary use in DT-CBD and DT-GC. 
10.  P*10—Hotels shall be required to provide main access to all guest rooms through a lobby of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet. Each guest room shall be accessed through an interior hallway and shall not have direct access to the exterior of the building unless it is required by fire safety regulations. Each hotel shall be required to provide staff or management on duty twenty-four (24) hours per day. Continental style dining for the guests of the facility is allowed in or near the lobby without providing additional parking. At a minimum provisions for weekly cleaning for each guest room shall be provided. Outside storage or long-term parking of heavy, construction or related equipment shall be prohibited. No facility permitted as a hotel shall be converted or used primarily as an apartment or condominium. No business license shall be issued for any business operating from a guest room within a hotel. This use excludes extended stay hotel or motels, which are advertised, designed, or utilized for weekly or monthly operation, unless approved by City Council with a Conditional Use Permit (C). 
11.  P*11—Limited Accessory Use-Commercial shall include retail bakery, barber shop, beauty salon, cafeteria/dining facility, dry cleaning—drop off, pick up only, grocery with general merchandise, pharmacy, shoe repair, tailor. 
12.  P*12—Manufacturing Facility-Limited shall be limited to establishments that produce small consumer household products and does not emit noise in excess of the City's noise restrictions for commercial users, odor, dust, vibration or fumes beyond the building enclosure, where all process, fabricating, assembly or disassembly of items takes place wholly within an enclosed building. 
13.  P*13—Office-Contractor shall be limited to office space only. No storage of materials, vehicles and/or equipment shall be permitted in categories not allowing storage-warehouse. 
14.  P*14—Parking-Commercial shall be required to be a parking structure in any of the permitted downtown districts. 
15.  P*15—Consumer Fireworks Retail Stands-Temporary shall include the following requirements: 
a.  License Required. A license shall be required in accordance with Chapter 22 of the Code of the City of Woodstock. 
b.  Permit Required. A permit shall be required prior to the establishment of a Consumer Fireworks Retail Stands-Temporary Use ("stand"). Said permit shall be posted on the site during the operation. Upon expiration of the permit, the use shall cease. 
c.  Permit Term. The permit is valid for no more than forty-five (45) days, no more than two (2) times in a twelve (12) month period. The permit shall specify the first and last day of the permit term, beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day and expiring at 11:59 p.m. on the last day specified by the permit. 
d.  Permission Required. The applicant shall provide a notarized written permission statement from the property owner or lease holder of the subject site. A twenty-four (24) hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with the permit application. 
e.  Location. Only one (1) permit shall be issued per tax parcel stands shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a fire hydrant, unless the Fire Chief or designee of the Woodstock Fire Department in writing authorizes operation in excess of one thousand (1,000) feet. Stands shall maintain a minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback from the right-of-way and not be located within required landscaping or buffer. Stands shall also maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any driveway, and shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of nursing homes, hospitals, day care facilities, schools, or residential districts. 
f.  Distance. Shall not be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Stand—Temporary or Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Facility-Permanent, measured by the shortest distance between property lines. 
g.  Parking. A minimum of six (6) parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the stand for the exclusive use of the operation. 
h.  Hours. The hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
i.  Signage. Shall be limited to the requirements set forth under Chapter XX. 
j.  Mobile Stand. It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks from any motor vehicle or from a trailer towed by a motor vehicle. 
16.  P*16—Innovator Space. In the interest of economic development and to remain as competitive as possible, the Innovator Space Use is hereby established. Once a proposed use is classified as Innovator Space by the Zoning Administrator, it may proceed under these provisions, adhering to the following requirements: 
a.  The maximum floor area in a building used for innovator space shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet in DT-GC or DT-CMU or four thousand (4,000) square feet in DT-CBD or DT-RO. 
b.  An area of the building equal to a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total square footage of the innovator space shall be dedicated to the retail sale of product made on premises, merchandise associated with the products and/or education about the processes utilized in the space. 
c.  Activities related to innovator space shall take place within an enclosed building and outdoor storage of materials, inventory, equipment, commercial vehicles or equipment is prohibited. 
d.  Activities related to innovator space shall not result in emissions of noise, smoke, fumes, heat, or odors that leave the innovator space. 
e.  No more than one (1) delivery or pick-up per day by vehicles exceeding thirty (30) feet in length. 
f.  Minimum parking requirement shall be one (1) space per employee plus one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of customer sales or showroom area, but not less than one (1) parking space per five hundred (500) square feet of Gross Floor Area (GFA). 
g.  In the event that a proposed Innovator Space project requires rezoning, conditional use permit, or a variance from the Code, the applicant may request expedited approval by the City Council. Expedited approval means the requirement of only one public hearing before City Council and possibly a waiver of the public input meeting, as determined by the Community Development Department. All other public hearing requirements of the Land Development Ordinance shall remain. 
h.  City Council may modify any of these requirements with a conditional use permit. 
17.  P*17—Residential, Multi-Family, Rental uses shall have direct access from an A or C street, or if accessed by only B and/or D streets, there shall be a minimum of four (4) access points to B and/or D streets, each connecting to the existing transportation network outside the development and which are not dead end streets. Developments with more than thirty (30) units shall complete a sewer availability and capacity study, and shall submit a traffic study, at the time of site plan submittal. 
18.  P*18—Residential, Multi-Family, Fee Simple uses (also known as condominiums or townhomes) shall have direct access from an A, B, or C street, provided, however, projects with thirty (30) units or less may be developed with access only by D streets as long as the total number of Residential, Multi-Family, Fee Simple uses accessed by such D streets do not exceed thirty (30) units. See LDO Chapter XV, Section 15.305. Developments with more than thirty (30) units which have direct access from an A, B, or C street shall complete a sewer availability and capacity study, and shall submit a traffic study, at the time of site plan submittal. 
(Ord. of 12-15-2017(1), § 4; Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018; Ord. No. 5305-2018, § 7, 8-27-2018; Ord. No. 5503-2018, § 6, 11-26-2018; Ord. No. 5642-2019, §§ 2, 3, 2-25-2019) 
7.507. - Customary Home Occupation Performance Standards. 
A.  Customary Home Occupations shall be permitted in any residential zoning district or residential dwelling, provided that the following performance standards are met: 
1.  The occupation, profession or trade must be carried out wholly within the principal building; 
2.  Not more than thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the principal building can be used for the conduct of said home occupation; 
3.  No merchandise or articles shall be displayed in such a way as to be visible from outside the structure; 
4.  There shall be no alteration in the residential character of the building or premises; 
5.  No person who is not a resident of the premises shall be employed, with the exceptions stated herein. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.  EMPLOYEES: The occupation shall be conducted by members of the family who are living the residence and maximum of one (1) additional employee. 
b)  ON-SITE EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the home occupational license holder to perform the business related duties on the same premises/residence for which the occupational license is issued. 
c)  OFF-SITE EMPLOYEE: A person(s) may or may not be directly employed by the occupational license holder and does not perform duties on the same residence for which the occupational license is issued for. 
6.  The home occupation shall not create disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, radio or television interference, voltage fluctuations or unhealthy or unsightly conditions; (Whether the disturbance is sufficient to invoke the prohibition of this section shall be determined by comparing the occupation caused disturbance to noises, smoke, odors, etc., that are commonly found in a residential neighborhood, such as children playing, yard maintenance tools, etc.); 
7.  One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area devoted to the home occupation; 
8.  No mechanical equipment shall be installed or used except as is normally required for domestic purposes; (This shall allow for normal home office equipment, including but not limited to, fax machines, computers and other communications equipment.); 
9.  Accessory home occupations may not serve as headquarters or dispatch centers where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; 
10.  Business or home occupation related group instruction, assembly, or activity shall be limited to five (5) persons at one (1) time only (day care excluded); 
11.  All home occupations shall be subject to the periodic inspections by the Community Development Department or its designee; 
12.  The Community Development Department must approve all Businesses/Occupational/Home Occupational Licenses which shall be re-certified annually; 
13.  Deliveries to the home occupation shall be made by passenger vehicles, mail carriers, or step vans (UPS, Federal Express, etc.) and must not restrict traffic circulations; 
14.  Deliveries to the home occupation through tractor-trailers or vehicle with over six (6) wheels shall be prohibited; and 
15.  No signs on the subject property, advertising, the permitted home occupation, shall be allowed. 
B.  Customary Home Occupation Use Standards. The following uses shall be permitted uses in a Customary Home Occupation provided they meet the above performance standards: 
1.  Instructional or tutoring services within an enclosed building, but limited to four (4) pupils at one (1) time. 
2.  Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or manufacturer's representative provided that there is no manufacturing, production, or storage provided on the premises, but limited to one (1) on site employee. Offsite employees will be limited to the equal number of off street parking spaces provided but limited to five (5). 
3.  Office facility of an Architect, Broker, Engineer, Land Surveyor, Lawyer, computer programmer, and similar or related professions, but limited to one (1) on site employee. Offsite employees will be limited to the equal number of off street parking spaces provided but limited to five (5). 
4.  Real estate broker, broker, real estate agent, appraiser, insurance agent, mortgage broker, or similar or related professions, but limited to one (1) on site employee. Offsite employees will be limited to the equal number of off street parking spaces provided but limited to five (5). 
5.  Arts and crafts, artistic studios, including painting, sculpture, composing, writing, and related crafts such as weaving, rug work, and lapidary. 
6.  Office service, including work processing, book keeping, transcribing, data entry, and telephone answering services. 
7.  Mail order wholesale or retail businesses provided there is no sale, shipment or delivery or merchandise on the premises. 
8.  Contractors, electrician, landscaping business/contractors, plumbing, air-conditioning/HVAC repair business/contractors, painting, cleaning, chimney cleaning and other related businesses but not including outside storage of equipment materials or vehicles. 
9.  Alterations and upholstery repair. 
10.  Barber and beauty shops, provided that the use is conducted by family members who live in the residence or only one (1) outside employee with only one (1) member residing in the property. The business shall consist of no more than one (1) beauty/barber chair, and no more than two (2) customers shall be permitted at one (1) time. Said business shall operate only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. All local and state licenses as well as any necessary permits must be obtained prior to the business being opened. There shall be no external evidence that a business is in operation inside the residence. Customer parking must be available on the same side of the street as the residence or paved parking must be provided on the side or rear of the property. Parking on the front of the property is prohibited. 
11.  Child day care center provided the following standards are met: 
a.  The child day care center must be located in a residential structure as a secondary use. The residential use of the structure must be the primary use of the structure. 
b.  The owner of the structure must obtain the approval for the day care use of his residence from seventy-five (75) percent of the property owners within five hundred (500) feet from his property, including the abutting residents. 
c.  The road giving access to the center must be of adequate capacity to handle the additional traffic and adequate off-street parking must be provided. 
d.  If the proposed center is not on sewer, the applicant must obtain a letter from County Sanitarian stating that the on-site septic tank system has the capacity to handle the proposed center. 
e.  The applicant must have a letter of conditional approval from the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
12.  Other similar uses as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.508. - Live/Work Unit Use Performance Standards. 
1.  Live/Work Units shall only be permitted in the residential zoning districts listed in Section 7.505 of the Land Development Ordinance provided that the following performance standards are met: 
a.  The Live/Work unit shall be the primary dwelling of the occupant; 
b.  The residential and the commercial space must be occupied by the same tenant, and no portion of the Live/Work unit may be rented or sold separately; 
c.  All business activities must be wholly contained within each Unit; 
d.  The outdoor storage and/or display of merchandise, sundries, and equipment is expressly prohibited. This requirement excludes vehicles and trailers within delineated parking spaces, not otherwise prohibited by restrictive covenants; 
e.  The following limitations shall apply to all Live/Work Units based on the most current International Building Code: 
1.  The Live/Work unit shall not be greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area; 
2.  The nonresidential area shall not be more than fifty (50) percent of the area of each Live/Work unit; 
3.  The nonresidential area function shall be limited to the first or main floor only of the Live/Work unit; 
4.  Not more than five nonresidential workers or employees are allowed to occupy the nonresidential area at any one time; (IBC Reference: Sections 419.1—419.9) 
5.  The commercial portion of the unit shall be ADA compliant; (IBC Reference: Section 419.7) 
6.  The Live/Work Unit uses shall not create disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, radio or television interference, voltage fluctuations or unhealthy or unsightly conditions that would unreasonably interfere with residential uses. 
2.  The following uses shall be permitted uses in a Live/Work units provided they meet the above performance standards: 
a.  Bakery - Retail. 
b.  Barber Shop, Beauty Salon. 
c.  Child/Day Care Center. 
d.  Customary Home Occupation. 
e.  Florist-Retail. 
f.  Instructional Studios - Dance, Gymnastics Martial Arts. 
g.  Massage Therapy. 
h.  Office - Common Business, Medical, Professional Service. 
i.  Office - Contractor (R). 
j.  Office - Real Estate Sales/Associated Services. 
k.  Restaurant - Small café, coffee shop, ice cream and yogurt shops. 
l.  Retail Store - Common Merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.509. - Railroad District Use Standards. 
In the RR Railroad District the only allowable uses are railroad infrastructure and signage, which signage is required by Federal, State or City law or regulation, utility infrastructure and easements and transportation infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.510. - Donation Containers. 
Donation containers shall mean any attended or unattended container, receptacle, box, or similar device used for soliciting and collecting donations of any tangible personal property, money, or similar items for profit or charitable purposes. Vehicles, trailers, and similar conveyances, whether attended or unattended, are expressly prohibited for use as donation containers. 
1.  Donations Generally. Donations of tangible personal property or money without the use of a donation container shall only occur at permanent structures or suites designated for such use. The use of vehicles, trailers, and similar conveyances, whether attended or unattended, to solicit donations of any kind is prohibited. 
2.  Exemptions. Donation containers for the express purpose of collecting Americans flags for retirement are exempt from this section. Containers, receptacles, boxes, vehicles, trailers, and similar conveyances owned by federal, state, or local government are exempt from this section. 
3.  Permit Required, Implementation. No Donation container shall be installed without first applying for and receiving a permit from the City as governed by this section. The fee for the donation container permit may be established by City Council from time to time with resolution. No donation container placed on or after September 1, 2016 may be out of compliance with this Ordinance. Any donation container existing in place prior to October 1, 2016 shall have a period of six (6) months to obtain a permit and come in to compliance with this Ordinance. 
4.  Occupation Tax. Prior to the issuance of a donation container permit, the entity requesting the permit shall pay all occupation taxes due as provided by this Code with the issuance of a business license. 
5.  Application. Prior to delivery and/or installation of any donation container, an application shall be filed with the Community Development Department identifying the size, color and location of each donation container, as well as any signage proposed on the exterior of the donation container. Each application must also be accompanied by a letter from the owner of the property authorizing installation of a donation container on their property. 
6.  Zoning. Donation containers shall only be permitted on developed property within the GC, DT-GC, and DT-CMU zoning districts. 
7.  Location. Donation containers shall be located so as not to interfere with traffic sight lines or on-site circulation. Donation containers shall be installed on a paved surface, but may not be located within a designated parking space, drive aisle, loading area, or within any established buffer. No donation container shall be permitted within the front setback of any parcel and shall only be permitted behind the front building line of the principal structure. 
8.  Number and Size. No more than one (1) donation container shall be placed on any parcel of land. Donation containers shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of five (5) feet by five (5) feet, nor be more than six (6) feet in height. 
9.  Contact Information. The following contact information shall be required to be displayed on each donation container: name, address, and telephone number of the entity permitted to install the container along with a twenty-four (24) hour contact name, telephone number, and email address for the same entity. 
10.  Signage. No more than two (2) signs of no more than two (2) square feet shall be permitted on each donation container. 
11.  Cleanliness and Maintenance. The property owner and donation container owner shall be responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and servicing of permitted donation containers. Donation containers shall be maintained in good condition with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust. Donation containers shall be free of debris and shall be emptied regularly to prevent overflow of donations or accumulation of junk, debris, or other material. 
12.  Renewal of Permit. The term of the permit shall expire annually on December 31st. Permits may be renewed by submitting a renewal application and associated fee to the Community Development Department. No person to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer, assign, or convey such permit to another person. 
13.  Removal. Donation containers shall be removed upon permit expiration or when the property becomes vacant. 
14.  Revocation of Permit. Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be subject to revocation for cause by the Director of Community Development or designee, including but not limited to, the failure to comply with this section or any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.511. - Parking Performance Standards. 
Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.512. - Plans Required. 
A parking plan for all but single-family residential uses shall be submitted to the City with the building plans or with the occupation tax license in case of a change in use. The City shall review the proposed parking plan to insure its conformance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.513. - Design Standards. 
Except provisions for single-family residences, all parking facilities including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
1.  Shall have access to a street or alley. 
2.  Shall be graded and paved, and curbed, including access drive(s). 
3.  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stone or other similar designations. 
4.  Standard vehicle parking spaces shall not be less than nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet deep, exclusive of interior drives. 
5.  Compact vehicle parking spaces may be provided up to twenty (20) percent of the total parking required. Compact vehicle parking shall be grouped together with no less than four (4) consecutive spaces in any one (1) location. The area(s) provided with compact vehicle parking shall be clearly identified by signage or other accepted marking. Compact vehicle spaces shall not be less than eight (8) feet wide and fifteen (15) feet deep, exclusive of interior drives. 
6.  There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a street. The following standards apply to interior drives: 
a.  One-way drive shall be twenty (20) feet wide. 
b.  Two-way drive with ninety (90) degree parking shall be twenty-four (24) feet wide. 
c.  Two-way drive with sixty (60) degree parking shall be twenty-two (22) feet wide. 
d.  Two-way drive with forty-five (45) degree parking shall be twenty (20) feet wide. 
7.  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties of public streets. 
8.  Shall be separated from sidewalks and streets in public rights-of-way by wheel bumpers and an adequate planted reserve strip. 
9.  Parking areas established for permitted non-residential uses shall be visually screened from adjacent residential uses. See Article IV, "Buffers" of this Ordinance for details. 
10.  The parking area including space and driveway arrangements shall conform to generally accepted geometric design standards. 
11.  Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night, such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect nor cause glare on abutting properties. 
12.  Shall meet American Disabilities Act requirements for accessible parking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.514. - Tree and Landscape Standards. 
For parking lot tree and landscape standards, refer to Chapter IX of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.515. - Location. 
All parking facilities required space shall be provided on the same plot with the use it serves, except as provided herein: 
1.  Where provision of the required parking spaces involves one (1) or more parcels or tracts of land that are not a part of the lot on which the principal use is located, the developer shall submit with his application for a permit, an instrument which subjects said parcels or tracts to parking uses for the principal use it serves. The developer shall pay the necessary fee and the building inspector shall have said instrument registered in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
2.  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained at a distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from the non-residential building served. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.516. - Joint Use of Parking Facilities. 
Joint use of up to fifty (50) percent of the required spaces may be permitted for two (2) or more uses located in the same building, on the same parcel, or on adjacent parcels provided that the applicant or developer can demonstrate that the uses will not substantially overlap in hours of operation or in the demand of shared spaces. For shared parking on two (2) or more adjacent parcels, a written agreement shall be provided for review by the Community Development Department, and when approved, an easement shall be recorded in the deed records and cross referenced to the owner's deeds for each affected property. Additionally, shared spaces serving uses on more than one (1) parcel shall be clearly marked as such. If the easement is cancelled, expires or is otherwise voided, other parking shall be provided in accordance with this chapter. If the required parking is not provided for any use covered by the former agreement, such use shall be illegal. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.517. - Use of Area. 
No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, and servicing or long term storage of any vehicle or equipment. No sales or the outdoor storage of items for sale shall be allowed within the parking areas required by the minimum standards within this Ordinance. Any outdoor storage of items for sale in areas abutting parking area as required under this Ordinance shall be separated and screened from view of the required public parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.518. - Required Spaces. 
1.  The number of parking spaces required for a particular use shall be as set forth in the table below. 
2.  Each use has minimum parking space requirements. The maximum allowable number of parking spaces per use is ten (10) percent over the stated minimum number. Single-family detached and single-family attached have no maximum. Where the DPC determines neighborhoods have residences abutting or close to the street, little or no on street parking or lack adequate space for visitor parking, new single-family attached and single-family detached developments shall have a minimum of 0.25 guest parking spaces for each residential unit. 
3.  In the event of exceeding the maximum allowable number, the parking spaces shall meet parking overage standards as set forth in Section 7.769, "Standards for Parking Spaces Exceeding the Maximum." 
4.  Uses marked with an asterisk (*), which do not have internal space on-site for loading and unloading, require at least one loading space in addition to the required parking spaces, to be designed as required by Section 7.521, Off-Street Loading Requirements. 

 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.519. - Interpretation of Required Spaces. 
1.  The parking requirements in the chart do not limit other parking requirements contained in these regulations. 
2.  The parking requirements in the chart do not limit special requirements, which may be imposed. 
3.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to be the next highest whole number. 
4.  The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed on the chart shall be the same as for a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation. 
5.  Where parking structures are utilized, only spaces on the top level of any exposed structure shall be counted towards parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.520. - Standards for Parking Spaces Exceeding the Maximum. 
The maximum number of parking spaces may be exceeded by designing the parking to some of the standards set forth herein. The intent of these standards is to enhance the attractiveness and sustainability of the public realm by mitigating the effects of overparking. Each standard allows an extra percentage or number of parking spaces over the minimum number set forth in Section 7.767. More than one (1) standard can be used together, but in no case shall the number of spaces exceed two hundred (200) percent of the minimum number of spaces allowed. In situations where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces allowed shall be constructed to the next highest whole number, unless otherwise stated. Any standard employed shall be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity. 
1.  Install an electric vehicle charging station. One (1) space over the minimum shall be permitted for each electric vehicle charging station installed. Parking spaces with charging stations shall be designated for electric vehicle parking only. This standard shall be used for no more than six (6) spaces. 
2.  Construct extra spaces in permeable pavement. The plan shall include an underdrain with connection to the stormwater management facility if site plan review staff determines it is necessary. One (1) extra space allowed for each two (2) spaces constructed in permeable pavement (do not round up for fractional spaces). 
3.  Design the parking lot with bioretention areas, stormwater planters, or other alternative stormwater management techniques that handle the runoff from the entire parking lot surface area for the first one-half (0.5) inch of rainfall during a storm event. The plan for this standard shall be reviewed and approved by the Development Process Committee. One hundred fifty (150) percent of the minimum number of spaces allowed. 
4.  Use paving materials with a three (3) year aged solar reflectance (SR) value of at least twenty-eight one-hundredths (0.28). If three (3) year aged value information is not available, use materials with an initial SR of at least thirty-three one-hundredths (0.33) at installation. The paving material or coating must be maintained properly in perpetuity. One hundred twenty (120) percent of the minimum number of spaces allowed. 
5.  Employ a rainwater harvesting and storage system. This method will only be allowed after approval of a plan for the system by the Development Process Committee. The system should be sized based on the size of the contributing drainage area, local rainfall patterns, and the projected demand for the harvested rainwater. The plan should outline a dedicated use for the harvested rainwater. One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of area where rainwater is conveyed into the system. Extra spaces shall only be awarded for each full three hundred (300) square feet of area, with no fractional spaces being rounded up. 
6.  Build a solar parking canopy over at least one-third (0.333) of the parking spaces. Placement of structure and parking lot screening shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Community Development. Two hundred (200) percent of the minimum number of spaces allowed. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.521. - Off-Street Loading Requirements. 
Off-street loading shall be established in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
1.  Design Standards. One (1) or more off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building and shall: 
a.  Have a minimum dimension of thirteen and one-half (13.5) feet by sixty (60) feet by fourteen and one-half (14.5) feet overhead clearance. 
b.  Be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion resistant material. 
c.  Be located so as not to hinder the free movement of vehicles nor pedestrians over a street, sidewalk, or alley. 
2.  Use of Area. Loading space(s) shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling nor servicing of any vehicles, equipment, and materials or supplies. 
3.  Mixed Uses in a Building. Where a building is used for more than one (1) use or for different uses, loading space may be shared among uses, as permitted by the Director of Community Development. 
4.  Uses located in the Downtown District. Loading spaces for these uses in the Downtown District may not be required on a case-by-case basis, and a plan for shared or remote loading spaces may be accepted in lieu of providing loading space on-site, as determined by the Director of Community Development. Criteria used to evaluate whether loading spaces are needed follow: 
a.  Availability of loading spaces that could be shared on adjacent properties. 
b.  Volume of traffic on the primary access street. 
c.  Whether user has control of the premises outside the footprint of the structure. 
d.  Whether the applicant can establish proof that deliveries will occur from vehicles that could fit in a normally sized parking space. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE VI. - BUFFERS 
See Chapter XVII for Stream Buffer Requirements. 

7.600. - Buffer Description. 
A buffer as referenced in this article is a land area reserved to provide a visual and noise barrier which is created by the use of plant or natural existing materials, alone or in combination with berms, fencing or walls. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.601. - Purpose. 
Buffers are required to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances, such as dirt, litter, noise, lights, signs, structures or parking areas. Buffers provide the spacing necessary to reduce potentially adverse impacts. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.602. - Buffer Requirements. 
1.  General Buffer Requirements. 

 
*NOTE: A two and one-half-foot evergreen planted berm or zero visibility stockade fence may be substituted for up to five (5) feet of reserved space if approved as shown on the preliminary site plans except as specified herein. 
2.  Buffers are required on City of Woodstock properties that border unincorporated County properties. The Director of Community Development, or designee, shall enforce the buffer requirement found in the Buffer Requirements Table that most closely corresponds to the County zoning district adjacent to the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.603. - Location and Design Requirements, General Buffers. 
1.  Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street or right-of-way. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending from the lot or parcel boundary line. Reserved buffers shall be established independently of building setbacks. Building setback requirements shall begin at the portion of a reserved buffer strip furthest from the property. 
2.  For new residential subdivisions with buffer requirements, buffers shall be located outside of individual residential lots, and shall be maintained by the Homeowner's Association. 
3.  Where a required drainage, utility or other easement is partially or wholly within a required buffer, the developer shall design the buffer to eliminate or minimize planting within the required easement. 
4.  Where a street or road separates different zones, the minimum specified buffers would be required, except where the right-of-way is one hundred (100) feet wide or greater. 
5.  Buffers shall be generally natural and undisturbed and free of encroachments, except with respect to matters required herein or by conditions of zoning. 
6.  Buffers required alongside property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required to observe the sight distance requirements contained in Chapter III of the Land Development Ordinance. 
7.  Buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is inadequate to provide a year-round effective visual screen shall be planted with supplemental plantings. A buffer design shall be submitted for approval, specifying the type, size and location of all plantings and any non-vegetative screening mechanism (i.e., fence) proposed for use. Refer to the Buffer Planting Standards within Chapter IX of the Land Development Ordinance. 
8.  Species selected are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for design situation. 
9.  Protection during Land Disturbing Activities. Natural buffers shall be clearly marked in accordance with the standards within Chapter IX of the Land Development Ordinance and protected prior to commencement of and during authorized land disturbing activities and during construction. 
10.  Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by Chapter IX of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.604. - Use of Buffers. 
1.  A buffer may be used for some forms of passive recreation; it may contain trails built in accordance with the City's trail master plan, provided that: 
a.  The year round visual barrier is preserved, and 
b.  The total width of the buffer is maintained, and 
c.  In no event shall the following uses be allowed in buffers: creation of impervious surfaces outside of trails built in accordance with the City's trail master plan, play-fields, stables, swimming pools, tennis courts, or similar active recreation uses. 
2.  Buffer areas shall not be used for parking. 
3.  A required buffer may not include a storm water retention area. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.605. - Ownership of Buffers. 
Buffers may remain in the ownership of the original owner (and assigns) of a land use. Buffers may be subjected to deed restrictions and subsequently be freely conveyed. They may be transferred to any consenting grantee, provided that any such conveyance adequately guarantees the protection of the buffer for the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.606. - Requirements for Maintaining Buffers. 
1.  Responsibility. The responsibility for maintenance of a required buffer shall remain with the owner of the property. Maintenance is required in order to ensure the proper functioning of a buffer as a reserved open area which reduces or eliminates nuisance. The owner shall be responsible for installing live, healthy plants. Replacement plants shall be provided for any required plants which die or are removed due to disease. 
2.  Maintenance. Maintenance shall consist of mowing, removal of litter and dead plant materials, and pruning as needed. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein. Natural water courses within a buffer shall be maintained as free flowing and free of debris. Stream channels shall be maintained so as not to alter flood plain. 
Where pedestrian or bicycle trails are allowed within a buffer, these trails shall be maintained to provide for their safe use. Such maintenance shall include pruning of plants to remove obstructions and removal of dead plant materials, litter, or other hazards provided minimal disturbance occurs. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.607. - Buffer Design. 
Required zoning buffers shall include, at minimum, either a wall, a berm, or a fence to be designed to the standards below, except where buffers have been specifically designated as undisturbed. 
1.  Wall Standards. Walls shall be of masonry construction and a minimum height of six (6) feet. Walls shall be placed on the edge of the buffered area nearest the most intense land use. The plantings shall be made on the lesser intense use side of the fence. 
2.  Berm Standards. Earthen berms shall be a minimum of five (5) feet high and contain the required plantings, unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance. 
3.  Fencing Standards. The fencing materials shall be a pressure treated lumber, redwood or cedar. It shall be a picket or stockade design with one hundred (100) percent visual blockage. The fence shall be a minimum of six (6) feet high and placed on the edge of the buffered area nearest the most intense land use. The plantings shall be made on the lesser intense use side of the fence. 
4.  Buffer and Setback. All land development activity subject to this Ordinance shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street or right-of-way. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending from the lot or parcel boundary line. Reserved buffers shall be established independently of building setbacks. Building setback requirements shall begin at the portion of a reserved buffer strip furthest from the property. 
b.  Where a required drainage, utility or other easement is partially or wholly within a required buffer, the developer shall design the buffer to eliminate or minimize planting within the required easement. 
c.  Where a street or road separates different zones, the minimum specified buffers would be required, except where the right-of-way is one hundred (100) feet wide or greater. 
d.  Buffers shall be generally natural and undisturbed and free of encroachments, except with respect to matters required herein or by conditions of zoning. 
e.  Buffers required alongside property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required to observe the sight distance requirements contained in Chapter III. Land Development Standards of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.608. - Requirements for Development on Buffer Zone Properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
1.  A site plan showing: 
a.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
b.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
c.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
2.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback. 
3.  Any other documentation that the Woodstock Community Development Department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
4.  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
5.  The Public Works Department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the Public Works Department in making such inspections. The City of Woodstock shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this Ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.609. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Ordinance or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
1.  Notice of Violation. If the Woodstock Community Development Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Woodstock Community Development Department by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
2.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Woodstock Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Woodstock Community Development Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop Work Order. The Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The Community Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Community Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (or such greater period as the Community Development Department shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Community Development Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the Community Development Department may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Ordinance, the Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Woodstock Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE VII. - DOWNTOWN DISTRICT STANDARDS 

7.710. - Purpose and Intent of the Downtown District. 
The regulations set forth in the Downtown District are designed to: 
1.  Preserve, protect and enhance downtown's historic and future role as the civic and economic center of Woodstock. 
2.  Create an environment where residents and visitors can live, work, meet, and play. 
3.  Encourage a balanced mix of retail, professional, residential, civic, entertainment, and cultural uses. 
4.  Enhance the efficient utilization of parking facilities by encouraging shared, underground, and deck parking and alternative modes of transportation. 
5.  Provide safe and accessible parks and plazas. 
6.  Improve the aesthetics of street and built environments. 
7.  Promote pedestrian safety by ensuring sidewalk-oriented buildings and attractive street-facing facades that foster pedestrian activity and liveliness. 
8.  Provide accessible and sufficient parking in an unobtrusive manner. 
9.  Enhance Woodstock's historic quality by ensuring that new and rehabbed buildings are compatible with the character of buildings built between 1860 and 1920. 
10.  Provide increased vehicular and pedestrian access through a grid of streets that maximizes connections with and extensions of existing streets. 
11.  Maintain and enhance quality of life of existing neighborhoods. 
12.  Plan for and maintain first class sustainable neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.720. - Master Plan Required. 
Prior to commencing any land development activities in the Downtown District, a master plan of a proposed development ("the Project") shall be provided to the Community Development Department for review. This master plan or illustrative project concept, shall at a minimum include the location of residential and commercial lots, structures, stormwater facilities, streams and floodplains, amenities, open space, parking, pedestrian facilities, buffers, landscaped areas, all applicable Downtown District standards, and any additional details necessary to complete the review, as required by the Director of Community Development. 
A master plan is also required for any project proposed that requires rezoning, conditional use permit, or variances. The master plan must illustrate the details of the request and accompany the public hearing application. 
1.  Master Plan Standards. The Master Plan shall adhere to the following standards: 
a.  Six (6) copies, provided on sheets 11 × 17 or larger; 
b.  Scale of 1" = 40 feet or as prescribed by the City Engineer; 
c.  Digital copy on flash drive or by download; 
d.  Preliminary engineering, including conceptual utilities and conceptual grading plan; 
e.  Include calculations for total acreage, number of units, residential density, open space, and commercial square footage; 
f.  Identify adjacent property zoning districts, uses, and approximate structure locations; 
g.  Provide written consent from all property owners whose property is included in the Master Plan; 
h.  Illustrate the extension of any Greenprints Trail, as per the adopted Greenprints Trails Plan, now and as amended; 
i.  Illustrate the extension of any grid streets, as per the adopted grid streets plan, now and as amended; 
j.  Explain compliance with the adopted Woodstock Town Center (LCI) Plan, now and as amended, and the Woodstock Comprehensive Plan, now and as amended. 
2.  Master Plan Procedures. 
a.  Compliance Review. The Community Development Department will review the master plan, providing comments regarding compliance with the following: 
i.  Downtown District Standards. 
ii.  Land Development Ordinance. 
iii.  Woodstock Town Center Plan. 
iv.  Woodstock Comprehensive Plan. 
v.  All other ordinances and standards adopted by the City Council, in addition to other local, state, and federal laws. 
b.  Compliance Required. Should the master plan fail to comply with the provisions set forth in Section 7.720(2)a., the deficiencies will be listed and provided to the Applicant. The applicant may then elect to pursue rezoning or variances from City Council, or render changes to bring the master plan into compliance. 
Once the master plan complies with the provisions set forth in Section 7.720(2)a., the applicant will be notified and the master plan will be docketed on the agenda of the Development Process Committee (DPC) for review and consideration. Upon approval by the DPC, the applicant may then submit land development plans in accordance with Chapter III of the Land Development Ordinance. 
In the event the master plan is included with a public hearing application, the Community Development Departments will complete the review as set forth herein and the DPC will include the findings of said review in the recommendation to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
c.  Exemptions. Projects or proposals may be exempted from this section if they meet any one of the following conditions: 
i.  The project exclusively involves the renovation or replacement of an existing structure in the same location; or 
ii.  The project involves one (1) unit on one (1) lot in a platted subdivision; or 
iii.  If the project is proposed on a site of one (1) acre or less and in the judgement of the Community Development Director, is in compliance; 
The subdivision of property is prohibited to meet any of these requirements. 
d.  Disclaimer. Compliance with this Section is the responsibility of the Applicant. The Community Development Department makes a good faith effort to thoroughly review each master plan tendered. Should a master plan review omit or fail to acknowledge noncompliance with this Section, the Applicant and the Project are in no way exempted from the provisions set forth herein. 
3.  Appeals. Any Person aggrieved by a decision of the DPC may appeal in writing directly to City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter X of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.721. - General Requirements. 
1.  Density. Maximum density for each Downtown District zoning classification can be found in Section 7.301 Establishment of Districts. The maximum density allowable on any given lot in the Downtown District may not necessarily be achieved due to infrastructure requirements and Downtown District site design requirements. The high densities allowed in this district are designed to incentivize assemblages that can comply with the code, providing public amenities as necessary, and reach the maximum allowable density. For mixed-use projects, density can be calculated using the entire parcel/project area, including commercial areas, only if the commercial development is to be completed first or concurrently. See Section 7.721 2.b. below. If not, residential densities shall be calculated using only the residential portions of the parcel/project area. 
2.  Minimum Acreage Requirement. No new residential development shall be permitted on any parcel or assemblage of parcels in the Downtown District that have a total area of less than five (5) acres. 
a.  Construction that does not require the subdivision of property into more than three parcels, and does not require any new streets, are exempt from this requirement. 
b.  Mixed-use projects with at least thirty-five (35) percent of the land area, at ground level, dedicated to newly constructed, non-residential uses, not including Open Space areas, are exempt from the minimum acreage requirement. Commercial and residential components that are part of the same project must be constructed concurrently. All commercial buildings in a project must be completed and issued a Certificate of Occupancy, prior to eighty (80) percent of residential buildings receiving building permits. 
c.  For projects proposed on less than five (5) acres, including the addition of phases to existing developments, the applicant may pursue a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Land Development Ordinance. Additional criteria shall be considered during a CUP case for this exemption. Projects should be evaluated for uniqueness, character, access, and connection to existing streets, alleys, and trails. 
3.  Mix of Housing Types Required for Residential Development. All new residential development in the Downtown District without at least twenty (20) percent of the land area, at ground level, dedicated to non-residential uses, not including Open Space, shall provide a mix of housing types. 

 
Housing Type Choices: 
a.  Large lot single-family detached - lots with a minimum square footage of 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Single-family detached - lots with less than 7,500 square feet. 
c.  Single-family detached with Accessory Dwelling Units. 
d.  Townhome. 
e.  Duplex. 
f.  Triplex. 
g.  Quad - condominium building with 4 units. 
h.  Small condo building - 5—20 condominiums per building. 
i.  Large condo building - over 20 units per building. 
j.  Multi-family, Rental (Conditional Use Permit required). 
k.  Residential over commercial. 
l.  Innovative housing type which fits into none of the categories above, as approved by the Director of Community Development. 
4.  Critical Mass for Redevelopment Requirement. Redevelopment of more than two (2) existing lots in a platted subdivision on the same Land Disturbance Permit is prohibited unless a critical mass of eighty (80) percent or more contiguous lots in the subdivision are acquired and assembled, leaving the remaining twenty (20) percent of the lots as one intact subdivision. For the purposes of this section, lots are considered contiguous if they share more than half of the length of the adjoining property line for each adjacent parcel that is to be considered contiguous. The phasing of redevelopment over several LDPs as a way to subvert this section is prohibited. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a platted subdivision is a subdivision of residential lots for which a subdivision plat has been recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office of Cherokee County. 
5.  Grading. Where future street connection locations exist within a new development, the temporary ends of these streets shall be graded in such a way that future connection is possible, as determined by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.722. - Definitions. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit not greater than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or forty (40) percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is greater, located in an outbuilding and located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. 
Build-To Line: The build-to line is the line along which the building street facade is permitted to be located. The distance between the build-to line and the nearest street curb is equal to the sidewalk area width requirements, except where public or private open space is adjacent to the sidewalk area. The build-to line shall extend to the perimeter of such open space including the minimum street facade frontage of principal structures. 
Downtown District: The area approved on the Downtown District map found on the official zoning map. 
Greenway Trail: A concrete or asphalt trail with a width capable of accommodating pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. The minimum width required is ten (10) feet, unless otherwise determined by the City Engineer. Boardwalks, bridges, and pervious concrete are permitted within the floodplain and stream buffers. 
Historic Overlay District: An area shown on the official zoning map, which has specific requirements that supersede certain other requirements of the Downtown District as amended. 
Multifamily: A building containing more than one (1) residential unit, excluding townhouses. 
Open Space: Private open space and public open space appropriately improved for pedestrian use and amenity not including detention ponds and stream buffers without greenway trails or areas used for vehicles, except for incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions only open space shall be exterior and computed as the total square footage of said spaces. 
1.  Private Open Space: Open space that is private courtyards, lawns, gardens, terraces, or balconies, which restrict access to residents of adjacent development. 
2.  Public Open Space: Park, plaza, or greenway trail that is open to the public during normal city park hours and sidewalk area requirements. 
3.  Park: A public open space that provides recreation amenities and gathering places. A park shall have streets along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter and shall have no more than twenty (20) percent of its area covered with impervious surfaces, with the exception of greenway trails. 
4.  Plaza: A public open space that is available for civic and commercial activities, but may have access limited for the purposes of providing outdoor dining areas. A plaza shall have streets along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter and a landscape consisting of durable pavement, trees and other plant materials. 
Residential Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk level of a street facade. 
2.  Provides habitable space for a minimum of the first ten (10) feet in depth behind the street façade on primary frontages. 
3.  On primary frontages, provides equally sized vertical windows where the top of which and the bottom of which shall be no higher and no lower than to the top of the door frame and the bottom of door frame. 
4.  Provides windows for a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the length of the built portion of the street facade, with the facade of each unit being calculated independently. 
5.  Provides an entry stoop or porch at a primary pedestrian street facade entrance. 
Sidewalk Area: Begins at the street curb and consists of a contiguous sidewalk landscape zone, sidewalk clear zone, and sidewalk supplemental zone including intervening driveways. 
1.  Sidewalk Landscape Zone: The portion of a sidewalk area adjacent to the street curb and reserved for the placement of trees, groundcover, and street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
2.  Sidewalk Clear Zone: The portion of a sidewalk area that is reserved for pedestrian passage and is unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight (8) feet, including but not limited to, steps and stoops, traffic control boxes, and utility structures. The sidewalk clear zone shall be adjacent and between the sidewalk landscape zone and the sidewalk supplemental zone and shall have a consistent cross-slope not exceeding two (2) percent. 
3.  Sidewalk Supplemental Zone: The area between the back of the sidewalk clear zone and the build-to line. Adjacent to storefront treatments, sidewalk supplemental zones may be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, merchandise display, potted plants, and decorative fountains. Outdoor dining is permitted only when adjacent to eating and drinking establishments. Elements that are prohibited in the supplemental zone include recreational areas and facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, fences and walls greater than forty (40) inches in height, service elements such as dumpsters, loading docks and similar elements, mechanical features, and parking. Public access may be restricted only for areas adjacent to residential treatment, and for outdoor dining areas when adjacent to storefront treatments. No element shall be attached to the sidewalk supplemental zone in any way, except for fences and walls. 
Storefront Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk level of a street facade of flat roofed buildings. Buildings with gabled roofs shall use residential treatment. 
2.  Provides habitable space for a minimum of the first twenty (20) feet in depth behind the street facade. 
3.  Provides a street level facade consisting of: 
a.  A non-glass base or knee wall below all windows beginning at grade and extending to a point no less than eight (8) inches but not more than twenty-four (24) inches above the sidewalk area at the build-to line knee wall may be waived when directly abutting a private patio. 
b.  A combination of glass display windows and doors covering a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the built portion of the build-to line beginning at the top of the bulkhead or knee wall, to a height not less than ten (10) feet and not more than twelve (12) feet above said sidewalk area at the build-to line below the base of the window. Such glass shall provide views into display windows that have a minimum depth of two and one-half (2.5) feet into and are accessible from the building interior for retail uses only. 
c.  Primary pedestrian entrances on the street facade recessed a maximum of seven (7) feet from the exterior facade, remain unlocked during normal business hours, and have a surface area that is a minimum of seventy (70) percent glass. All other doors located along street frontage shall be of a character that matches with the surrounding downtown area. 
d.  A glass transom located along the street facade of a structure above the glass display window and entry door shall have a minimum height of twenty-four (24) inches and a maximum height of thirty-six (36) inches. 
e.  Provides no length of facade exceeding twenty (20) feet without intervening glass display windows or glass doors. 
4.  A non-glass sign band area located above the glass transom having a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches. The sign band area is the area between the top of the transom window and cornice line. 
5.  A cornice line above the sign band a minimum height of eight (8) inches. 
6.  Street address numbers, a minimum of six (6) inches in height located above the primary pedestrian entrance. 
7.  Sidewalk level drop ceiling, if at a lower elevation than the top of the window, shall recess a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the window opening for retail uses. 
8.  Finished ceiling height shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet. Exterior height of single story buildings shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet as measured at top of parapet. Parapet must enclose all sides of the roof. 
Street Facade: The exterior wall of a building, not including extruding structures such as porches, stoops or bay windows, which is located along the build-to line or street without an intervening building or street wall. 
Street Facade Frontage: The percent of street facade required along the build-to line. 
Street Wall: A wall no less than seventy-five (75) percent opaque built along the build-to line and co-planer with the street facade, often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the street. Street walls shall be a minimum of three and one-half (3.5) feet in height, and constructed of a material matching the adjacent street facade or dense evergreen hedge. Street walls shall be discontinued no more than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. The street wall shall have other individual openings not exceeding four (4) square feet in area at height of less than three and one-half (3.5) feet. 
Townhouse: Attached single-family residential structure in which no residential unit is directly above or below another residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.723. - General Provisions. 
1.  Code Compliance Certificate Required. In order to ensure compliance with the requirements set forth in this section, a code compliance certificate (CCC) shall be required prior to approval of any building permit for any exterior and building façade additions, improvements, or renovations within any subarea of the Downtown District. A CCC application shall include a site plan, building floor plans, and elevations, drawn to scale, and shall be approved by the director of community development, or his designee, through the regular review process. In addition to building permit applications, a CCC is also required for the following in keeping with other requirements of the Downtown District open space development and maintenance agreements, paving in parking areas other than asphalt and concrete, off-site parking, shared parking, angled on-street parking, driveway curb cuts, new streets, sidewalk area requirements and improvements including special or decorative paving and plantings and street furniture location and type, and street wall requirements. 
2.  Legally Nonconforming Buildings. Existing buildings and building façades are considered legally nonconforming, until such time remodeling and renovations occurs in accordance with these provisions, except as exempted below: 
a.  The building and property shall comply with the Downtown District Standards once the total remodeling and renovation construction costs exceed fifty (50) percent of the total building value as shown on the current county tax assessor record within the most recent thirty-six (36) month period. The property owner may also submit an appraisal of the building value for consideration. 
b.  Remodeling and renovations shall occur in compliance with Downtown District Standards. In no case shall any legally non-conforming building or façade be expanded, extended, enlarged, or otherwise altered in any way which increases its non-conformity. 
c.  Any remodeling or renovation projects that violate the Downtown District Standards forfeit legally non-conforming status and Downtown District Standards, including but not limited to, street and sidewalk area, open space, parking, and street façade requirements. Internal renovations that do not alter the building façade or building footprint, and upgrades of building and construction materials, do not affect the legally nonconforming status. 
3.  Lot of Record Lot Exemption. A Lot of Record is exempt from the Downtown District Code under the following provisions: 
a.  For the purposes of this amendment, a Lot of Record means a Lot which is part of a Subdivision recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office, or a Lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office prior to the adoption of this amendment, September 10, 2018. Includes both residential lots with one (1) existing single family detached structure and a commercial business located in a structure formerly used as a single-family residence. "New construction," both residential and commercial, means construction on a vacant lot where no structure was previously constructed, or a newly planned structure proposed on a lot. 
b.  A lot cannot be subdivided to comply with this Code section. 
c.  Only one (1) structure with one (1) dwelling unit can be built per lot, excluding one (1) accessory dwelling unit or accessories structure; 
d.  Exclusively in DT-CBD and DT-RO, commercial uses may be included within a structure formerly uses as a single family residence or a newly constructed structure. 
e.  Renovations. All renovation/maintenance activities can occur as long as the structure is not expanded beyond thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area and the architecture either remains consistent with the current structure, an earlier appearance of the structure, or in compliance with the architectural provisions in the Downtown District Code. 
f.  Replica. An existing structure may be demolished and replaced as long as the new structure is substantially similar to the former structure. 
g.  New residential construction, structure and site. A new single family residence and accompanying site layout proposed with one (1) dwelling unit may be constructed as long as the new structure and site proposed is substantially similar to: the structure previously occupying the same lot, the structures on nearby and adjacent lots, or structures in the same subdivision. 
h.  New commercial construction, structure and site. The constructor of new commercial buildings must comply with the Downtown District Architectural Standards. 
i.  In the absence of other architectural standards, as detailed above, Downtown District Architectural Standards shall govern. Setbacks shall remain consistent with those recorded on the applicable subdivision plat or in effect at the time the lot was recorded. 
j.  The installation of planned infrastructure including the extension of grid streets, trails, and pedestrian projects with new construction projects is required. The dedication of right-of-way for the future expansion of planned public improvements is required with new construction. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018; Ord. No. 5360-2018, § 1, 9-10-2018) 
7.724. - Public Infrastructure and Standard Details. 
In addition to Articles III and XV of the LDO, all downtown development shall comply with downtown standards as outlined in the downtown standards policy adopted by the Mayor and City Council with resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.725. - Open Space Requirements. 
All open space requirements shall be subject to a CCC. All developments shall be required to dedicate open space. Location of such open space shall be approved by the City either within the confines of the development or at a proximate location. The minimum requirement for open space is twenty (20) percent of the parcel area. 
In addition to the definition requirements, open space shall be dedicated, designed and constructed pursuant to the following regulations: 
1.  Detention ponds and required stream buffers shall not be used in open space calculations. 
2.  The owner shall submit a maintenance agreement establishing a mechanism for maintaining open space dedication located within subject development. 
3.  Open space requirements shall be constructed or dedicated as part of the first phase of construction, in an amount equivalent to the first phase proportion of the total development. 
4.  Open space dedication shall be guaranteed through bonds, conservation easements, land donation to the City or permanent deed restriction. In lieu of open space dedication, a cash value contribution shall be provided to the City's open space bank, which contribution shall be equivalent to the square footage value of subject land multiplied times the square footage of such open space requirement. The value of the subject land shall be equal to the land value as determined by the county assessor on the most recent property tax statement. 
5.  Non-residential development shall provide public open space, which shall be open to the public during daylight hours and other hours as determined by the City. Residential development shall provide either public open space or private open space. 
6.  Where greenway trails are required along streams, there shall be public access along such greenway trails and there shall be a minimum seventy-five (75) feet natural buffer along such streams measured from top of bank, which may include such greenway trail and such natural buffer shall be calculated towards open space requirements. 
7.  Side setbacks, lot remnants, and areas not easily accessible to pedestrians are not to be considered open space to meet the minimum requirement. 
8.  Open Space privacy buffer option. Where new developments are adjacent to existing residential development, screening buffer areas may be used to meet up to twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum open space requirement (five (5) percent of the parcel area). To qualify, screening buffer areas must be at least seven (7) feet in depth, contain a wall or fence at least forty (40) inches in height, and contain dense plantings of evergreen trees and shrubs, to be approved by the Community Development Director or designee. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.726. - Street and Sidewalk Area Requirements. 
1.  Whenever a development three (3) acres or greater is to be developed or redeveloped, maximum block sizes requirements shall apply in each subarea as indicated on the downtown site limits table. For any new development that requires a street to be constructed, the right-of-way for such portion of said street shall be platted according to specified street requirements as indicated below and on the street type tables. The owner is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of the "The City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance." The entire dedicated right-of-way shall be shown as such on a final survey plat that is submitted to and approved by the City. Measurements involving minimum lot standards shall be made at the edge of the full right-of-way. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any new development on such lot, either the street shall be constructed or guaranteed through bonds to the standards established herein. Development permission that would have otherwise been allowed within such dedicated street right-of-way shall be allowed to be developed elsewhere on the site. 
2.  New streets within DT-VLR (very low-density residential) and DT-LR (low-density residential) shall be D1 (local residential) or D2 (give-way residential), within DT-MR-A (medium-density residential A), DT-MR-B (medium-density residential B), and DT-RO (residential/office) streets shall be D1 (local residential), D2 (give-way residential), or B (local mixed-use), and within all other subareas shall be B (local mixed-use) streets. See street type tables. All new and improved streets in the Downtown District shall use header curb with no gutter. 
3.  Planned grid streets and connections shall be installed as shown on the most recently adopted Woodstock Town Center LCI Plan. Grading at ends of grid streets shall be prepared for the easiest future connection by neighboring properties. 
4.  A sidewalk area shall be located along all streets and shall consist of a sidewalk landscape zone with street trees, an unobstructed sidewalk clear zone, and a supplemental zone with requirements as indicated on the street type table—sidewalk area and greenway trail requirements. Changes to the configuration of the sidewalk area may be granted by administrative waiver if there are existing trees, overhead or underground utilities, or existing buildings present in the required sidewalk area locations. Administrative Waivers shall be determined by the Development Process Committee (DPC). Any Person aggrieved by a decision of the DPC may appeal in writing directly to City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter X of the Land Development Ordinance. 
5.  Any paving including concrete, special or decorative paving within the sidewalk landscape zone, sidewalk clear zone, or sidewalk supplemental zone shall continue across any intervening driveway. 
6.  Dead-end and cul-de-sac streets are prohibited. 
Prior to extending an existing street within the Downtown District, approval by City Council is required. An owner or applicant seeking to extend an existing street must first submit the request in writing to the Community Development Department. A public hearing will be scheduled before the City Council, adhering to the public hearing and public notice requirements outlined in Chapter XI, Zoning Policy and Procedures, of this Land Development Code. 
Should a proposed street extension accompany a rezoning request, the street extension will be evaluated and considered in conjunction with the rezoning request, following the zoning process as outlined in Chapter XI, Zoning Policy and Procedures. 
7.  Within the sidewalk landscape zone. 
a.  Street trees are required as indicated in the street type table—sidewalk area and greenway trail requirements. Street trees shall be planted a maximum of fifty (50) feet on center and spaced equal distance between streetlights and in line with stripes of parallel parking spaces. All newly planted trees shall be a minimum caliper of three and one-half (3.5) inches measured twelve (12) inches above ground, shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven (7) feet and shall have a minimum mature height of forty (40) feet. Trees shall have a minimum planting area of two hundred (200) square feet. As stated by Chapter IX Tree Preservation and Replacement Standards, if existing underground utilities are present, the Director of Community Development may allow alternative proposals on a case by case basis. In the event that existing overhead power lines prohibit the planting of required overstory trees, an appropriate understory tree species may be selected and approved for required inches according to accepted horticultural standards and as approved by the impacted utility. The criteria by which cases with underground utilities shall be evaluated includes the size, location, and depth of the existing underground utilities, and the size, type, location, and appropriateness of the plantings proposed as an alternative to the required street trees. 
b.  Within DT-VLR (very low-density residential) and DT-LR (low-density residential) shall be continuous trees and groundcover with exception of intervening driveways. Within all other subareas shall be groundcover, decorative paving, or tree grates with exception of intervening driveways. 
c.  All street furniture and pavers, where installed, shall have a location and type subject to approval including but not limited to the following benches, waste receptacles, bicycle racks, newspaper stands, tree grates, and street lights. Tree grates shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet by five (5) feet. Decorative pedestrian lights shall be placed a maximum of one hundred (100) feet on center and shall be spaced equal distance between required trees. All downtown standard details are on file with the community development department. 
d.  Street tree requirements within the sidewalk landscape zone may be met through landscape bulb-outs between on-street parking spaces on Main Street downtown, local mixed-use, and local residential streets that have on-street parking. The final placement of street or pedestrian lights shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Department. 
e.  Sidewalk area width requirements may be reduced for streets with entire total lengths of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less within DT-MR-A (medium-density residential A) and DT-MR-B (medium-density residential B). 
8.  Within the sidewalk supplemental zone: 
a.  Terraces, porches stoops, and stairs may encroach a maximum depth of sixty (60) percent of the total zone depth, and shall have a maximum finished floor height of twenty-four (24) inches above finished-grade. Such terraces, porches, and stoops shall not be considered street facade. 
b.  Balconies, awnings and bay windows may encroach a maximum depth of five (5) feet of the total zone width. 
c.  DT-RO (residential/office), DT-MR-A (medium-density residential A), and DT-MR-B (medium-density residential B) shall provide landscaping for a minimum of forty (40) percent of the zone's horizontal area adjacent to sidewalk level residential treatments. 
d.  Hardscaping shall be provided for a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the zone's horizontal area adjacent to storefront treatments. 
e.  DT-VLR (very low-density residential) and DT-LR (low-density residential) shall provide a minimum of three (3) feet between the sidewalk clear zone and any structure such as stairs, terraces, porches, and stoops. 
f.  Buildings with no adjacent sidewalk supplemental zone that exist before March 2005 may have outdoor dining areas encroach a maximum of two (2) feet into the sidewalk clear zone, measured from the street facade. 
g.  Sidewalk supplemental zone width requirements may be reduced where the sidewalk landscape zone is increased to a minimum width of ten (10) feet for purposes of locating outdoor dining. 
h.  Sidewalk supplemental zone width requirements may be increased where taller buildings are proposed along narrow streets, at the discretion of the Director of Community Development. To determine the appropriate supplemental zone width, the Director shall consider the width of the street in proportion to the height of the structures proposed. 

 

 

 
;adv=6q>(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.727. - Parking, Garage, Driveway and Access Requirements. 
1.  No parking shall be permitted between a building and the street without an intervening building, except in DT-GC (general commercial) where the street facade frontage requirements have been met. 
2.  Developments are permitted a maximum of one (1) driveway curb cut per block face or one (1) curb cut per four hundred (400) linear feet of block face, whichever is greater. For the purposes of this section, two (2) curb cuts serving two (2) one-way driveways shall only be counted as one (1) curb cut. Curb cuts for a street and an alley may be installed closer than four hundred (400) linear feet, subject to final approval by the City Engineer. 
3.  No curb cuts, driveways or circular drives shall be permitted on Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, or Arnold Mill Road when access can be provided from a side or rear street. Circular drives are prohibited, with the exception of hotel and hospital uses, in the DT-CMU (commercial mixed-use) and DT-GC (general commercial) subareas. 
4.  Driveway curb cuts on streets shall be limited to a one (1) way maximum width of twelve (12) feet or a two (2) way maximum width of twenty-four (24) feet, alleyways are not included. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements shall be as established in section 7.760, parking performance standards, except that all multifamily residential uses, such as apartments/duplexes and condominiums, shall be required to provide one (1) space per bedroom, but not more than two (2) spaces. 
6.  Screening of Parking Areas. 
a.  Any parking not screened from the street by a building shall have a minimum seven (7) foot wide landscaped area between such parking and the street. Such landscaped area shall have a minimum of one (1) shade tree per fifty (50) linear feet, groundcover, and an evergreen hedge at a maximum of thirty-six (36) inches or decorative wall or fence with a minimum height of thirty (30) inches. Trees shall be planted and street lighting placed in line with the stripes of adjacent parking spaces. 
b.  Parking areas in new developments that are located within twenty-five (25) feet of existing residential development, if not entirely screened by an intervening building, shall have a continuous, visual screen from the residential development reaching a minimum height of six (6) feet. This screen shall consist of a compact evergreen hedge or other foliage screening, and a wall or fence. 
7.  Where the end of a parking space has a permanent concrete or masonry curb and abuts a landscaped area that is a minimum width of six (6) feet, the depth of such space may be reduced by two (2) feet. 
8.  Commercial parking lots are not permitted except where individual businesses lease spaces under a shared parking arrangement. 
9.  Paving materials used for parking and loading areas other than asphalt or concrete shall be subject to approval by administrative variance. 
10.  Required parking may be provided off-site within one thousand (1,000) feet of use except in DT-LRV (very low-density residential), DT-LR (low-density residential), DT-MR-A (medium-density residential A), and DT-MR-B (medium-density residential B). Public and on-street parking cannot be used to meet building requirements except for on-street parking directly adjacent to the subject property. Using on-street parking to meet parking requirements is optional. 
11.  Angled on-street parking on both sides shall be permitted. Forty-five (45) degree angled parking shall require parking space length of nineteen (19) feet and two (2) travel lanes width of ten (10) feet. Sixty (60) degree angled parking shall require parking space length of twenty (20) feet and two (2) travel lanes width of eleven (11) feet. Ninety (90) degree angled parking shall require parking space length of eighteen (18) feet and two (2) travel lanes width of twelve (12) feet. Parallel parking spaces shall be eight (8) feet deep and twenty-two (22) feet long. 
12.  Reduction of parking requirements may be permitted, subject to a shared parking arrangement under the following criteria: 
a.  The minimum number of parking spaces for a development where shared parking is proposed shall be determined by a study prepared by the applicant following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Report or Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Shared Parking Guidelines. The actual number of parking spaces required shall be based on well-recognized sources of parking data such as the ULI or ITE reports. If standard rates are not available or limited, the applicant may collect data at similar sites to establish local parking demand rates. If the shared parking plan assumes use of an existing parking facility, then field surveys shall be conducted to determine actual parking accumulation. If possible, these surveys shall consider the seasonal peak period for the combination of land uses involved; 
b.  All shared parking spaces shall be clearly marked as such; and 
c.  An applicant shall submit the following information as part of an application to reduce parking requirements and avoid conflicting parking demands. 
i.  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces. 
ii.  Hours of business operation of non-residential parking users. 
iii.  Written consent of property owners agreeing to the shared parking arrangement (when provided off-site). 
iv.  Copies of parking lease agreement, easements for parking, or notarized letter or sworn affidavit as to the intent of lease agreement, including renewed leases, shall be filed with the Department of Planning and Economic Development. Lapse of a required lease agreement shall terminate approval for shared parking. 
13.  Rear alleys shall be provided to access townhouse and multifamily garages, single-family dwelling garages, and commercial loading and service areas, where such access is feasible. See Street Type Table—Alley Requirements. 
14.  All required off-street parking for townhouses and multifamily dwellings, excluding accessory dwelling units, shall be met in a private, on-site, enclosed garage or in a parking structure. 
15.  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: All new non-residential uses shall provide one (1) such space for every twenty (20) automobile spaces and new multifamily uses shall provide one (1) such space for every five (5) units provided that no such uses shall have fewer than two (2) such spaces or be required to exceed thirty (30) spaces. Such spaces shall be located within the sidewalk landscape zone a maximum distance of one hundred (100) feet from the primary pedestrian entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. Bicycle parking spaces shall include a bike rack with a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. 
16.  Garages and carports shall not face adjacent streets except where alley access is not feasible, in which case such garages and carports shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the street facade. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.728. - Site Limits. 
1.  Where such street facade frontage requirements are satisfied by existing principal buildings, additional principle buildings shall be exempt from these requirements. 
2.  Any balconies, awnings and bay windows may encroach into any sidewalk supplemental zone or required setback a maximum depth of five (5) feet. 
3.  Walkways with a minimum width of four (4) feet shall be provided from the closest public sidewalk clear zone to the primary entrance of all buildings and structures not built to the sidewalk area, including parking structures. 
4.  All developments must comply with the following site limits table: 

 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.729. - Street Facade Requirements. 
Along the street facade of all new and renovated buildings and structures the following shall apply: 
1.  Sidewalk level uses shall have a primary pedestrian entrance, which faces, is visible from, and directly adjacent to required sidewalk area or adjoining open space, including but not limited to dwelling units, multifamily lobbies, and individual business establishments. 
a.  If the second level above the sidewalk level of a residential structure is the main living space, which includes the kitchen and main living room, a walkway and stairs shall connect the sidewalk to the front porch or stoop through the Supplemental Zone. 
b.  Where an individual use has a street facade on more than one (1) street, such entrance requirement shall apply along Main Street, or when on other streets, such requirement shall apply along the higher order of street shown on the Downtown District regulating plan, with "A" being the highest order and "E" being the lowest. Where both streets are the same order, entrance orientation may be to either street. 
c.  Units fronting on Open Spaces may only do so if a street borders the opposite side of the Open Space, and the primary pedestrian entrance shall face and be visible from the Open Space and street. 
2.  All buildings with more than four (4) sidewalk area level residential units along a single street shall have individual entrances to such units directly accessible from the required sidewalk area or adjoining open space except in the historic zone. All walkways providing such access shall be shared between no more than two (2) adjacent units. 
3.  The first two (2) stories of building facades shall be brick, cast stone, concrete siding such as hardiplank, natural wood or stone, with the exception of pedestrian entrances and windows. In DT-CBD (central business district) such requirements shall apply to the entire building facade along Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, and Arnold Mill Road and building facades seen from such streets. 
4.  Awnings shall be of fabrics, canvas, fixed metal, or similar material. Internally lit awnings and canopies that emit light through the awning or canopy material are prohibited. 
5.  Blank, windowless walls are prohibited. All building stories with the exception of storefront treatments shall have windows and doors that equal a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the total facade length with each story being calculated independently, gables are exempt. For secondary street facade frontages on corner lots, see Subsection 18. 
6.  All windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width, including display windows but not transoms. Windows located inside gables are exempt. 
7.  Glass panels in windows and storefronts shall be clear and unpainted, and shall not be tinted such that views into the building are obstructed. False windows may be allowed by administrative waiver when warranted by the interior design of the structure, such as the presence of fireplaces or stairwells blocking window locations, and when not used excessively. 
8.  Entry facade window trim shall not be flush with the exterior wall and shall have a minimum relief of one-quarter (.25) inch from the exterior wall, except on brick and stone facades. A window detail showing these dimensions shall be present on all building plans for downtown structures. 
9.  Doors and windows that operate as horizontal sliders are prohibited. 
10.  Window frames shall be recessed a minimum of two (2) inches from the exterior facade. Window frames on other than masonry facades shall be trimmed with multi-dimensional trim with a minimum width of three inches and include header and apron trims. Multiple dimensions can accomplished by layering of trim or use of more detailed trim. Prior approval of details required. 
11.  Porches and stoops shall not be enclosed with screen wire or glass on primary frontages. 
12.  Porch and arcade columns shall be a minimum width of six (6) inches, unless otherwise determined by the Director of Community Development. 
13.  Residential porches shall be covered and have a minimum depth of five (5) feet, a minimum length of eight (8) feet and a minimum area of forty (40) feet. 
14.  Exterior entry steps shall have enclosed risers. 
15.  Building foundations shall be brick, stone, stucco, or concrete with similar appearance. 
16.  Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from visibility; shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels; shall be faced in brick, stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stone. 
17.  The minimum building height as measured along the build-to line shall be eighteen (18) feet in all subareas except DT-OS (open space), where there shall be no minimum building height. 
18.  Buildings on corner lots have two (2) street facades. The secondary frontage, or the facade without the primary pedestrian entrance, shall have the option, in lieu of providing minimum thirty (30) percent window coverage on each story, to provide, on a minimum of forty (40) percent of the facade on each story, a mixture of architectural elements that conform with this section, including porches, balconies, doors, a historic or unique brick pattern, or a mixture of materials and architectural accents such as ledges, moldings, millwork, and keystones. Proposals for this alternative shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Community Development. 
19.  All buildings shall have street facades with continuous storefront treatment or residential treatment requirements as indicated in the building facade and materials requirements table. 
20.  See building facade and material requirements table for maximum building height requirements. 

 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.730. - General Requirements. 
1.  Building Requirements. 
a.  The primary pedestrian entrance to all sidewalk level retail and eating and drinking establishments shall remain unlocked during business hours. 
b.  Primary sidewalk level pedestrian entrances to individual businesses and residential units shall be adjacent to required sidewalk area, park, plaza, or courtyard. 
c.  Building facade materials shall be combined only horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter. 
d.  Chimneys shall extend to the ground. 
e.  All roofs shall have a minimum twenty-five (25) year roof and no visible roll roofing. 
f.  Building mechanical and accessory features: 
i.  Shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure or on rooftops and shall be screened from any public open space or sidewalk area views. 
ii.  When located on rooftops shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with materials similar to the building. 
g.  Any parapet walls shall extend around all sides of the building. 
h.  On residential buildings, if rear decks or porches are visible from any streets, public sidewalks, public trails, or are adjacent to and visible from any Open Spaces, they shall be covered, and designed with materials to match the façade and/or trim of the building. 
2.  Site Requirements. 
a.  The height of fences and walls located between the street facade of principal structures and a street shall not exceed forty (40) inches and in other areas shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
b.  Fences and walls located along the alley right-of-way line shall be a maximum height of six (6) feet. For new development, where new alleys run along parcel lines of existing developments, a wall shall be required to screen the alley from the existing property or properties. The wall shall be four (4) to six (6) feet in height and shall be constructed with a brick, stone, or stucco veneer, or a combination of masonry materials that complement the theme of the property architecture and/or site design. 
c.  No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link or similar elements shall be visible from any public park, required sidewalk area, or sidewalk area level outdoor dining area. 
d.  Loading docks and dumpsters shall be entirely screened from view of any public open space or sidewalk area, with a dumpster pad enclosure. Dumpster pad enclosure is required, constructed of the same materials, and matching the architecture of the principal structure. Doors and gates shall be opaque and must remain closed while not in use. Chain-link is not an acceptable material. 
e.  Utilities shall be placed underground or in alleys wherever feasible. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.731. - Historic Overlay District (DT-HO) Requirements. 
Buildings within the historic overlay shall be of a scale and character compatible with historic residential buildings as described below. Parcels within the historic zone are subject to the following regulations, in addition to other requirements of the Downtown District. 
1.  The required build-to line shall match the average distance between the primary structure and the curb of the nearest two (2) adjacent buildings on the same street built before 1945. 
2.  No parking shall be located between any structure and the street, and no parking shall be located to either side of any structure fronting an A or B street. 
3.  This district is intended for Detached Single-family homes, even if they have a commercial use. Multiple residential dwelling units within the same building are prohibited in DT-HO. 
4.  Detached and attached garages shall both be permitted. Attached garages shall have decorative doors which shall be located in an inconspicuous location, so as not to become the main architectural feature on structures on lots that are front-loaded. The architecture of detached garages shall match and compliment the primary structure. 
5.  All exterior facades except windows shall be brick, horizontal hardiplank, natural wood or stone. 
6.  Flat roofs shall be prohibited. 
7.  Parking decks shall be prohibited. 
8.  Roofs shall extend a minimum of eighteen (18) inches beyond exterior building walls. 
9.  Exterior street facade doors shall be wood panel or fixed glass in wood frame. 
10.  Primary structures shall have a residential treatment regardless of use. 
11.  All windows shall be either double-hung or fixed glass in keeping with the particular architectural style described below. 
12.  With the exception of stories partially contained within roofs, all above-ground stories shall be equal in floor area and shape. 
13.  All street facade porches that are not a required "accessible route into and through the dwelling unit", as established by Section 804 [42 U.S.C. 3604](3)(C)(iii)(I) of the Fair Housing Act, shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches above the grade of the sidewalk area. 
14.  Buildings shall be one (1) of the following five (5) architectural styles and shall meet all the requirements contained herein. 
a.  Craftsman, which shall provide: 
i.  A rectangular building footprint, with the short end facing a street. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of twenty (20) degrees and a maximum pitch of forty (40) degrees from horizontal, with roof lines running parallel or perpendicular to the street. 
iii.  Decorative beams or braces under gables. 
iv.  Exposed roof rafters where roofs overhang. 
v.  Equal height windows along the entire street facade. 
vi.  A symmetrical or asymmetrical street facade. 
vii.  A front porch extending the entire width or one-half (0.5) the width of the building. Said porch shall include square columns not less than eight (8) inches thick that taper from bottom to top. Said columns shall be set atop stone or masonry bases extended to the ground. Square or rectangular balusters and handrails are optional. 
b.  Folk, which shall provide: 
i.  A building footprint that is rectangular or "L-shaped," with the end of the short leg of the "L" facing a street. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of thirty (30) degrees and a maximum pitch of forty-five (45) degrees from horizontal, with roof lines parallel or perpendicular to the street. 
iii.  Ridge vents having a minimum size of one (1) foot by one (1) foot shall be provided along all gables facing a public street. 
iv.  Equal sized windows along the entire street facade. 
v.  A symmetrical street facade for buildings with rectangular footprints. 
vi.  A front porch extending the entire width of the building, except with an "L-shaped" footprint said requirement shall not apply to the short-leg of the "L". Said porches shall include turned columns, turned balusters, handrails, and optional lace-like spandrels. 
c.  Simple Queen Anne, which shall provide: 
i.  A building footprint that is rectangular or "L-shaped," which may include the circular base of a tower. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having steep pitch, which may be of irregular shape. 
iii.  An asymmetrical front porch that is one (1) story and wraps around one (1) or both sidewalls of the building. 
iv.  Porch columns that taper from the top to bottom, with decorative details at the top. 
d.  Colonial Revival, which shall provide: 
i.  A rectangular building footprint with the long side facing a street. 
ii.  A gabled, hipped, gambrel, or second story overhang roof. 
iii.  An accentuated entrance with a pediment supported by pilasters and/or an entry porch supported by slender columns. 
iv.  A symmetrical street facade with a centered door and balanced rectangular windows. 
v.  A cornice between the street facade and roof that extends around the entire roofline of the structure. 
e.  Gothic Revival, which shall provide: 
i.  A building footprint that is rectangular or "L-shaped," with the end of the short leg of the "L" facing a street. 
ii.  A symmetrical street facade for buildings with rectangular footprints. 
iii.  A steeply pitched centered gable, paired gable, front-gable, or asymmetrical roof. 
iv.  At least one (1) window with Gothic detailing. 
v.  A one (1) story front porch supported by column with Gothic detailing which either extends the entire width of the building or as an entry porch. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.732. - Illustrations. 
The drawings within this section are graphic depictions of some of the requirements herein. Unless otherwise indicated, each is intended to specifically illustrate only the indicated requirement; all other suggestions of design, such as architectural style, tree shape and aesthetics, do not constitute a requirement of this section (refer to supplemental section entitled "Downtown District Graphics" provided separately at Appendix A at the end of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE VIII. - OTHER DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS AND OVERLAY ZONING 

7.800. - Ridgewalk Overlay District Ordinance. 
7.801. - Intent and Purpose. 
The intent of the Ridgewalk Overlay District is to set a standard for the design, form, and use of properties in the Ridgewalk Parkway corridor that will provide an appropriate transition of density and intensity, which should be situated in a decreasing pattern, radiating outward from the interstate interchange. The Overlay is intended to support commercial development and protect the integrity of the existing neighborhoods by regulating scale and creating a consistent design language articulated through streetscape, trail connections, and architectural requirements. 
The regulations set forth in the Ridgewalk Overlay District are designed to: 
1.  Produce well-designed, unique, and attractive commercial developments. 
2.  Respect existing residential development. 
3.  Produce commercial buildings that are reusable by future commercial users with different uses, and to discourage highly specialized buildings with common national brand architecture. 
4.  Provide a regulatory framework to maximize commercial productivity. 
5.  Result in developments that exhibit a consistent character which is unique to Woodstock and more specifically, to the Ridgewalk area. 
6.  Provide accessible and sufficient parking that is not concentrated in large parking lots. 
7.  Provide safe, comfortable, and unique pedestrian access complete with connected, effective transitions from one (1) property to the next. 
8.  Create and maintain an environment where commercial development can flourish and remain viable and visible in the Woodstock market. 
9.  Produce a consistent streetscape that is rich with aesthetic design elements such as brick piers, fences, hedges, decorative walls, ornamental trees, canopy trees, and decorative streetlights with wide sidewalks separated from traffic. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.802. - Boundaries of Ridgewalk Overlay District. 
The Ridgewalk Overlay District shall include those properties that are zoned GC or NC, which have property frontage along any portion of Ridgewalk Parkway and are identified on the most recently approved Zoning Map, which is on file with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.803. - Legally Non-Conforming Properties. 
At the time of the adoption of this ordinance, all previously developed properties shall be deemed to be in compliance with this ordinance, until such time that any improvement which requires a land development or building permit is requested. Tenant finishes and minor repairs are excluded. Such permit shall only be granted if the improvements proposed meet the standards herein, and if the streetscape along any frontage adjacent to Ridgewalk Parkway is brought into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.804. - Definitions Related to this Overlay District. 
Decorative: Requires the use of brick or stone veneer, complementing the primary structure. 
Decorative Lighting: Outdoor lighting, including pole and fixture, meeting the specifications of the outdoor lighting installed on Ridgewalk Parkway at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
Decorative Walls/Fences: Those walls and fences with brick, stone, or wood veneer. 
Façade, Primary: The street-facing façade of the building which includes the main building entrance or the primary pedestrian entrance, and which faces Ridgewalk Parkway or the most primary street. 
Façade, Secondary: A building façade which faces a street or civic area, without another intervening building, which is not the primary façade. 
Façade, Tertiary: A building façade which does not face a street, civic area, or open space. 
Fountain: An ornamental structure in a body of water from which one (1) or more jets of water are pumped into the air. 
Landscaping, Additional: Trees, shrubs, and permanent plantings installed twenty-five (25) percent beyond minimum Code requirements. 
Office or Employment Use: A use where the primary purpose is an office use, as regulated by Section 7.505, or a use with the creation of fifty (50) or more full-time-equivalent jobs in key business sectors. Key business sectors are as determined by the City of Woodstock Economic Development Department. 
Open Space: Property not intended for development or reserved for preservation as open space, including waterways, stream buffers, floodplain, steep slopes, or remnants. 
Plaza, Corner: A small public gathering area, delineated with decorative pavers or concrete and may include street furniture on the corner of two (2) streets. 
Pocket Park: A public space providing passive recreation. 
Public Art: Sculptures of at least two (2) feet in height and murals of at least one hundred sixty-five (165) square feet. 
Stormwater Feature: A water quality, detention, or retention design that exceeds minimum standards, as found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, creating an attractive amenity for the site. 
Street Furniture: Includes benches, trash cans, and other pieces of equipment meeting City specifications as set forth in the plans for Transportation Enhancement Project PI Number 0010648. 
Sustainability Measures: Measures found in Section 7.520 of the Land Development Ordinance or proposed by a developer and approved by the DPC. 
Terminated Vista: A location containing a building or monument that stands at the end or in the middle of a road, so that when one is looking up the street, the view ends with the site containing the building or monument. A building located at a terminated vista is required to be designed in response to the context. 
Transportation System Improvement: A public transportation project or donation in lieu to complete a public transportation project other than roadway and pedestrian improvements required by the LDO to serve the project. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.805. - Site Development Standards. 
1.  For properties within the Ridgewalk Overlay District, minimum setbacks shall be as follows: 

 
2.  A forty-five (45) foot buffer shall be required along any property line that is adjacent to any property that is part of any of the following existing platted subdivisions: Brookshire, Meridian, Montclair, Whitfield, and the Magnolias at Ridgewalk. A fifty (50) foot buffer shall be required adjacent to any USACE-owned properties. Aside from these, no other zoning buffers shall be required on properties located in the Overlay. Buffers in the Overlay shall follow the design standards found in Article VI of this Chapter, Buffers. 
3.  Parking 
a.  Parking minimum and maximum requirements for number of spaces shall be as required by Chapter VII, Article V. 
Parking areas shall be distributed around the site, rather than being concentrated in large lots, unless these lots are screened from the public right-of-way by buildings. A maximum of two (2) rows of parking may be located between the primary structure and any streets. Smaller parking lots containing no more than four (4) rows or parking spaces are permitted to be located to the side of buildings, and larger lots are permitted to be located behind buildings, generally as shown below. 

(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.806. - Site Design Standards. 
1.  All development within the Ridgewalk Overlay shall adhere to the required standards set forth in the following points matrix. Using the matrix, each site proposed for development must a achieve a minimum score as follows: 

 
  

 
The DPC will review and approve the final score for each proposed development. No development shall receive a land disturbance permit (LDP) unit the final score is approved by the DPC. An applicant may appeal the DPC decision directly to the City Council. 
2.  Streetscape Requirements—At a minimum, each site developed must include the following: 
a.  Ridgewalk Parkway: 
i.  Sidewalk—Five (5) feet in width along the northside of Ridgewalk Parkway and ten (10) feet in width along the southside. 
ii.  Landscape Strip—Seven (7) feet between the back of curb and the sidewalk. 
iii.  Decorative lighting—Every one hundred (100) feet on center (o.c.) in the landscape strip. 
iv.  Street Trees—Every fifty (50) feet on center (o.c.) in the landscape strip. 
v.  Brick/Stone Piers—Every one hundred (100) feet on center (o.c.) with the decorative fence in between, as depicted below. 

b.  Other Streets. At a minimum, a five (5) foot sidewalk is required. 
i.  Parking must be screened if visible from streets by an evergreen hedge, minimum thirty-six (36) inches tall. 
ii.  Alterations in streetscape requirements may be achieved with the deducts found in the matrix. 
3.  Pedestrian Network: 
a.  A pedestrian network interior to the site shall be composed of minimum five (5) foot wide sidewalks which shall give access from the sidewalk or trail within the Streetscape, through any parking lots, to the primary entrance of each commercial or business establishment. These sidewalks shall be located outside of any drive aisles except where required to cross the drive aisle. 
b.  The pedestrian network shall give access from each primary building entrance through and to any side or rear parking areas intended to serve the establishment. Pathways through large rear parking lots shall be six (6) to ten (10) feet wide. 
c.  The pedestrian network shall connect each property to the next wherever there is a logical connection to be made, including connections to any open spaces or civic areas on the site or which border the site. 
4.  Other Site Design Standards: 
a.  Loading docks, service areas, and dumpsters shall not be located in any Front Yard or streetscape area and shall be screened if visible from the public right of way by a combination of fences, walls and landscaping, but not landscaping alone. Dumpsters shall be located in an enclosure designed to be consistent with the principal building in material, texture, and color, and shall have gates or doors which are to remain closed when not being accessed. 
b.  Terminated Vista locations shall be considered during site design. A Terminated Vista shall not terminate in a parking lot, to the side or back of a building, or any other unappealing area. Prominent buildings with enhanced architecture often with a vertical element, civic spaces, fountains, monuments, or sculptures are appropriate features for Terminated Vista areas. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.807. - Architectural Standards. 
1.  The Primary Façade of a proposed building shall include the main building entrance and primary pedestrian entrance, and shall face Ridgewalk Parkway, or the most primary street. 
2.  The façade composition standards below shall apply to any street-facing building façade, and any building façade which faces a civic space. These are considered Primary or Secondary Façades. 
a.  Primary façades shall be articulated and designed to create additional visual interest by varying architectural details, building materials, the roof line, and building offsets. 
b.  Windows and doors shall be provided for at least fifteen (15) percent of the total façade area, with each story calculated independently, including spaces between floors. The maximum contiguous area without windows or doors shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and twenty (20) feet in width. 
c.  Façades over fifty (50) feet in length shall incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum of twelve (12) inches in depth. The combined length of said recesses and projections shall constitute at least twenty (20) percent of the total façade length. 
d.  Façades over two hundred (200) feet in length shall incorporate a major articulation at least every two hundred (200) feet of façade length. Said major articulation shall occur for a minimum length of twenty (20) feet and shall be accomplished through: 
i.  A change of façade material from the grade to the roof; or 
ii.  A change in façade composition from the grade to the roof; or 
iii.  Changes in storefront systems, varying setbacks, or similar means intended to convey the impression of separate buildings. 
3.  Tertiary Façades do not have window, door, or articulation requirements but shall incorporate a decorative pattern with varied materials and textures in lieu of windows or doors. For the purpose of satisfying this requirement, control and expansion joints shall not constitute a decorative pattern with varied materials and textures. 
4.  Façade material standards for Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Façades shall be as follows: 
a.  Primary Façades shall be composed of a majority of Tier 1 façade materials, with twenty (20) percent or less of the façade area being composed of Tier 2 façade materials, and five (5) percent or less of the façade area being composed of Tier 3 materials (intended for trim and other small architectural features). 
b.  Secondary Façades shall be composed completely of Tier 1 or Tier 2 façade materials, and five (5) percent or less of Tier 3 materials. 
c.  Tertiary Façades shall be composed of Tier 1, 2, or 3 materials, with no more than eighty (80) percent of the façade being composed of Tier 3 materials. 
d.  Exposed neon or LED lighting outlining and detailing building features is prohibited. 
5.  Façade materials are as follows: 
a.  Tier 1 façade materials are brick, stone, cast stone, and natural wood. 
b.  Tier 2 façade materials are hard-coat stucco, quik brik and similar faux brick systems, and cementitious siding. 
c.  Tier 3 façade materials are Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS), metal, faux wood or wood composite, and concrete. EIFS shall not be used within six (6) feet of the foundation or slab. Other composite materials may be considered Tier 3 materials, as approved by staff. 
6.  Accessory structures shall be consistent with the principal building in material, texture, and color, and shall not be covered in only Tier 3 materials. 
7.  Foundations, where provided, shall be constructed as a distinct building element that contrasts with the façade materials. Exposed above-ground foundations shall be coated or faced in stucco, brick, cast stone, or natural stone to contrast with façade materials. Exposed cement surfaces may be approved by administrative waiver. 
8.  Flat roofs shall be screened from the view of public and private streets by a parapet with a cornice, which shall extend around all sides of the building. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment, vents, and stacks shall be screened from view from all sides. Roofing material and color shall be compatible with the building and its surroundings. 
9.  Optional Approval Process for architectural elevations. 
a.  The details of architectural elevations for any proposed building in the Ridgewalk Overlay must be approved by staff for compliance of this section, and for adherence to the intent and purpose of the Overlay. 
b.  In situations where the proposed architecture is not in compliance with these standards, but staff feels that with some changes, the intent and purpose of the Ridgewalk Overlay could be met, the Community Development Department reserves the right to engage an architect for review of the proposed building. 
c.  The applicant, architect, and staff shall work together to reach a design that conforms to the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, which shall then be voted on for approval by the DPC. 
d.  In the event that the DPC does not approve the proposed architecture, the City Council shall have the right to approve or deny architecture on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.808—7.839. - Reserved. 
7.840. - Specific Standards for Senior Living. 
7.841. - Purpose and Intent of Senior Living. 
The regulations set forth in senior living are designed to: 
1.  Provide for the development of detached, attached, and multifamily dwelling units limited to those persons age fifty-five (55) and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act. 
2.  Locate these developments in areas where retail, professional, civic, and cultural uses are convenient for residents to access, preferably even when they can no longer drive. 
3.  Promote the concept of aging in place which provides a variety of living choices aimed at allowing residents to remain in their communities as they age. These include communities with a mix of housing type and size, active living communities, assisted living facilities and full care facilities. 
4.  Promote pedestrian safety by ensuring sidewalk-oriented buildings and attractive street-facing facades that foster pedestrian activity and liveliness. 
5.  Provide an adequate amount of meaningful open space within each development which creates areas for social interaction among neighbors, opportunities for recreation, and is easily accessible for all residents. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.842, 7.843. - Reserved. 
7.844. - Residential Density Bonus. 
Density bonuses will be awarded to each senior living project which incorporates affordable units, assisted living units, and/or full care facilities. These bonuses are listed in the table and are based on a percentage of the total units by project, followed by a maximum allowed density in each subarea. 

 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.845. - Location Requirements. 
Any project in a SL category must adhere to the following location requirements. These requirements are calculated by measuring the walkable distance on an improved surface between the main entrance of the SL neighborhood or building to the front door of the commercial facility. 
1.  SL-A and SL-B must be located within a three-quarter (0.75) mile radius of commercial retail uses including but not limited to grocery stores, pharmacies, and/or medical service facilities. Projects must also maintain the scale and intensity of surrounding uses. 
2.  SL-C must be located within a one-quarter (0.25) mile radius of commercial retail uses including but not limited to grocery stores, pharmacies, and/or medical service facilities. SL-C projects may be exempt from these requirements if these uses are provided on-site. Projects must also maintain the scale and intensity of surrounding uses. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.846. - Site Planning Requirements. 

 
Any project in a SL category must adhere to each of the following site planning requirements: 
1.  The minimum requirement for open space shall be twenty (20) percent of the project area. Required infrastructure, detention facilities and mandatory stream buffers shall not be used in open space calculations. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the total open space requirement shall be provided in the form of private open space. 
2.  Each unit in SL-A and SL-B shall provide a minimum of one (1) parking space in a garage structure, not to exceed two (2) spaces. All garages must be accessed through the use of rear alleys. 
3.  No parking in SL-C shall be permitted between the building(s) and the main access street in order to facilitate pedestrian access to the street. Vehicular access to the building(s) shall be provided from the rear, side, underneath or a courtyard. In addition, a main pedestrian access to each building shall be provided on the side facing the street. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.847. - Street Design Requirements. 
1.  In order to promote a safe pedestrian environment, street design shall accommodate the use of landscape strips, a minimum six (6) foot wide sidewalk on both sides of the street, and dedicated on-street parking areas where appropriate. 
2.  When a SL project fronts an existing street, the above requirements are to be applied along the existing street along the entire frontage of the property. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.848. - Senior Living Zoning Category Requirements. 
1.  The total number of units zoned under any SL category shall not exceed more than twenty (20) percent of the total number of housing units within the city limits. The number of units that may be zoned SL will be updated as needed by the City. 
2.  All SL developments shall have development plans approved by the City within eighteen (18) months of receiving SL zoning or it shall revert to the previous zoning category. At its discretion, City Council may grant extensions. 
3.  In order to promote a pedestrian friendly environment, the following overlay standards are expressly waived in favor of the requirements in the SL site limits table lot sizes, lot widths, streetscape adjustments, setbacks, and buffers. Any overlay standards related to streetscape themes and architectural requirements shall be adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.849. - Senior Living General Requirements. 
1.  All other sections of the City's Land Development Ordinance shall be enforced including but not limited to tree preservation, stream buffer requirements, engineering requirements, and signage regulations. 
2.  Upgrades to existing adjacent infrastructure shall be required including but not limited to the installation or upgrade of crosswalks and sidewalks, pedestrian signalization including count down timers and audio notification for the visually impaired, and/or wheelchair compatibility. 
3.  The exterior of each dwelling unit and other buildings shall be brick, cast stone, concrete siding such as hardiplank, natural wood, hard coat stucco, and/or natural stone. 
4.  All residential units within SL shall incorporate applicable and "Easy Living Home" standards to include: 
a.  A step free entrance into the main floor at either the front or side of the structure, or through the garage. 
b.  A bedroom, kitchen, wheelchair friendly bathroom, and entertaining area all on the main floor. 
c.  Every interior door on the main floor provides a minimum thirty-two (32) inches of clear passage. 
d.  Blocking installed in the bathroom(s) on the main floor to facilitate the future addition of handrails or similar accessibility features. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.850. - Specific Standards for Conservation Subdivisions. 
7.851. - Definition and Purpose of Conservation Subdivisions. 
A conservation subdivision is a residential zone that provides for the preservation of open space and greenspace for watershed protection and the nonstructural management of stormwater runoff. The purpose of the conservation subdivision is to provide flexibility of design in order to promote sustainable development of land in portions of the City already zoned for residential use. It permits the clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive lands which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. Appropriate use of the conservation subdivision can also: 
1.  Provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
2.  Provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
3.  Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
4.  Permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
5.  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.852. - Applicability. 
The conservation subdivision option is available in the residential zoning district listed in Section 7.300. Unless specifically noted, the development must meet all applicable requirements contained in Chapter III of this Ordinance in addition to the guidelines of this section. Ownership of Development Site: The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.853. - Minimum Development Requirements. 

 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.854. - Housing Density Determination for Conservation Subdivisions. 
The maximum number of lots in the Conservation Subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two (2) methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
1.  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The one hundred (100) year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
2.  Yield Plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.855. - Standards to Determine Open Space. 
1.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least forty (40) percent of the gross tract area. 
2.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory one hundred (100) year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least seventy-five (75) feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
3.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one (1) acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight (8) inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five (5) acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
4.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the forty (40) percent minimum area requirement (exception historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
5.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
6.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.856. - Permitted Uses of Open Space. 
Uses of open space may include the following: 
1.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
2.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
3.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
4  Passive recreation areas; 
5.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
6.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
7.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
8.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.857. - Prohibited uses of Open Space. 
1.  Golf courses; 
2.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
3.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
4.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.858. - Ownership and Management of Open Space. 
1.  The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
2.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. Should the homeowner's association go defunct responsibility falls to the actual homeowners. 
3.  Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection. The open space preserved as part of the conservation subdivision shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one (1) of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this Ordinance. If the entity accepting the easement is not the City, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City; 
d.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.859. - Conservation Subdivision Application Requirements. 
1.  Site Analysis Map Required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten (10) foot intervals; 
d.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in Section 4 of this article; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected open space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; and 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
2.  Open Space Management Plan Required. An open space management plan shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the City Council; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
3.  Instrument of Permanent Protection Required. An instrument of permanent protection, as described in [Subsection] (c)(6) of this section, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
4.  Other Requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.860. - Overlay Zoning Districts. 
7.861. - General to Overlay Districts. 
7.862. - Purpose Statement. 
1.  Overlay zoning serves as a development standard for specific areas identified within the City. These development standards provide for a uniform landscape and design theme in these areas. The specific design and land use policies are an extensive plan for these areas of the City. 
2.  Overlay zoning is intended to generate quality development through the use of design standards and other requirements specific to those areas defined within the specific overlay zoning districts. The use of overlay zoning is designed to promote economic, cultural, open space and safety features to aid the public's general welfare. This orderly planning system is intended to attract future development and provides for mixed use options to encourage development consistent with the comprehensive plan of the City. 
3.  The addition of overlay zoning to those areas identified within the City will be by subsequent zoning map amendment and will be in the form of an "overlay" zoning. Those properties located within these areas will retain the rights conferred by their existing zoning classifications. Moreover, new property rights will be conferred on those properties on the corridor that meet the criteria established herein. 
4.  Nothing in the Ordinance precludes the filing for a map amendment to any zoning classification allowed by the City of Woodstock Zoning Ordinance. However, it is the express legislative intent of the City that strip or single lot commercial development will undermine the objective sought through the adoption and implementation of this Ordinance. Accordingly, while this Ordinance seeks to confer additional rights without depriving any property of its existing rights, the passage of this Ordinance should not be interpreted as an endorsement of traditional commercial zoning. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.863. - Existing Conditions. 
It is the desire of the City and its citizens and private property owners cooperating in the creation of this Ordinance to implement it as rapidly as possible and to do so in a fair manner. Existing conditions need not change immediately upon the adoption of this Ordinance. While this Ordinance will become effective immediately for new development, construction and renovation, some flexibility is provided in the implementation of the other elements. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.864. - Application of Overlay Standards. 
After adoption by the Mayor and the City Council of the City, this Ordinance will apply to all applications for land disturbance and/or building permits submitted after the effective date of this Ordinance's adoption. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.865. - Exterior Renovations. 
Exterior renovations to a building must comply with the Ordinance requirements. The structural aspects of this Ordinance will not be triggered by standard maintenance activities not requiring a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.866. - Continuation of a Non-Conforming Use. 
The lawful use of any building structure or tract of land existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, except that the non-conforming use shall not be: 
1.  Extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
2.  Extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless, such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of this Ordinance and was clearly designated to house the same use as the non-conforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
3.  Re-established after discontinuation for sixty (60) days within a non-residential district or re-established at all after discontinuance in a residential district. 
4.  Changed to another non-conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.867. - Continuation of a Building Occupied by a Non-Conforming Use. 
A building occupied by a non-conforming use at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance or amendment of this Ordinance may be retained except that: 
1.  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling may be enlarged, altered, or rebuilt except in conformance with this Ordinance, but it may repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
2.  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling, when replaced within six (6) months, shall be rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this Ordinance, provided that such damage occurred as a result of fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.868. - Coordination with Other Ordinances. 
These design guidelines supersede other ordinances, codes and laws of the City, only so far as they exceed the requirements of those documents or as specifically stated herein. Compliance with these guidelines does not negate any responsibility to comply with other ordinances and codes not superseded by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.869. - Reserved. 
7.870. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.871. - Parkway Overlay District. 
7.872. - Legislative Purpose. 
This Ordinance shall be known as the Parkway Overlay District Ordinance, and shall serve to encourage developing as one (1) project, tracts of land that are sufficiently large to allow a mixed-use development consisting of uses permitted under this article, and, when developed pursuant to this Ordinance, only such permitted uses, while maintaining compatibility with the existing areas and creating an attractive, efficient and stable environment. It encourages a mixture of prominently sited office/institutional, commercial establishments, civic or community buildings and housing types to provide a balanced mix of activities and public spaces. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.873. - Legislative Objective. 
1.  The Parkway Overlay District Ordinance serves as a development standard for the Highway 92 corridor. This development standard provides for a uniform landscape and design theme along this improved road. The specific design and land use policies are a comprehensive plan for the Highway 92 corridor of the City. 
2.  The Parkway Overlay District Ordinance calls for a pattern of commercial and office buildings constructed in eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. The regulations recognize and are intended to protect and preserve the established residential areas located to the north and south of the improved road. The incorporation of buffering techniques seeks to assist in the preservation of adjoining residential areas by providing a unique transition zone rather than the traditional descending density theory. 
3.  The parkway overlay district ordinance is intended to generate quality development along the expanded Highway 92 thoroughfare while promoting economic, cultural, open space and safety features to promote the public welfare. This orderly planning system is intended to attract quality development as described in the permitted uses of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.874. - Establishment of Parkway Overlay District Boundary. 
The boundaries of the parkway overlay district shall extend one thousand (1,000) feet to the north of the centerline of Highway 92 and one thousand (1,000) feet to the south of the centerline of Highway 92 from the eastern city limits to the western city limits. All parcels lying within the specified boundaries, except those listed in Section 7.925, shall be governed by the requirements set forth. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.875. - Parcels Split by Boundary. 
Application may be made to extend the boundary of the parkway overlay district to include an entire parcel which is divided by the specified boundary of the parkway overlay district refer to Section 11.202 of the City of Woodstock's Land Development Ordinance for application procedures. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.876. - Exemptions from Parkway Overlay District Ordinance. 
The following parcels are expressly exempted from the requirements of the parkway overlay district: 
• Parcels within the designated area and zoned pursuant to the downtown master plan (DTMP). 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.877, 7.878. - Reserved. 
7.879. - Site Development Standards. 
All projects developed within the parkway overlay district shall meet the following minimum site development standards: 

 
1.  The intent of buffers is to provide a year-round visual screen, such as evergreen trees, between adjacent properties and new development, except for the five (5) foot buffer required between commercial/institutional uses which may be landscaped at the discretion of the property owner in compliance with other provisions of the Land Development Code. 
2.  Access to Highway 92 must comply with all city, county and state traffic access requirements established by the City Engineer and the Georgia Department of Transportation. Internal roadways or vehicular connections making developments accessible to each other shall be used whenever possible to discourage traffic congestion on Highway 92. 
3.  All utilities shall be located underground. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.880. - Streetscape Zone Standards. 
All projects developed within the parkway overlay district shall meet the following streetscape zone standards: 

 
1.  Streetscape zone requirements shall include landscaping along the entire property frontage, except where driveways may be required, for the minimum depth required. 
2.  Landscaping shall utilize fences, berms, connecting sidewalks, trees, and other plantings to comply with the requirements set forth. 
a.  A three (3) rail fence of appropriate style, white in color, shall be installed within two (2) feet of the right-of-way of Highway 92. 
b.  An approved street tree with a minimum three (3) inch DBH, as indicated in the Tree Preservation Ordinance, shall be required every forty (40) feet on center along the entire property frontage within the streetscape zone. 
c.  A landscaped berm of no less than three (3) feet in height or evergreen landscape plantings of no less than three (3) feet in height shall be provided to screen vehicular parking areas, loading areas, and dumpsters from view of Highway 92. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.881. - Architectural Standards. 
All projects developed within the Parkway Overlay District shall meet the following architectural standards: 
1.  Buildings shall be designed to substantially resemble eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. 
2.  Building mass shall be broken up to give the appearance of individual buildings or places of business, presenting a village appearance. 
3.  Large areas of uninterrupted brickwork shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, blind windows, archways, or other patterns. 
4.  Window areas shall not extend down to the floor line. A wall of not less than two (2) feet in height shall separate the floor from the bottom of the window frame. 
5.  In a mixed use project all residential uses will be designed in traditional styles that will complement the office/commercial uses. 
6.  Buildings shall have no less than eight (80) percent of the non-glass area of three (3) exterior sides faced with brick or natural stone of a natural color and texture that simulates historic types of brickwork. If a building has more than four (4) planar areas, seventy-five (75) percent of these areas shall be faced in brick. 
7.  Multi-pane windows shall be used in individual window openings, rather than large glass sheets. 
8.  Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than twenty (20) percent and glass curtain walls are prohibited. 
9.  Paint colors shall be of traditional, historic types which are generally muted tones such as ivory, cream, beige, white, and pastel colors. Colors which are not permitted are bright or vibrant colors of orange, pink, purple, bright green, or violet, which are considered to be inconsistent with the district. The exterior color scheme shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Economic Development. 
10.  All buildings shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half (4.5) inches vertical elevation per one (1) foot of horizontal distance, except as otherwise provided herein. 
11.  Commercial building styles without a pitched roof shall have a detailed parapet and cornice, in keeping with eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. 
12.  All roofing materials shall be of a consistent style and pattern. Pitched roofs shall be finished in either architectural or dimensional shingles, or standing seam metal roofs. 
13.  Renovations to preexisting non-conforming buildings which require a building permit shall include monument signage and ivy on trellises on the exterior of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.882. - Technology Park Overlay District. 
7.883. - Legislative Purpose. 
1.  The Technology Park Overlay Ordinance serves as a development standard for the development of a mixed use office and technology park combined with commercial and residential uses along the Woodstock Parkway, Rope Mill Connector roadways. This Ordinance is designed to set a standard for development that fully integrates those uses that will create a vibrant activity center in a unique style that complements and enhances the natural environment and existing development pattern of the surrounding areas of Woodstock and Cherokee County. 
2.  The Technology Park Overlay District calls for a combination of light industrial, technology oriented commercial, office uses, and a mixture of low, medium and high density residential uses combined with natural preserve areas in a style that uses modern forms and patterns with influences based upon historic styles and models. The technology park overlay district is oriented towards an exclusive office park environment targeted toward long term corporate clientele, with an emphasis toward corporate clientele, with an emphasis toward corporate headquarters and campuses. The technology park overlay is intended to maintain the natural surroundings and give the appearance and feel of an area completely unique to the City. This Ordinance is intended to provide for mixed use options to encourage development consistent with the City's comprehensive plan. 
3.  Nothing in the ordinance precludes the filing for a map amendment to any zoning classification allowed by the City of Woodstock Zoning Ordinance. While this Ordinance seeks to confer additional rights without depriving any property of its existing rights, the passage of this Ordinance should not be interpreted as an endorsement of the traditional commercial zoning. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.884. - Establishment of Technology Park Overlay District Boundary. 
The general boundaries of the technology park overlay district shall be those properties that are currently zoned light industrial that are located along Old Highway 5/Canton Highway, Woodstock Parkway, Rope Mill Road and Ridgewalk Parkway. The specific boundaries are drawn on the approved map by the City Council and the approved map resides with the City Clerk and Department of Planning and Economic Development. These boundaries shall not include any properties zoned for and used as a general commercial use. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.885. - Permitted Use Standards. 
The following uses shall be permitted, in addition to those uses permitted under light industrial zoning (LI) within any development permitted pursuant to this Ordinance: 
1.  Eating and drinking establishments, including coffee shop, ice cream and yogurt shops, restaurant—sit down, restaurant—fast food, restaurant with alcoholic beverages, small cafe. 
2.  Institutional, including auditorium, assembly hall, civic center, community center, cultural facility, government building, library, museum, park and recreation facility, school facility. 
3.  Medical, including group care facility, hospital, hospice, medical office, residential board/care facility. 
4.  Residential, including single-family home, fee simple townhome, independent retirement living, residential condominium over commercial. 
5.  Retail local, including bakery—retail store only, florist—retail store only, grocery store [limited to fifty-five thousand (55,000) square feet], retail store—common merchandise, news stand. 
6.  Services local, including bank and financial institutions, barber and beauty shop, clinic—public/private, carpet/rug sales and storage, day care facility, equipment supply, dry cleaning—pick up/drop off, dry cleaning—on premises, hotel. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.886. - Prohibited Use Standards. 
Any uses not specifically listed in Section 7.885 shall not be permitted within the Technology Park Overlay District and in addition, the following uses shall be prohibited: 
1.  Adult video/novelty shop, advertising display/sales, agricultural business—cooperation, amusement park, automobile garage/repair shop including oil and lube, automobile sales—new/used, automobile salvage lot/scrap yard, billiard parlor, boat sales/service/repair facility, bottled gas/storage/distribution center, bottling plant, builder supply—storage, cesspool builder—service, check cash service, communication towers, contractor equipment/material storage, curio/souvenir shop, drive-in theater, electric substation, farm equipment sales/service, gas regulation station, go kart/motor bike track, kennel—commercial, manufacturing facility, meat processing facility, mini-warehouse facility, manufactured home sales, nude/semi-clothed dancing establishment, pawn shop, petroleum products—bulk storage, planned industrial park, produce stands, recreational vehicle sales/service/repair facility, storage yard, truck terminal, tire sales/repair shop. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.887. - Residential Development Standards. 
1.  The intent of this overlay is to allow for a variety of different housing types. Housing above and immediately adjoining office and retail space, creating a lively mix of uses and a twenty-four (24) hour community is encouraged. The ideal inclusion of residential uses is within a building that also contains commercial and/or residential uses. A mix of low density, medium density, to high density residential housing shall be permitted immediately adjoining these mixed use buildings. A low density shall be designed up to three (3) units per acre, a medium density shall be up to six (6) units per acre, and a high density shall be up to twelve (12) units per acre. Higher densities shall be governed by the adjacent land use and a logical transition of land use from a more intense use to a less intense, low density residential use. For purposes of determining a logical transition the depth of the property as measured between commercial and other residential uses shall be divided into proportionate parts. The section nearest commercial may have the higher density and the section nearest other residential will be the least density. 
a.  The total number of residential units will not exceed two thousand (2,000). The gross land area allocated to residential use will not exceed forty-two (42) percent of the total land area in the Technology Park Overlay at the time of site plan application. 
b.  Residential uses are not to be of a density less than two (2) units per acre, with a total density not more than twelve (12) units per acre. 
2.  The orientation of residential and mixed use buildings should be along public roads and nature preserves with only one (1) side or face of the building overlooking a parking area. The creation of courtyards and enclosed parking area are strongly encouraged. The architecture of any mixed use or purely residential building should conform with the design standards previously set forth in this Ordinance. 
3.  Residential units shall not be separated from office and or retail uses but fully integrated as part of a greater whole. Separation would include but not limited to the fencing or enclosing of a residential area with restricted vehicular or pedestrian access to any residential area. This restriction of separation is not designated to endanger any resident or impair the security of any resident. Rather than creating a fortress-like residential environment, security can and should be provided at the entrance points to buildings or in enclosed secure parking areas that are restricted from public view. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.888. - Site Development Standards. 
1.  Setbacks shall not be less than ten (10) feet from any right-of-way. Other setbacks shall be per Article IV, Zone District Performance Standards of Chapter VII, Zone District Standards of the Land Development Ordinance of the City for the underlying zoning classification or the most closely related category for the proposed use. 
2.  Impervious surface in the technology park overlay zoning district, not including street parking, shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the total lot area. This calculation must be included on the site plan provided for the addition of off-street parking spaces. 
3.  A plan for any additional outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and approved by the Department of Planning and Economic Development to ensure that unnecessary glare shall not be cast on adjacent property. Unnecessary glare shall be defined at one-tenth (0.1) foot candle at the property line between the commercial and residential property. 
4.  A berm or hedgerow type evergreen landscape feature, no less than three (3) feet in height, shall be provided to shield vehicular parking area from view of any publicly accessible area. This screening is not designed to restrict safe viewing areas or driving lanes. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.889. - Streetscape Zone Standards. 
1.  The streetscape zone shall include broom finished sidewalks with hand troweled joints directing pedestrian connections to the main entrance of existing or new buildings Landscaping utilizing fences, berms, connection sidewalks, trees and other plantings, well maintained from landscape area, appropriate landscaping, mature trees, hedgerow plantings, brick piers, period style lighting, and the minimization of parking and driveway areas to comply with the City's comprehensive plan. The streetscape zone is measured from the edge of pavement. 
a.  Front yard landscaping areas along the Woodstock Parkway/Rope Mill Connector shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in depth along the entire property frontage except where driveways or other openings may be required. 
b.  A major tree not less than two (2) inch DBH as indicated in the Tree Ordinance shall be planted every twenty (20) feet on center along the entire roadway frontage of the property within the landscape strip. 
2.  An upgraded sidewalk shall be added from the street to the main entrance of all structures on Woodstock Parkway. Upgraded sidewalks should incorporate brick, stone or other material that will tie in and compliment the building architecture and landscape. The intent is to eventually have sidewalks fronting any structure along Woodstock Parkway. The project design shall provide pedestrian connectivity through sidewalks and/or multiuse trails, to the other activities centers such as, but not limited to, library, city hall, downtown and school to the maximum possible extent. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.890. - Architectural Standards. 
All projects developed within the Technology Park Overlay District shall meet the following architectural standards: 
1.  Building mass shall be broken up to give the appearance of individual buildings or places of business, presenting a village appearance. 
2.  Large areas of uninterrupted brickwork shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, blind windows, archways, or other patterns. 
3.  Window areas shall not extend down to the floor line. A wall of not less than two (2) feet in height shall separate the floor from the bottom of the window frame. 
4.  In a mixed use project all residential uses will be designed in traditional styles that will complement the office/commercial uses. 
5.  Buildings shall have no less than eighty (80) percent of the non-glass area of three (3) exterior sides faced with brick or natural stone of a natural color and texture that simulates historic types of brickwork. If a building has more than four (4) planar areas, seventy-five (75) percent of these areas shall be faced in brick. 
6.  Multi-pane windows shall be used in individual window openings, rather than large glass sheets. 
7.  Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than twenty (20) percent and glass curtain walls are prohibited. 
8.  Paint colors shall be of traditional, historic types which are generally muted tones such as ivory, cream, beige, white, and pastel colors. Colors which are not permitted are bright or vibrant colors of orange, pink, purple, bright green, or violet, which are considered to be inconsistent with the district. The exterior color scheme shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Economic Development. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.891. - Gateway District Ordinance. 
7.892. - Legislative Purpose. 
1.  The Gateway District Ordinance serves as a development standard for the areas along Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, Eagle Drive, and Arnold Mill Road. The specific design and land use policies are an extensive plan for the areas of the central business district of the City, including the Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, Eagle Drive, Arnold Mill Road corridors. 
2.  The Gateway District calls for a pattern of commercial and office buildings constructed in a style reminiscent of nineteenth and early twentieth century architectural styles. The gateway district is intended to generate quality development along the Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, Eagle Drive, and Arnold Mill Road thoroughfares while promoting economic, cultural, open space and safety features to aid the public's general welfare. This orderly planning system is intended to attract future development and provides for mixed use options to encourage development consistent with the comprehensive plan of the City. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.893. - Establishment of Gateway District Overlay Boundary. 
The general boundaries of the gateway shall be those properties along Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, Eagle Drive, and Arnold Mill Road within the limits of the City. The specific boundaries are drawn on the approved map by the City Council and reside with the City Clerk and Department of Planning and Economic Development. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.894. - Exemptions from Gateway District Ordinance. 
The following parcels are expressly exempted from the requirements of the gateway overlay district: 
• Parcels zoned within the downtown master plan (DTMP). 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.895, 7.896. - Reserved. 
7.897. - Site Development Standards. 
All exterior buffers and setbacks will be in accordance with Article VI of Chapter VII of the Land Development Ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.898. - Streetscape Zone Standards. 
1.  The appearance for this area shall incorporate sidewalks, brick piers, period style lighting and other appropriate elements to establish a consistent look along these road frontages. 
2.  Landscaping shall utilize hedgerow plantings, picket fences, trees and other methods to comply with the City's streetscape theme. Where parking area front the roadway, a planted berm or evergreen landscaping shall be provided to screen vehicular parking areas, loading areas, and dumpsters from the view from the thoroughfare or streets stated herein. 
3.  The width of this landscaped area shall not be less than five (5) feet. 
4.  This buffer area should include piers not less than three (3) feet in height constructed of brick or stone placed no less than forty (40) feet on center. 
5.  Fencing that approximate the look of wrought iron fencing should connect the piers if a hedgerow is not used. 
6.  Trees shall not be disturbed to any maximum possible extent than absolutely necessary to construct any building or other improvements in the opinion of the Director, Planning and Economic Development. 
7.  Existing (undisturbed) land forms and other elements such as berms with asymmetrical clumps of plants, trees and shrubs indigenous to the area and region of Georgia are preferred for the landscape area. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.899. - Architectural Standards. 
All projects within the gateway overlay district shall meet the following architectural standards: 
1.  Buildings shall be designed to substantially resemble eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles with the exception of single-family detached residential development. 
2.  Building mass shall be broken up to give the appearance of individual buildings or places of businesses, presenting a village appearance. 
3.  Large areas of uninterrupted brickwork shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, blind windows, archways, or other patterns. 
4.  Window areas shall not extend down to the floor line. A wall of not less than two (2) feet in height shall separate the floor from the bottom of the window frame. 
5.  Buildings shall have no less than eighty (80) percent of the non-glass area of three (3) exterior sides faced with brick or natural stone of a natural color and texture that simulates historic types of brickwork. If a building has more than four (4) planar areas, seventy-five (75) percent of these areas shall be faced in brick. 
6.  Multi-pane windows shall be used in individual window openings, rather than large glass sheets. 
7.  Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than twenty (20) percent and glass curtain walls are prohibited. 
8.  Paint colors shall be of traditional, historic types which are generally muted tones such as ivory, cream, beige, white, and pastel colors. Colors which are not permitted are bright or vibrant colors of orange, pink, purple, bright green, or violet, which are considered to be inconsistent with the district. The exterior color scheme shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Economic Development. 
9.  All buildings shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half (4.5) inches vertical elevation per one (1) foot of horizontal distance, except as otherwise provided herein. 
10.  Commercial building styles without a pitched roof shall have a detailed parapet and cornice, in keeping with eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. 
11.  All roofing materials shall be of a consistent style and pattern. Pitched roofs shall be finished in either architectural or dimensional shingles, or standing seam metal roofs. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, APPEALS 

7.910. - Non-Conforming Uses. 
7.911. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance to recognize that the elimination, as expeditiously as is reasonable, of the existing buildings and structures or uses that are not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance are as much a subject of health, safety, and welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this Ordinance. It is also the intent of this Ordinance to so administer the elimination of non-conforming uses, buildings, and structures as to avoid an unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. 
Lawful non-conforming uses, buildings, and structure existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto shall be allowed to remain subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Change of Use. An existing non-conforming use of a building may be changed to a conforming use or to another non-conforming use of the same or higher classification, providing, however, that the establishment of another non-conforming use of the same or higher classification shall be subject to the written approval of the City Council and subject to such conditions as the City Council may require in order to protect the area. 
2.  Enlargement Prohibited. A non-conforming use of land shall be restricted to the area occupied by such use as of the effective date of this Ordinance. A non-conforming use of a building or buildings shall not be enlarged to either additional land or buildings after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
3.  Discontinuance. When a non-conforming use of any structure or land ceases to operate as defined in Section 7.932(4), it shall not be reestablished or changed to any use not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. Immediately upon their removal or vacation of a structure non-conformity of such structure and use of land shall lapse. 
4.  Damage. Any non-conforming building or non-conforming use, which is damaged by fire, flood, wind, or other acts of God or man, may be reconstructed and used as before, if it be done within six (6) months of such damage, unless damage to the extent of more than sixty (60) percent of its fair market value immediately prior to damage, in which case any repair or reconstruction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
5.  Structural Alteration. A non-conforming building or building housing a non-conforming use shall not be structurally altered except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. This provision shall not be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs or alterations required for structural safety. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.920—7.929. - Reserved. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance to place the function of the previous Zoning Board of Appeals of the City with the Council. Whenever in the Code or Land Development Ordinance the Zoning Board of Appeals is referenced, it shall hereafter be deemed to refer to the Council as hereinafter defined. The Clerk of the City is hereby authorized to replace the name "Zoning Board of Appeals" with City Council wherever it appears in the Code or Land Development Ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.930. - Non-Conforming Use Regulations for Conditional Uses. 
7.931. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to apply certain protections to property owners whose property is properly zoned and used by a business operating with a valid conditional use permit or is classified as a legally nonconforming conditional use establishment. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.932. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
1.  The term "legally nonconforming" means legitimately operating in the City while noncompliant with the current Code due to predating the Code(s). 
2.  The term "property owner" means persons, companies, corporations, partnerships or other business entities that own property within a zone designated as commercial by the City. 
3.  The term "business operating with a valid conditional use permit" means any company, corporation, partnership or other business entity located in a commercial zone of the City which meets all of the following conditions: 
a.  The business, if of a type commonly registered with the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia must be currently registered and in good standing, or the business, if not of a type commonly registered with the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia must maintain on file with the City evidence of the type of business entity they are operating; and 
b.  The business must have a valid and current occupational tax license issued by the City; and 
c.  The business must have a valid and current conditional use permit issued by the City or fall under the exception granted by this section. 
4.  The term "ceases to operate" shall mean a business that meets one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Where the interior area of the business structure is designated as patron or retail space meant for public use and more than seventy (70) percent of that area has not been continuously occupied by said use for a period of thirty (30) days or more; or 
b.  Where the exterior areas and grounds of the business structure constitute necessary and customary use in the conduct of the business, and more than seventy (70) percent of that area has not been continuously occupied by said use for a period of thirty (30) days or more; or 
c.  The City Council declares the business to be non-existing, deemed abandoned or out of business and notifies the property owner; or 
d.  The occupational tax license for the business has expired; or 
e.  The conditional use permit for the business has expired. 
5.  The term "same conditional use" means a business that operates in such a manner as to require a conditional use permit from the City that is identical to the type of conditional use permit required by the previous business that is deemed to have ceased to operate. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.933. - Conditional Use Permit Expiration. 
All property owners whose property is zoned for and used by a business operating with a valid and current conditional use permit, or a conditional use business classified as legally nonconforming shall have a maximum of sixty (60) days from the date that business ceases to operate to use said property for a new business with the same conditional use without the new business having to obtain a conditional use permit from the City. After the sixty (60) day period expires, any non-conforming property and/or business must come in full conformance with all relevant zoning. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
Appendix A. - Downtown District Graphics 































Chapter VIII - STANDARDS FOR WATER AND SEWER 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL INFORMATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), repealed the former Art. I, §§ 8.110—8.134, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 2009 publication. 

8.110. - Preface. 
The intent of these standards is to provide a basis for guiding construction and development in a rational and orderly manner. In this respect they should be viewed as a minimum criteria and in no way replace the obligation of sound engineering judgment. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.120. - Definitions. 
Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated, which shall be applicable to both the singular and plural thereof: 
Contractor: The person, firm or corporation with whom the Owner/Developer has executed the Agreement to perform Work associated with the Project. 
Director: The Public Works Director for the City of Woodstock, or its designated representative. 
Drawings: Documents which show largely through graphical presentation the characteristics and scope of the Work to be performed and which have been prepared or approved by the Engineer. 
Engineer: The person, firm or corporation named as the engineering representative of the Owner/Developer. 
Owner/Developer: A public or quasi-public body or authority, corporation, association, partnership, or individual for whom the Work is to be performed. 
Project: The undertaking to be performed by the Contractor. 
Subcontractor: An individual, firm or corporation having a direct contract with the Contractor or with any other Subcontractor for the performance of a part of the Work at the site. 
Work: All labor necessary to produce the construction required by the Project, and all materials and equipment incorporated or to be incorporated. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.131. - Referenced Standards. 
All material and workmanship specified by number, symbol, or title of referenced standard shall comply with the latest edition or revisions thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.132. - Inspections. 
The Director and/or his representatives will at all times have access to the Work. The Owner/Developer will provide proper facilities for such access and observation of the Work and also for any inspection, or testing thereof. Inspections may also be made at the factory or fabrication plant of the source of material or equipment supply. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.133. - Utility Locations. 
All underground utilities shall be installed outside the roadbed, whenever possible. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.134. - Final Acceptance. 
1.  Upon completion of all work items in the Project including water lines, sanitary sewer lines, force mains, and lift stations; streets, storm sewers, and all other utilities, the Owner/Developer shall notify the City, whereupon the City in company with the Director shall make a formal inspection of the project. Should the entire Work appear to be complete and in conformance with the Drawings, the Director shall issue a certificate that the Work has been accepted, provided all other applicable terms of the contract have been satisfied. If the Work does not entirely meet requirements of the Drawings at the time of inspection, the Director shall in writing notify the Owner/Developer of these items which require completion or correction. After completing or correcting deficiencies noted by the Director together with any additional deficiencies which appear, the Owner/Developer shall again notify the City. The inspection and completion or correction process shall then be repeated until the entire Project at the time of inspection shall appear to be in conformance with the Drawings. In the event that any Work is damaged or discovered to be deficient after an initial inspection but prior to final acceptance, such work shall have been completed or corrected at the time of final acceptance, but this requirement shall not extend to repair of Work damaged by the City. 
2.  Upon satisfactory completion of any discrepancies noted during this inspection, the Owner/Developer will begin the twelve-month maintenance period required for all phases of the development. 
3.  At the end of twelve (12) months, the City will re-inspect the entire development. All deficiencies will be addressed as outlined above in Section 1. When all discrepancies have been corrected, the City will issue an acceptance letter and will begin perpetual maintenance of the Project. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.135. - Inspection Requirements for All Storm and Sanitary Sewer Lines. 
1.  All storm and sanitary sewer lines, public or private, shall have a televised inspection completed after installation of said lines (hereinafter the "Mains"). These inspections must be copied to DVD and approved by the City of Woodstock Public Works Department both 1) prior to the final approval by the City of any plat of the property upon which said storm and sanitary sewer lines are located and 2) prior to final acceptance of the storm and/or sanitary sewer system(s), or, in the case of the private system(s), at such time the storm and/or sanitary system(s) is turned over to a private property owner or group (i.e., home owners association). 
2.  Prior to televising the mains, the Mains shall be flushed with water so that sags are apparent. 
3.  For sanitary sewer systems this inspection shall include all Mains, man holes and laterals leading from the six-inch clean out to the tie in point at the Main. For storm sewer systems, the inspection shall include all manholes, junction boxes, inlets and pipes twelve (12) inches in diameter or greater. 
4.  The Mains shall be televised in segments identified by the approved manhole ID numbers shown on the approved construction plans. The lateral inspections will be identified by the street address. If no street address has been assigned at the time of inspection Lot Numbers can be used. 
5.  The video shall be stored on DVD and two (2) copies shall be delivered to the City Public Works Department. A report shall also be submitted summarizing the findings of the inspection and detailing any faults found with the footage of such faults noted on the report. This footage shall match up to the footage on the DVD. The inclination for all lines shall be documented in this report. 
6.  Any faulty pipe (i.e., sagging pipes, broken pipes, bad joints, etc.) identified during the inspection must be repaired. All repair techniques must be approved by the Director, in writing, before the repairs are made. All repairs shall be made within fifteen (15) working days after written technique approval is given by the Director. Note that internal grouting is not an allowable repair technique. After all repairs have been completed, the subject line must be televised again until all faults are identified and repaired. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

8.200. - Design Criteria. 
1.  Residential Water Supply. Use the following table and at a minimum pressure of twenty (20) psi. 
MINIMUM INSTANTANEOUS WATER DEMANDS FOR RESIDENTAIL AREAS 

 
2.  State Approval. All water system developments must obtain approval from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources before beginning construction. 
8.210. - Fire Protection. 
All fire/water lines shall be 8-inch ductile iron pipe. 
1.  Fire Hydrants. Provide spacing of fire hydrants as follows: 
a.  Single Family Residential (detached) - Space fire hydrants not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary to permit a maximum hose lay distance of five hundred (500) feet from the hydrant to the most distant building served by that hydrant. Fire hydrants shall normally be located at all intersections. 
i.  Fire hydrants must be in place prior to beginning construction on proposed structures. 
b.  All other uses. Space fire hydrants not more than six hundred feet (600) apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary so that all portions of the building can be reached by a hose lay of not more than three hundred (300) feet in length. 
i.  Fire hydrants must be in place prior to beginning construction on proposed structures 
c.  Submit GIS coordinates for all new and relocated hydrants along with the flow test data in an approved electronic format to the Fire Marshal's office prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Horizontal locations should be referenced to the US State Plane coordinate system, NAD 83 (2011), GA West Zone, US Survey Feet. Vertical locations should be referenced to the NAVD88 datum, GEOID12A, US Survey Feet. 
2.  Accessibility for Fire Fighting Equipment. 
a.  Provide reasonable accessibility to and around all buildings for fire fighting equipment, including fire department ground ladders on multiple-story projects. (Minimum of ten (10) feet on all sides and a customary turning radius of twenty-five (25) feet). 
b.  Minimum widths of access driveways excluding parking, to be twenty (20) feet. The customary turning radius of a fire department access road is twenty-five (25) feet. 
c.  Where the number of dwelling units in a project exceeds one hundred (100), provide two (2) entrances to the projects where road frontage is adequate for two (2) entrances, as determined by the Rules and Regulations for the Control and Protection of State Highway rights-of-way. 
d.  Maintain accessibility for fire fighting equipment throughout all stages of construction and occupancy. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.220. - Location of Water Lines and Fixtures. 
1.  Locate water lines on existing County and City roads on the south and west side of the road, six (6) feet from the edge of pavement with a minimum bury of forty-two (42) inches. 
2.  Locate fire hydrants on existing County and City roads between the right-of-way and the water line and within five (5) feet of the right-of-way. 
3.  Locate water lines on new streets on the south and west side of the street, five (5) feet from the back of the curb with a minimum bury of forty-two inches. 
4.  Locate fire hydrants on new streets between the water line and the street right-of-way and within five (5) feet of the right-of-way. 
5.  Locate service laterals with a minimum bury of forty-two (42) inches within the right-of-way and shallowing to a bury of eighteen (18) inches at the water meter location. 
6.  Locate water meters at the edge of the street right-of-way. 
7.  Locate water valves at intersections behind the curb. The number of valves shall equal the number of street in the intersection minus one. 
8.  Provide a gate valve and a minimum of thirty-six (36) feet of pipe with a removable plug at the end of all lines for phased developments. Provide ductile iron pipe in the following locations: 
a.  Over all cross drains; 
b.  Under and over all stream crossings; 
c.  Under all road crossings; 
d.  At all designations specified by the City Engineer; 
e.  Under all paving or surfaces likely to be paved. 
9.  All metal pipe shall be fully coated when used within the right-of-way. 
8.230. - Line Extension Requirements. 
1.  Developers are required to extend all mains along their entire property frontage if the existing main is adjacent to the proposed development. The size of the extension will be at least the size of the existing main and may be larger according to the City's requirements. The over-sizing may be eligible for reimbursement under a prior agreement specified in the following paragraph. Lines larger than those required to serve the development may be eligible for a portion of the cost being paid by the City. 
2.  If an existing main must be extended to serve a particular development, Owner/Developer may be required to pay all the initial costs. If the main extension would serve other developments within a three-year period the City may negotiate with the Owner/Developer for pro rata share participation from future Owner/Developers who wish to tie on during the three-year period. This three-year period would begin upon completion of the extension and acceptance by the City for perpetual maintenance. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SANITARY SEWERS 

8.300. - Types of Sewers. 
Design gravity sewers and force mains as separate sanitary sewers only in which rainwater from roofs, streets, and other areas and groundwater from foundation drains are excluded. Do not permit overflows from sewers. 
8.310. - Design Factors. 
1.  Consider the following factors in determining the required capacities of sanitary sewers: 
a.  Maximum hourly sewage flow; 
b.  Additional maximum sewage or waste flow from industrial plants; 
c.  Ground water infiltration; 
d.  Topography of the area; 
e.  Depth of excavation. 
2.  Design new sewers on the basis of an average daily flow of sewage of not less than four hundred (400) gallons per household per day. Design gravity sewers to carry the per peak capita flow when flowing one-half full. Normally, design all sewers with a peaking factor of not less than two and one-half (2½); this may be increased upon the direction of the City Engineer. When deviations from the foregoing per capita rates are demonstrated, include a description of the procedure used for design. 
3.  Design sewage lift stations for peak flow with one (1) pump off-line. 
4.  Design sewer systems for the estimated ultimate tributary population. Tributary population is considered to be all areas upstream of the discharge point of the system being designed. Design and install sewers to the uppermost property line of the development being served. 
Consideration should be given to the maximum anticipated capacity of institutions, industrial parks, etc. 
8.320. - State Approval. 
All sanitary sewer developments must obtain approval from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources before beginning construction. 
8.330. - Details of Design and Construction. 
1.  Size. No gravity sewer less than eight (8) inches after leaving the uppermost property line to be served. The minimum acceptable force main diameter shall be three (3) inches. 
2.  Depth. Provide four (4) feet of cover at the inlet end of all service laterals at the street right-of-way, and over any part of the main or service within the street right-of-way. 
3.  Slope. 
a.  Design and construct all gravity sewers to give mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two (2.0) feet per second based on Kutter's formula using an "N" value of 0.013. The following are the minimum slopes to be provided; however, slopes greater than these are desirable: 

 
b.  These minimum slopes will be used only when sufficient flows are expected to maintain a velocity of two (2.0) feet per second and maintain a cleaning action in the line. Place sewers with uniform slope between manholes. Use case iron or ductile iron pipe sewers on twenty (20) percent slope or greater and anchor securely with concrete anchors to prevent displacement by erosion or shock. Build the inverts of manholes connecting grades of twenty (20) percent or more with close fitting concrete block. Limit maximum slope of sewers to thirty (30) percent and design at less than twenty (20) percent whenever possible. 
4.  Provide three (3) feet minimum cover for any sewers on off street easements unless cast iron or ductile iron pipe is used. Filling over the pipe to obtain minimum cover is not allowed, if the fill will impede the natural flow of surface water or will cause an erosion problem. 
5.  Service connections shall be made to gravity sewers, manholes or pump station wet wells. Under no circumstances will manifolded connections to force mains be permitted. 
8.340. - Force Mains. 
For all sewage force mains use ductile iron pipe, cast iron pipe or PVC pipe with joints and fittings rated for the maximum theoretical pressure plus a fifty (50) percent safety factor. Use ductile iron pipe or cast iron pipe for the same conditions where required for potable water lines and within ten (10) feet horizontally of a potable water line. Provide thrust blocking at all fittings. 
8.350. - Manholes. 
1.  Location. Install manholes at the end of each line; all changes in grade, size, or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances normally not greater than three hundred fifty (350) feet. Spacings for eight-inch sewer scan be more then three hundred fifty (350) feet but not more than four hundred (400) feet and will be allowed only in isolated cases when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, it is impractical to install an additional manhole and when the extra distance will not impede maintenance of the line. Manholes spacing in sewers ten (10) inches and larger will conform to Ten State Standards. In no circumstances will a spacing of greater than three hundred (300) feet be allowed when the slope exceeds ten (10) percent. Cleanouts may be used only for special conditions and shall not be substituted for manholes not installed at the ends of laterals greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. 
2.  Drop Manholes. Provide a drop pipe for a sewer entering a manhole at an elevation of more than one (1.0) foot above the manhole invert. Use cast iron or ductile iron materials for all drops and use at least one (1) piece of cast iron or ductile iron pipe on the incoming line to reach a solid, unexcavated formation. Provide thrust block poured below all outside ninety-degree elbows. 
a.  Use outside drop manhole on the construction plans at any time the drop exceeds one (1.0) foot. 
b.  Where the difference is elevation between the incoming sewer and the manhole invert is less than one (1.0) foot, slope the invert to prevent solids deposition. 
c.  Construct the flow channel through manholes to conform in shape and slope to that of the sewers. Minimum drop through a manhole to be one (1.0) foot. 
8.360. - Protection of Water Supply and Other Utilities. 
1.  Do not allow physical connections between a public or private potable water supply system and a sanitary sewer which would permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply. 
2.  Related to Water Mains - Whenever possible, lay sewers at least ten (10) feet horizontally from any existing or proposed water main. Should conditions prevent a separation of ten (10) feet, lay the lines in separate trenches. In either case, construct the elevation of the crown of the sewer at least eighteen (18) inches below the invert of the water main. 
a.  When sewers cross under water mains, lay the sewer so that the top of the sewer is at least eighteen (18) inches below the bottom of the water main. Install the two (2) pipes such that a full length of pipe will be centered over the crossing so that all joints will be separated as much as possible. Install cast iron or ductile iron pipe for both mains when the crossing is at less than two (2) feet separation. 
b.  Whenever conditions prevent the proper horizontal and vertical separation of the lines, construct the water main of cast iron or ductile iron pipe. 
c.  When sewers are laid within public streets, construct the manholes and lines along the center of the street at the depth of not less than six (6) feet from where surface to the top of the pipe. In curves and other areas where this is not possible install the lines and manholes within the confines of the curb to avoid conflict with the curb and other utilities. 
d.  Use cast iron or ductile iron pipe for sewer lines crossing storm sewers at less than two (2.0) feet and at other times when directed by the City Engineer. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

8.400. - Water Requirements. 
8.401. - Preliminary Plans. 
1.  Five (5) copies of preliminary plans will be prepared and submitted for review. 
2.  Preliminary plans shall include the following: 
a.  Portion of the County Tax Maps highlighting the land to be developed; 
b.  Type of development; 
c.  Number of units; 
d.  Tie-in location and the general plan for water supply; 
e.  Name, Address and Telephone Number of the Developer or his representative; 
3.  Questions relating to adequate fire protection, multiple feeds, water supply and proposed location of connection(s) should be resolved at this stage before proceeding with detailed planning. 
4.  The submittal for preliminary review must include all land to be developed although the land is to be developed in several phases or units. Adequacy determinations of the existing water supply system will be made for the entire project. 
8.402. - Construction Plans. 
1.  Construction plans shall be submitted to the City of Woodstock. 
2.  All plans for Water Main Projects shall include the following: 
a.  A suitable Title showing the Name of the Project; 
b.  Scale in feet; 
c.  The North Arrow; 
d.  Date; 
e.  Detailed Project Location Map 
f.  Owner/ Developer's Name, Address, Telephone Number, and Fax Number; 
g.  Design Professional's Name, Address, Telephone Number, and Fax Number; 
h.  Design Professional's Signature and his/her Registration Stamp. All Design Professionals preparing Construction Plans and Specifications must be registered in the State of Georgia as a Professional Engineer or a Registered Land Surveyor. 
i.  If the project requires a water line extension of more than five hundred (500) feet to reach the project; a registered Professional Engineer must Design and Stamp the Line Extension. 
j.  Include the Funding Source if State or Federally funded; 
3.  The plans shall be clear and legible. They shall be drawn to a scale which will permit all necessary information to be plainly shown. Plans shall be submitted on 22" x 36" drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. 
4.  The following shall be provided: 
a.  A sheet index shall be provided, as well as a legend of symbols used; 
b.  Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (West Zone feet); 
c.  Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to Mean Sea Level; 
d.  Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum; 
e.  All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99; 
f.  All points are subject to verification by the City of Woodstock; 
g.  Water line locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
5.  The construction plans shall require that the Contractor place a vertical piece of two-inch-diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every fifty (50) feet along the length of the water main for the purpose of enabling the surveyor to determine the elevation of the water main for "As-Builts". 
6.  The Contractor will then be responsible for removing the vertical PVC sections after the as-built locations have been verified by the City of Woodstock. 
7.  The information submitted electronically for water mains, including locations of the water main at fifty-foot intervals, fire hydrants, valves, fittings, main line taps, master meters, and fire line meters, shall include the following: 
a.  Point ID (see City of Woodstock staff) 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Ground Elevation 
e.  Top of Pipe, Valve or Hydrant Elevation 
f.  Point Description (Pipe, Fitting or Valve Type and Size) 
8.  Construction Plans shall consist of the following: 
a.  Site plan showing the water layout only with project name, streets, street names, topography with contour lines at two-foot intervals, location map, lot layout (if subdivision) or building location (multi-family, commercial or industrial site), land lots, district and north arrow. Lot numbers shall run in consecutive order and there shall be no duplicate lot numbers within the project. Note if any other utilities are existing. Plan scale shall be a minimum of 1"=100'. 
b.  Proposed pipe materials, sizes, lengths and alignment. 
c.  Proposed service lateral locations. 
d.  Location, type and size of water valves and air release valves (to be installed at highest points of system). 
e.  Thrust blocks where used. 
f.  Fire hydrant locations. 
g.  Water system materials. 
h.  Location and sizes of existing water lines surrounding project, with nearest line valve in each direction from proposed connection. 
i.  Detail of connection to existing water lines. 
j.  Proposed meter sizes and locations. 
k.  Detailed plan of fire line meters, detector meters, compound meters, backflow preventers, etc. if applicable. 
l.  Any other items incidental to the proposed system. 
m.  Details of special water line installations such as stream crossings, elevated lines on piers, bridges, pipe bedding, special highway crossings, railroad crossings, etc. 
n.  Show all right-of-way widths, easement widths and pavement widths. 
o.  Plan and profile sheets shall be prepared with a horizontal scale of 1"=50' and a vertical scale of 1"=10'. These scales also apply to any profile view of sanitary sewers. 
p.  The vertical datum used should be the elevation above mean sea level. 
q.  A sheet index shall be provided, as well as a legend of symbol used. 
r.  Each plan sheet should include a note stating "The Contractor must call the Utilities Protection Center 'Call Before You Dig' Telephone number (1-800-282-7411) four (4) days before excavation". 
s.  Each set of Construction Plans shall include a reproduction of the following information (Detail W729) from the Utilities Protection Center. 
t.  Identify the location where Water Service crosses perpendicular to a street by Chiseling initial "w" in the curb. 
8.410. - Sewer Requirements. 
8.411. - Preliminary Plans. 
1.  Five (5) copies of preliminary plans will be prepared and submitted for review. 
2.  Preliminary plans shall include the following: 
a.  Portion of the County Tax Maps highlighting the land to be developed; 
b.  Type of development; 
c.  Number of units; 
d.  Amount of Sewage that is expected to be generated; 
e.  Location and the General Plan for Sewage Collection; 
f.  Name, Address and Telephone Number of the Developer or his/her representative; 
g.  Questions related to adequate remaining capacity and proposed locations of connections to the existing system should be resolved at this stage before proceeding with detailed planning; 
3.  The submittal for preliminary review must include all Land to be Developed although the land is to be developed in several phases or units. 
4.  Adequacy determinations of the existing Sanitary Sewer System will be made for the entire project. 
8.412. - Construction Plans. 
1.  Construction plans shall be submitted to the City of Woodstock. 
2.  All plans for Sanitary Sewer Projects shall include the following: 
a.  A suitable Title showing the Name of the Project; 
b.  Scale in feet; 
c.  The North Arrow; 
d.  Date; 
e.  Detailed Project Location Map 
f.  Owner/ Developer's Name, Address, Telephone Number, and Fax Number; 
g.  Design Professional's Name, Address, Telephone Number, and Fax Number; 
h.  Design Professional's Signature and his/her Registration Stamp. All Design Professionals preparing Construction Plans and Specifications must be registered in the State of Georgia as a Professional Engineer or a Registered Land Surveyor. 
i.  If the project requires a water line extension of more than five hundred (500) feet to reach the project; a registered Professional Engineer must Design and Stamp the Line Extension. 
j.  Include the Funding Source if State or Federally funded; 
3.  The plans shall be clear and legible. They shall be drawn to a scale which will permit all necessary information to be plainly shown. Plans shall be submitted on 22" x 36" drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. 
4.  The following shall be provided: 
a.  A sheet index shall be provided, as well as a legend of symbols used; 
b.  Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (West Zone feet); 
c.  Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to Mean Sea Level; 
d.  Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum; 
e.  All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99; 
f.  All points are subject to verification by the City of Woodstock; 
g.  Water line locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
5.  The information submitted electronically for gravity sewer lines shall include: 
a.  Manhole ID (City of Woodstock staff will assign manhole ID number during plan review. The manhole ID numbers shall be shown on the revised construction plans submitted for final review before the plans are stamped. The same ID numbers shall be used for as-builts. 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Center of Manhole (Lid) Elevation 
e.  Invert (In and Out) Elevations 
f.  Each Manhole point shall include pipe(s) entering and leaving manhole. Pipe(s) size, Pipe Invert, Material, Type (i.e. Sewer line, service line or force main). 
6.  The information submitted electronically for sewer force mains shall include: 
Force Mains shall be located at fifty-foot intervals (ground and top of pipe). All fittings, valves, and air release valves shall also be located. All vertical locations shall be finished ground and top of pipe. The Contractor shall place a vertical piece of two-inch-diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every fifty (50) feet along the length of the force main for the purpose of enabling the surveyor to locate the force main for "As-Builts". The Contractor will then be responsible for removing the vertical PVC sections after the as-built locations have been verified by the City of Woodstock. The rim elevation, top of pipe and the manhole invert elevation of all air release valve manholes shall be located. The size and material of all pipes shall be recorded. 
Force Main Pipe Lines, Fittings etc… 
a.  Point ID (see City of Woodstock staff) 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Ground Elevation 
e.  Top of Pipe Elevation 
f.  Point Description/Fitting Type and Pipe Size 
Air Release Valves (Manholes) 
a.  Manhole ID (City of Woodstock staff will assign manhole ID number during plan review. The manhole ID numbers shall be shown on the revised construction plans submitted for final review before the plans are stamped. The same ID numbers shall be used for as-builts. 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Center of Manhole (Lid) Elevation 
e.  Invert Elevation 
f.  Top of Pipe Elevation 
g.  Each Air Release Valve Manhole point shall include Pipe Size and Material. 
Plans for sanitary sewers shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, the General Notes for Sanitary Sewer System Construction, sections and supplementary views, erosion and sediment control plan, and detailed design drawings for all special fixtures. 
8.413. - Site Plans. 
1.  The site plan shall show the following: 
a.  Land lots; 
b.  District; 
c.  North Arrow; 
d.  Lot Layout and existing and proposed building locations 
e.  Lot numbers shall run in consecutive order and there shall be no duplicate lot numbers within the project; 
f.  Show all Existing and Proposed Streets and their Names; 
g.  All Streams, Water Courses, Storm Drains and the Discharge Points for all drainage structures; 
h.  Show the Topography with Contour Lines at suitable intervals; 
i.  Show the Sewer Layout with Existing and Proposed Lines, Manhole Numbers, Line Designation and Direction of Flow; 
j.  Show the Size of all Lines and the Location of Proposed Services. 
2.  The Design of Cross-country Sewer Lines and Force Mains shall be based on field-run surveys. The Site Plan for Cross-country Sewer Lines and Force Mains need not show Contour Intervals, but the profiles shall be based on Mean Sea Level Elevation. Site Plans for Lift Stations shall show Existing and Proposed Contours. 
3.  In the event the Subdivision is Developed in Phases, the Final Construction Plans for Sewers may be submitted in phases or units. However, at the time the first phase is submitted, the Engineer will submit one (1) copy of the Preliminary Layout of the Entire Sewer System. This layout will show all Lines required to serve any lots to be Developed and any surrounding property that may be served through the Property. The Site Plans for each phase or unit shall contain a Location Drawing showing the relationship of the phase or unit to the total Project and to the surrounding Streets and Sewer Outfalls. 
8.414. - Plan and Profile Sheets. 
1.  Profiles should have a Horizontal Scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch for Cross-country Lines and fifty (50) feet to the inch for Congested Areas, and a Vertical Scale of not more than ten (10) feet to the inch. The Plan view should be drawn to a corresponding Horizontal Scale. The Plan view should normally be shown on the same sheet as the profile. In any case both the Plan and Profile view should have Line Designations, Station Numbers, Manhole Numbers and any other indexing necessary to easily correlate the plan and profile view. Match lines shall be provided where necessary. 
2.  Plans and Profiles shall show: 
a.  Location of Streets, Sanitary Sewers and Drainage Easements; 
b.  Profile of Ground Surface, the Grade of the Sewer between each two (2) adjacent Manholes, Size and Material of Pipe, Length between Manholes, Invert of Sewer in and out of each Manhole, and Surface Elevation at each Manhole. All manholes shall be numbered (City of Woodstock ID No.) on the Plan and correspondingly numbered on the Profile. Station Numbers will be shown for each Manhole. The Profile of adjacent parallel Stream Beds and of adjacent Lake Surfaces, Low Buildings, and Low Lots shall be shown on the Profile. When a Body of Water is located adjacent to a Project, indicate the one-hundred-year Flood Zone Elevation of the stream/river and/or the high water/winter pool elevations of lakes or reservoirs. 
c.  Locations of all special features such as connections to existing Sewers, Concrete Encasements, Collar Walls, Ductile Iron Pipe sections, Elevated Sewers, piers, special Manhole Covers such as vented Outfall Covers or Sealed Covers, etc. 
d.  All known existing structures both above and below ground which might interfere with the proposed construction, particularly Water Mains, Gas Mains, Storm Drains, Utility Conduits, Retaining Wall Footings, etc. 
e.  Identify the location where Sewer Service crosses perpendicular to a street by Chiseling initial "r" in the curb. 
8.420. - As-Built Requirements. 
8.421. - Water As-Built Requirements. 
At the completion of the water line installation and when requesting the final project inspection, the contractor shall present three (3) sets of printed as-built plans and electronic data prepared in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Attached to the As-Builts shall be a completed Project Information Form (Exhibit B), which includes the Name of the Project, the Project Location, the Developer's Name and Telephone Number, the Contractor's Name and Telephone Number, the Street Names, the Water Main Size for each Street, the length of the water main for each street, the pipe material used on each street, the cost of the water facilities for each street, and the work start date and work completion date for each street. (A copy of a blank Project Information Form is attached at the end. Exhibit "B") 
2.  Five (5) sets of "As-Built" plans shall be submitted to the City of Woodstock Director of Planning and Economic Development. The plans shall show all water information "As-Built" in the field and any field changes made to the approved plans. In the event "As-Builts" cannot be made available at the completion of the line, the Director of Public Works may authorize the continuation of the construction; however, the final inspection cannot be conducted and the conditional approval letter cannot be written until "As-Builts" are received. In the event that the designer does not perform the field staking, the contractor must furnish certification from a licensed engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of all as-built information presented. This certification and the certification of the engineer / land surveyor preparing the "As-Builts" must be shown on the drawings. "As-built" drawings shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. The "As-Built" drawings shall meet the same requirements as the plans for review. The printed version of the As-Built water plan shall show the location of water mains at fifty-foot intervals, fire hydrants, fittings, tap location(s), valves, meters, and lot services. 
As-Built plans shall be submitted on 22" x 36" drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. The monumentation and the calculations used to reference and determine the coordinate system for locations shall be supplied at the same time that As-Built plans are submitted. As-Built information for utility locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
The Contractor shall place a vertical piece of two-inch-diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every fifty (50) feet along the length of the water main. Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (West Zone feet) and accurate to within ±0.05'. Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to Mean Sea Level and accurate to within ±0.05'. Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum. All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99. All points shall be verifiable by the Cherokee County Water and Sewerage Authority control network. All Horizontal and Vertical locations shall have no translation, rotation or angle adjustment. All points are subject to verification by the City of Woodstock. 
The information submitted electronically for water mains, including locations of the water main at fifty-foot intervals, fire hydrants, valves, fittings, main line taps, master meters, and fire line meters, shall include: 
a.  Point ID (see City of Woodstock staff) 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Ground Elevation 
e.  Top of Pipe, Valve or Hydrant Elevation 
f.  Point Description (Pipe, Fitting or Valve Type and Size) 
The following are specific guidelines for the preparation of the printed version of the "as-built" drawings: 
a.  Water "As-Built" shall be a separate plan. 
b.  No contour lines. 
c.  Location of service, meter and backflow preventer should be shown. 
d.  Road names shall be on plans. 
e.  The center of all fire hydrants shall be located horizontally and vertically as described above. 
f.  All lots are to be numbered. 
g.  Printed "As-Builts" are to be clear and legible. 
h.  Roads shall be shown on all plans. 
i.  "As-Built" is to be in large clear print on plans. 
j.  Drawings sheet shall be no larger than 22" x 36". 
k.  Scale no larger than 1"=20', no smaller than 1"=100' for cross-country lines and 1"=50' for congested areas. 
l.  When a phase of a subdivision is completed, a location sketch of the entire subdivision with said phase outlined shall appear on plans. 
m.  Ground water and solid rock encountered during construction will be noted on "As-Builts". 
3.  As-Built water plans for commercial, multi-family, school and industrial sites shall show the following at a minimum scale of 1" = 100': 
a.  Location, size and elevation of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and fire lines and of any easements required. 
b.  Location and size of all fire mains and location of all fire hydrants. 
c.  Location, size and number of dwelling units and buildings. 
4.  The As-Builts presented to the Inspector must be printed from the Autocad files supplied to the City of Woodstock concurrently with the As-Builts. These plans shall have been corrected to show all field changes made to the approved drawings. Hand marked copies prepared by the contractor will not be accepted for "As-Builts". 
5.  As-Built drawings shall include the site plan, construction plan sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. Plan of fire meters or detector meters should be shown if applicable. "As-Builts" is to be stamped in large clear print on plans. 
6.  The City of Woodstock shall have the right to withhold water meters until the "As-Builts" have been submitted as required. 
7.  The conditional approval letter will not be issued until "As-Builts" have been completed and submitted to the City of Woodstock. 
EXHIBIT "B"  CITY OF WOODSTOCK PROJECT INFORMATION FORM  WATER SYSTEM FACILITIES 

 
8.422. - Sewer As-Built Requirements. 
At the completion of the sanitary sewer lines and when requesting the final project inspection, the contractor shall present three (3) sets of printed as-built plans and electronic data prepared in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Attached to the As-Builts shall be a completed Project Information Form (Exhibit B), which includes the name of the project, the project location, the Developer's name and telephone number, the Contractor's name and telephone number, the street names, the sewer main size for each street or cross-country line, the length of each sewer main by street or segment, the pipe material used for each street or segment, the cost of the sewer facilities for each street or segment, and the work start date and work completion date for each street or segment. (A copy of a blank Project Information Form is attached at the end. Exhibit "B") 
2.  Five (5) sets of "As-Built" plans shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Economic Development. The plans shall show all sewer information "As-Built" in the field and any field changes made to the approved plans. In the event "As-Builts" cannot be made available at the completion of the line, the Director of Public Works may authorize the continuation of the construction; however, the final inspection cannot be conducted and the conditional approval letter cannot be written until "As-Builts" are received. In the event that the designer does not perform the field staking, the contractor must furnish certification from a licensed engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of all elevations, grades, manhole locations, and service locations. This certification and the certification of the engineer / land surveyor preparing the "As-Builts" must be shown on the drawings. "As-built" drawings shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. The "As-Built" drawings shall meet the same requirements as the plans for review. 
As-built plans shall be submitted on 22" x 36" drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. The monumentation and the calculations used to reference and determine the coordinate system for locations shall be supplied at the same time that As-Built plans are submitted. As-built information for utility locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (West Zone feet) and accurate to within ±0.05'. Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to Mean Sea Level and accurate to within ±0.05'. Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum. All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99. All points shall be verifiable by the Cherokee County Water and Sewerage Authority control network. All Horizontal and Vertical location shall have no translation, rotation or angle adjustment. All points are subject to verification by the City of Woodstock. 
The information submitted electronically for As-Builts of gravity sewer lines shall include: 
a.  Manhole ID (City of Woodstock staff will assign manhole ID number during plan review. The manhole ID numbers shall be shown on the revised construction plans submitted for final review before the plans are stamped. The same ID numbers shall be used for As-Builts. 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Center of Manhole (Lid) Elevation 
e.  Invert (In and Out) Elevations 
f.  Each Manhole point shall include pipe(s) entering and leaving manhole. Pipe(s) size, Pipe Invert, Material, Type (i.e. Sewer line, service line or force main). 
The information submitted electronically for sewer force mains shall include: 
Force Mains shall be located at fifty-foot intervals (ground and top of pipe). All fittings, valves, and air release valves shall also be located. All vertical locations shall be finished ground and top of pipe. The Contractor shall place a vertical piece of two-inch-diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every fifty (50) feet along the length of the force main. The rim elevation, top of pipe and the manhole invert elevation of all air release valve manholes shall be located. The size and material of all pipes shall be recorded. 
Force Main Pipe Lines, Fittings etc. 
a.  Point ID (see City of Woodstock staff) 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Ground Elevation 
e.  Top of Pipe Elevation 
f.  Point Description/Fitting Type and Pipe Size 
Air Release Valves (Manholes) 
a.  Manhole ID (City of Woodstock staff will assign manhole ID number during plan review. The manhole ID numbers shall be shown on the revised construction plans submitted for final review before the plans are stamped. The same ID numbers shall be used for As-Builts. 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Center of Manhole (Lid) Elevation 
e.  Invert Elevation 
f.  Top of Pipe Elevation 
g.  Each Air Release Valve Manhole point shall include Pipe Size and Material. 
The following are specific guidelines for the preparation of the printed version of the "as-built" drawings: 
a.  Sewer "As-Built" shall be a separate plan. 
b.  No contour lines. 
c.  Approximate depth of lateral should be shown. 
d.  Any lateral that does come out at a ninety-degree angle shall show its distance from property pins. 
e.  Road names shall be on plans. 
f.  All measurements of laterals should be kept between manholes and both sides shall add up to the distance between manholes. 
g.  The center of all manhole rims shall be located horizontally and vertically as described above. 
h.  All lots are to be numbered. 
i.  Printed "As-Builts" are to be clear and legible. 
j.  Profiles are to be included in all "As-Builts". 
k.  Roads shall be shown on all plans. 
l.  "As-Built" is to be in large clear print on plans. 
m.  Drawings sheet shall be no larger than 22" x 36". 
n.  Scale no larger than 1"=20', no smaller than 1"=100' for cross-country lines and 1"=50' for congested areas. 
o.  When a phase of a subdivision is completed, a location sketch of the entire subdivision with said phase outlined shall appear on plans. 
p.  Line designation shall be used for correlation between profiles and plan view. 
q.  Ground water and solid rock encountered during construction will be noted on "As-Builts". 
r.  Force Mains shall be located as described above. 
4.  As-Built sanitary sewer plans for commercial, multi-family, school and industrial sites shall show the following at a minimum scale of 1" = 100': 
a.  Location, size and elevation of all sanitary sewer lines and of any easements required. 
b.  Location, size and number of dwelling units and buildings. 
5.  The As-Builts presented to the Director of Planning and Economic Development must be printed from the Autocad files supplied to the City of Woodstock concurrently with the As-Builts. These plans shall have been corrected to show all field changes made to the approved drawings. Hand marked copies prepared by the contractor will not be accepted for "As-Builts". 
6.  As-Built drawings shall include the site plan, construction plan sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. Plan of lift stations or other special features should be shown if applicable. "As-Builts" is to be stamped in large clear print on plans. 
7.  The City of Woodstock shall have the right to withhold water meters until the "As-Builts" have been submitted as required. 
8.  The conditional approval letter will not be issued until "As-Builts" have been completed and submitted to the City of Woodstock. 
EXHIBIT "B"  CITY OF WOODSTOCK PROJECT INFORMATION FORM  SEWER SYSTEM FACILITIES 

 
ARTICLE V. - TRENCHING AND BACKFILLING 

8.500. - Description of Work. 
Trenching and backfilling operations include, but are not limited to all earthwork associated with installation, modification, or abandonment of underground utilities and appurtenances, and restoration of damaged improvements. 
8.501. - Sampling and Testing. 
The City Engineer may perform sampling, surveying inspection or testing activity during construction for his use, but such activity does not relieve the Owner/Developer from his responsibility to achieve specified results. 
8.502. - Trenching. 
1.  [ Generally. ] Trenching consists of removal and disposal of material encountered to obtain required subgrade elevations incidental to installation or modification of underground pipelines and appurtenances. 
2.  [ Unauthorized trenching. ] Unauthorized trenching consists of removal of materials beyond indicated subgrade elevations or dimensions without specified authorization of the City Engineer. 
3.  Stability of Elevation. Slope sides of excavations to comply with local codes an authorities having jurisdiction. Shore and brace where sloping is not possible either because of space restrictions or stability of material excavated. Maintain sides and slopes of excavations in a safe condition until completion of backfilling. 
4.  Shoring and Bracing. Provide materials for shoring and bracing, such as sheet piling, uprights, stringers and cross-braces, in good serviceable condition. 
a.  Maintain shoring and bracing in excavations regardless of time period excavations will be open. Carry down shoring and bracing as excavation progresses. 
b.  Provide shoring and bracing to comply with local codes and authorities having jurisdiction. 
5.  Dewatering. Perform earthwork in a manner to prevent surface water and minimize subsurface or ground water from flowing into excavations, and to prevent water from flooding project work and surrounding area. 
a.  Do not allow water to accumulate in excavations. Remove water using dewatering methods which will prevent softening of foundation bottoms, undercutting footings, and soil changes detrimental to stability of subgrades and foundations. Provide and maintain pumps, sumps, suction and discharge lines, and other dewatering system components necessary to convey water away from excavation. 
b.  Limit opening of additional trench length to that which can be dewatered with available equipment or methods. 
c.  Do not use trench as temporary drainage ditch. 
6.  Material Storage. Locate and retain materials away from edge of trench. 
a.  Dispose of excess soil material and waste materials such as unsatisfactory excavated soil materials, trash and debris, as specified hereinafter. 
7.  Excavating. Do not extend excavation below or wider than that which is necessary to construct work except as otherwise provided herein. Repair any unauthorized trenching as necessary to obtain an adequate subgrade as determined by the Engineer. 
a.  Limit open trench excavation to a maximum of three hundred (300) feet or distance between manholes ahead of completed backfill. 
b.  Where specific utility system elevations or depths are indicated on the Drawings or elsewhere herein, accurately conform with such requirements. Otherwise, achieve a minimum earth and/or pavement cover of thirty-six (36) inches above top of underground utilities being constructed unless a greater cover is made necessary by easement or permit requirement, by maintaining a minimum clearance of eighteen (18) inches below an existing or proposed structure or channel or by achieving proper alignment with existing or proposed facilities. 
c.  Confine trench width from an elevation of one (1) foot above top of underground pipe to the trench bottom, to that minimum which is necessary to pipe laying operations, but not exceed maximum trench width determined by pipe foundation requirements. 
d.  Remove rock, masonry and concrete material to a distance of at least six (6) inches from all parts of pipe and appurtenances being installed. Backfill and thoroughly compact to proper trench bottom elevation with select excavated material. 
e.  Do not mix excavated rock, masonry or concrete with backfill material placed within two (2) feet of installed pipe, or within one (1) foot of finished grade. 
8.  Pavement Removal. Where authorized by the City, remove all pavement, including curb and gutter, sidewalk and the like, which must be disturbed by trenching operations. 
a.  Saw cut edges of bituminous pavement. For concrete pavement, saw cut edges or remove and replace to nearest joint. 
b.  All sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and the like, remove entire width of damaged sections. 
c.  Extend pavement removal to the width required to accomplish trenching operations without damage to edge of remaining pavement. Correct any edge damage which occurs as requested by the City Engineer. 
9.  Removal of Unsatisfactory Soil Materials. Where removal of unsatisfactory soil material is due to fault or negligence of Contractor in his performance of shoring and bracing, dewatering, material storage or other specified requirements, excavate resulting unsatisfactory soil material and replace with satisfactory soil material. 
8.503. - Compaction. 
1.  General. Control soil compaction during construction providing minimum percentage of density specified for each area classification. 
2.  Percentage of Maximum Density Requirements. Achieve not less than the following percentages of maximum density of soil material compacted, at optimum moisture content for each layer of soil material-in-place as determined by ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) test procedures: 
a.  Right-of-Ways. Conform with the more stringent requirements of the permit issuing authority and the requirements herein. 
b.  Roadways. Under and within five (5) feet horizontal distance of traffic using surfaces, compact each layer of backfill and fill material to ninety-five (95) percent of maximum dry density. 
c.  Walkways. Under and within two (2) feet horizontal distance of paved walks, compact top six (6) inches of subgrade and each layer of backfill and fill material to ninety-five (95) percent of maximum dry density. 
d.  Driveways and Parking Lots. Under and within two (2) feet horizontal distance of traffic using surfaces, compact each layer of backfill and fill material to ninety-five (95) percent of maximum dry density. 
e.  Lawn or Unpaved Areas. Compact each layer of backfill or fill material ninety (90) percent of maximum dry density. 
f.  Spoil Areas. Compact each layer of backfill or fill material to eighty-five (85) percent of maximum dry density. 
3.  Moisture Control. Where a layer of soil material is too dry to achieve required compaction, uniformly apply water to layer in such manner as to prevent excessive free water from appearing on surface during or subsequent to compaction operations. 
Remove, dry and replace, or scarify and air dry in place, soil material that is too wet to achieve required compaction. 
8.504. - Backfill and Fill. 
1.  General. Place acceptable soil material in uniform layers, to required elevations. Backfill excavations as promptly as work permits. 
2.  Backfill and Fill Materials. Use acceptable trench excavated soil material, free of stumps, trees, roots, muck, trash and other objectionable matter. 
3.  Placement and Compaction. Place backfill and fill materials in layers not more than eight (8) inches in loose depth. Before compaction, moisten or aerate each layer as necessary to provide the optimum moisture content. Compact each layer to required percentage of maximum density for each area classification. Do not place backfill or fill material on surfaces that are muddy, frozen, or contain frost or ice. 
Commence backfill and fill operations close behind utility laying operations. Take care to prevent wedging action of backfill or fill against structures by carrying the material uniformly around structure to approximately same elevation in each lift. 
8.505. - Grading. 
1.  General. Uniformly grade areas within limits of earthwork, including adjacent transition areas. Smooth and compact finished surface within specified tolerances, with uniform levels or slopes between points where elevations are shown, or between such points and existing grades, or between existing grades. 
2.  Grading Outside Structures. Grade finished areas adjacent to structures to drain away from structures (except drainage inlets), and to prevent ponding. Finish surfaces free from irregular surface changes, and as follows: 
a.  Grassed or Landscaped Areas. Finish areas to within not more than 0.10 feet above or below the required elevations. 
b.  Walks and Pavement. Shape surface of areas under walks and pavements to line, grade and cross-section, with finish surface not more than one-half-inch above or below the required subgrade elevation. 
c.  Compaction. After grading, compact subgrade surfaces to the depth and percentage of maximum density for each area classification. 
8.510. - Site Information. 
1.  Existing Utilities. Locate all existing underground utilities in the areas of work including verification of nature and exact location of any utility indicated on Drawings. If utilities are to remain in place, provide adequate means of protection during earthwork operations.Should unexpected piping or other utilities be encountered during excavation, consult the utility owner immediately for directions. Cooperate with Owner and utility companies in keeping respective services and facilities in operation. Repair damaged utilities to satisfaction of utility owner. 
2.  Traffic Control. Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconveniences to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flagmen, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by trenching by making two (2) separate cuts so that at least one (1) traffic lane is open at all times. Cover open trenches with steel plate between work phases. Perform construction work where crossing roads and streets within time period between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.. 
3.  Subgrade Compaction. After the storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross section shown on the planes. The contractor shall then submit a subgrade compaction test made by an authorized testing company to the City. 
If any sections of the subgrade are composed or unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the authorized representative of the City and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
8.520. - Protection of Persons and Property. 
1.  Barricade open excavations and post warning lights for safety of person. Operate warning lights during hours from dusk to dawn each day. 
2.  Protect structures, utilities, sidewalks, pavements, and other facilities immediately adjacent to excavations, from damage caused by settlement, lateral movement, undermining, washout and other hazards. 
3.  Take precautions and provide necessary bracing and shoring to guard against movement or settlement of existing improvements or new construction. Contractor is entirely responsible for strength and adequacy of bracing and shoring, and for safety and support of construction from damage or injury caused by the lack thereof or by movement or settlement. 
4.  Use work methods and provide temporary facilities as necessary to prevent washing, erosion, siltation or dust damage, or hazard to persons and property, within and outside the work area. 
5.  Place excavated material compactly alongside of the trench, and keep such material trimmed up so as to present the least practicable inconvenience to the public. Where necessitated by traffic conditions, remove from the roadway the first material excavated from a working length of trench so that further excavation is immediately used for backfilling, and thereby avoid stockpiling of material upon the roadway. Afterward, return first excavated material if needed for final backfilling. 
6.  Maintain all streets, sidewalks, crossings, fire hydrants, water and gas valves, fire alarm boxes, and other utilities accessible for their intended use except while the work is steadily advancing in the immediate vicinity of each such facility. 
7.  Keep every drain, gutter, culvert, sewer, and surface drainage route encountered, open for both temporary and permanent flow unless other effective provision for drainage is made. 
8.  Do not permit any hazardous condition to result from trenching and backfilling operations. 
8.521. - Use of Explosives. 
1.  Do not bring explosives onto site or use in work without prior written permission from authorities having jurisdiction. 
2.  Use explosives only as legally permitted and when other work methods are impractical. 
3.  Do not permit explosives on the project site other than during the least practicable use period. 
4.  Assume sole responsibility for handing, storage, and use of any explosive material. 
8.530. - Maintenance. 
1.  Protection of Graded Areas. Protect newly graded areas from traffic and erosion, and keep free of trash and debris. 
2.  Repair and re-establish grades in settled, eroded, and rutted areas to specified compaction and tolerances. 
3.  Reconditioning Compacted Areas. Where completed compacted areas are disturbed by subsequent construction, adverse weather, traffic, or other cause, scarify surface, re-shape, and compact to required density prior to further construction. 
8.531. - Disposal of Excess and Waste Materials. 
1.  Disposal of Excess Excavation. Transport excess excavated material, including unsatisfactory soil material, to the designated spoil areas, and spread as specified in the approved plans and specifications otherwise remove from the project work area and legally dispose of such material which cannot be acceptably distributed within project work area. 
2.  Disposal of Waste Material. Remove trash, debris, and waste materials from the project work area and legally dispose of such material. 
8.532. - Restoration. 
1.  Plan and execute total work so as to minimize damage to property. Restore all surface materials, shrubbery, fences, lawns, walls, structures and other improvements to a condition no less desirable than that which existed before construction operations began. 
2.  Where necessary to temporarily remove or damage improvements of any significance, take professional quality photographs of such improvements before disturbing the. Make copies of such photographs available to the City Engineer on request. 
3.  Restore work area and accomplish site cleanup immediately after backfilling and fill operations. 
8.540. - Accessibility and Maintenance. 
1.  Construction operations shall be scheduled and executed in such a manner as to cause minimal inconvenience to owners of abutting property. Convenient access to all property, roads, highways, sidewalks and driveways along the line of Work shall be maintained. Routes normally used by vehicular traffic shall be safely negotiable without slipping, sliding or loss of traction. Maintenance operations are to be performed on a day to day basis as necessary to provide access at all times. Once construction operations have begun, access shall be maintained until final Project acceptance. 
2.  For the convenience of the public, Work shall be so conducted as to offer the least possible obstruction and inconvenience. No work shall be under construction than the amount which can prosecute properly with due regard to the rights of the public. 
3.  No material or equipment shall be stored where it will interfere with the free and safe passage of public traffic. At the end of each work day, and at other times when construction operations are not in progress for any reason, all equipment and other obstructions shall be removed from that portion of a roadway intended for public use. 
4.  Access to fire hydrants and fire alarm boxes shall be maintained throughout the prosecution of the Work. Hydrants, alarm boxes, and standpipe connections shall be kept clear of obstructions and visible at all times. If visibility cannot be maintained, actions shall be taken to provide clearly visible signs showing the location of the fire hydrant, fire alarm box, or standpipe connection. 
5.  Utility companies and public agencies having facilities within the limits of the Work shall have access to their facilities at all times for inspection and repair. 
ARTICLE VI. - TUNNELING 

8.600. - Discription of Work. 
1.  Tunneling pertains to the installation of carrier pipe and tunnel liner below ground by means other than open cut excavation. 
2.  Use appropriate size and type of tunnel liner and construction methods as necessary to provide a complete tunnel liner installation. 
3.  Related Work Specified Elsewhere - Trenching and Backfilling, Article V; Water System, Article VIII; Sanitary Sewer System, Article IX. 
8.601. - Carrier Pipe. 
When carrier pipe is installed without tunnel liner by tunneling methods, conform with carrier pipe material specifications unless otherwise indicated. 
Installation - Provide adequate support for carrier pipe to prevent vertical deflection and maintain proper alignment, seal end of casing to carrier pipe with masonry and cement or other approved materials. 
8.602. - Pipe Tunnel Liner. 
1.  Where tunnel liner is installed using jacking or boring construction methods, comply with the following material specifications for tunnel liner: 
a.  Steel Pipe Tunnel Liner, four (4) inches and smaller - Conform to ASTM A120 material specifications. Use galvanized steel, Schedule 40. 
b.  Steel Pipe Tunnel Liner, larger than four (4) inches - Conform to ASTM A53 or A139 material specifications, except hydrostatic testing is not required. Join pipe sections with full strength welds in accordance with procedures approved by the American Welding Society. 
2.  Unless otherwise indicated on the Drawings, use pipe meeting the following thickness requirements: 

 
8.610. - Inspection. 
Examine areas and conditions under which tunneling is to be done, and notify City Engineer in writing, of conditions detrimental to proper and timely completion of Work. 
8.611. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Codes and Standards. Comply with applicable provisions of the following, unless otherwise indicated: 
a.  AASHTO, "Design Specifications for Tunnel Liner Plate". 
b.  AISC, "Specifications for the Design, Fabrication and Erection of Structural Steel for Buildings", including the Commentary. 
8.620. - General. 
Carry out Work in a safe manner, taking all necessary precautions and measures necessary to maintain a stable construction system which does not weaken existing earth or structures. 
When tunneling operations are carried out under railroad tracts, highways, streets, or any other existing thoroughfare, perform operations in such manner as not to interfere with normal operations of such thoroughfares. 
1.  Excavation. 
a.  The following requirements are supplemental to the excavation section(s) of these specifications. 
b.  When required, excavate suitable pits or trenches for tunneling operations. Provide all necessary bracing, sheeting and/or other temporary means to insure safety or persons and property. 
c.  Maintain excavation free from water, mud and debris which will interfere with an efficient tunneling operation. Neatly dry-excavate material of whatever nature encountered within the tunnel. Do not use sluicing or jetting excavation techniques. 
d.  Limit excavation to the minimum diameter required for tunnel liner installation. 
e.  Pressure grout all excessive voids which may develop about the tunnel liner exterior. 
f.  Promptly backfill all pits and trenches. 
2.  Jacking. 
a.  When installing tunnel liner by jacking method, use guide rails or other jacking frame structure to effectively maintain tunnel liner at proper line and grade. Force tunnel liner into place with suitable jacks which apply uniform pressure around the tunnel liner end section. Excavate at the lead end of the tunnel as the jacking operation progresses, but do not excavate more than six (6) inches in front of tunnel liner. Remove excavated material through the tunnel liner. 
b.  Perform tunneling such that the final tunnel liner position is within the following limits: 
1.  Lateral Alignment. Within two (2) percent of tunnel liner length. 
2.  Vertical Elevation. With one (1) percent of tunnel liner length, provide that the final grade of flow line is in the direction indicated on the Drawings. 
3.  Boring. 
a.  Mechanically bore by use of a cutting head on a continuous auger. Install tunnel liner in hole by jacking or other suitable methods. Accomplish boring of hole and tunnel liner installation simultaneously. Boring shall not proceed more than one (1) foot in front of tunnel liner. 
b.  Perform tunneling such that the final tunnel liner position is within the following limits: 
1.  Lateral Alignment. Within two (2) percent of tunnel liner length. 
2.  Vertical Elevation. Within one (1) percent of tunnel liner length, provided that the final grade of flow line is in the direction indicated on the Drawings. 
4.  Abandonment. Should it become necessary to abandon a tunnel for any reason, pressure grout the abandoned hole to prevent damage to surrounding earth and structures. When the tunnel liner is retained, pressure grouting may be limited to eighteen (18) inches from each end of the tunnel, and any voids about the tunnel liner exterior. 
5.  Tunnel Locations. Locate tunnels as indicated on the Drawings. To facilitate construction, changes in tunnel location may be permitted. Proposed changes must be submitted for approval. Changes in location must be acceptable to the City Engineer and any utility company having jurisdiction over the location. 
6.  Permits. Georgia Department of Transportation and railroads may require special permits and design standards within their respective rights-of-way. Owner/Developer is responsible for same. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAVEMENT PATCHING 

8.700. - Description of Work. 
1.  The extent of pavement patching consists of the repair of all pavement removed or damaged in the course of constructing the Project. 
2.  Pavement patching includes repair of paved roads, streets, highways, walkways, driveways, patios, slabs on grade, and parking lots together with walls, curbing, gutters and headers, and other pavements and appurtenances designated by the Design Engineer. Pavement referred to under this section, refers to asphaltic, cementious, brick, cobble or other large stone pavement materials together with underlying construction, irrespective of its composition. 
8.710. - Job Conditions. 
1.  Traffic Control. Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flagmen, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Perform construction work crossing streets and roads within the time period between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.. 
2.  Weather Limitations. Conduct all operations during weather conditions appropriate to the Work being performed. 
3.  Grade Control. Establish and maintain lines and elevations which will assure finished pavement patch having desirable appearance, function and strength. 
4.  General. Use materials and gradations which have locally exhibited a satisfactory record or previous usage, and which for finished visible surfaces will permit obtaining appearance, color and texture reasonably matching remaining; adjacent pavement of the same type. 
5.  Inspection. Areas and conditions under which pavement patching will be conducted, giving special attention to stability of sub-base. Do no proceed with pavement patching work until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected in a manner acceptable to personnel and subcontractor doing the paving work. 
6.  Preparation. Saw cut any edges of existing pavement, or in the case of concrete work, remove existing pavement to nearest joint. Remove all loose material from underlying and adjacent surfaces. 
7.  Strength and Stability. Use materials and construction techniques as necessary to obtain strength, stability and durability of pavement patch at least equal to that of remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. As a minimum, conform with pavement patch details, and where such details are not provided, accomplish pavement patching utilizing strengths, thicknesses, etc. not less than that of remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. 
8.  Placing. Construct pavement using methods and equipment in general sue for the type of work being performed. 
9.  Finish. Accomplish pavement patching using materials and techniques which result in visible, finished surfaces having appearance, color, and texture reasonably matching remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. Do not permit the finished surface to have dips, objectionable roughness or discontinuity or non-draining areas. Do not create any unsafe pavement condition. 
10.  Repairs. If pavement patch or adjacent pavement settles or shows evidence of other distress resulting from the Work, cut pavement out, repair subgrade, and reconstruct patch. Do not place additional pavement material on top of unsatisfactory previously repaired surfaces. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WATER SYSTEM 

8.800. - Description of Work. 
Water system work includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Foundation preparation. 
2.  Furnishing and laying water pipe. 
3.  Furnishing and installing water line appurtenances. 
4.  Furnishing and laying services and accessories. 
5.  Cleaning and sterilizing constructed work. 
6.  Testing constructed work. 
7.  Related Work Specified Elsewhere: 
Trenching and Backfilling, Article V 
Tunneling, Article VI 
Pavement Patching, Article VII 
8.810. - Job Conditions. 
1.  Traffic Control. Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flagmen, barricades, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by water lines. 
2.  Connection to Existing Pipework. Where it is required that connection be made to existing pipework, expose existing piping and obtain the exact fittings and/or other appurtenances necessary to make the connection prior to starting work. Connections to existing pipework indicated on drawings (if any) are shown only for the purpose of illustrating the general type of connection desired, and no assurance exists that such illustration can be followed precisely. Notify the City Engineer at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of starting connection work so that they may be present to observe the work. 
3.  Weather Limitations. Conduct all operations during weather conditions appropriate to the Work being performed. 
8.820. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Manufacturer. Furnish manufactured items, fittings, valves and fire hydrants, from manufacturers having regularly produced such items as specified herein which have proven satisfactory in actual-service, over at least a two-year period, as determined by the City Engineer. 
2.  Imperfections. Irregardless of tolerances permitted by industry standards specified herein, the City Engineer may reject pipe or appurtenances at the manufacturing plant of project site, which have cracks, chips, blisters, lack of smooth interior or exterior surface, evidence of structural weakness, porosity, joint defect, significant variation from theoretical shape, or other imperfection which might, in the opinion of the City Engineer, contribute to a reduced functional capability, accelerated deterioration, or reduced structural strength. 
3.  Repairs. Do not use patched or repaired pipe or appurtenances unless each individual length or element has been approved and marked for repair by the City Engineer at the manufacturing plant. Repairs, other than at the manufacturing plant, are not permitted. 
8.830. - Materials. 
Provide all materials, products and accessories required for complete, properly functioning system. Use only those pipe, fitting and accessory materials that are free of qualities which impart taste, odor or toxicity to potable water. Refer to Drawings for locations of specific piping systems, valves and accessories required to be used in the Work. 
8.840. - Ductile Iron Piping Systems. 
Ductile Iron Piping System Type 1 (DIPW-1) 
1.  Pipe. Ductile cast iron pipe conforming with ANSI A21.51 for wall thickness not less than required by ANSI A21.51 using Tables 50.5 and 50.12 for minimum 250 PSIG rated working pressure, laying condition two (2), and depth of cover two and one-half (2½) or five (5) feet, whichever requires the greater wall thickness. 
2.  Pipe Lining. Provide standard cement mortar pipe lining complying with ANSI A21.4, and standard bituminous coating over lining and pipe exterior. Do not use any material which imparts taste or odor to potable water, or which is toxic to humans. 
3.  Fittings. Use gray or ductile iron fittings complying with ANSI A21.10 for two hundred fifty (250) PSI pressure rating, lined and coated same as connecting pipe. 
4.  Joints. For pipe fittings and valves, use the following joint types indicated for the specified locations, unless otherwise specified or shown. 
a.  Flanged Joint (FJ). Flanged joint complying with ANSI B16.1 or standard one-hundred-twenty-five-pound drilling, unless two-hundred-fifty-pound drilling is indicated on Drawings or is required for connecting valves. Use corrosion resistant alloy bolts, and either rubber or asbestos composition gaskets complying with manufacturer recommendations. Provide flanged joints for normally visible piping. 
b.  Mechanical Joint (MJ). Mechanical joint complying with ANSI A21.11, use corrosion resistant alloy bolts. Provide mechanical joints for direct burial piping or concealed piping within structures, for piping installed in tunnel liner, or, at Contractor option, for direct burial piping outside structures. 
c.  Push-on Joint (POJ). Push-on type joint complying with ANSI A21.11. Provide push-on joints for direct burial piping outside structures. 
d.  Grooved Joint Coupling (GJC). Where indicated on the Drawings provide bolted couplings utilizing grooved and shouldered pip ends, and suitable for not less than one hundred fifty (150) psig working pressure while permitting angular and restrained longitudinal flexibility of connecting pipe. Fabricate body of malleable iron, coupling gasket of molded synthetic rubber, and bolting of corrosion resistant steel alloy. Cut piping grooves as recommended by coupling manufacturer. 
e.  [ Products in compliance. ] Firms offering coupling products complying with these specifications include the following: 
Victaulic (Style 31) 
Aeroquip, Gustin-Bacon Division (100 Series) 
Ductile Iron Piping System Type 2 (DIPW-2) 
1.  Pipe (Ball Joint) . Ductile iron pipe conforming with ANSI A21.51, suitable for minimum two hundred fifty (250) PSIG water working pressure and with wall thickness not less than tabulated below: 

 
a.  Provide non-floating pipe with additional wall thickness, which with accessories and cement lining results in at least ten (10) percent negative buoyancy when pipe is under water and full of air. 
2.  Pipe Lining. Provide cement mortar pipe lining complying with ANSI A21.4 and standard bituminous coating over lining and pipe exterior. Do not use any material which imparts taste or odor to potable water, or which is toxic to humans. 
3.  Joints. Boltless, flexible type joints permitting deflections of up to fifteen (15) degrees without damage to pipe or joint. Construct joints of high strength, corrosion resistant, alloyed cast steel or ductile iron with flexible gasket which safely permits high end-pull forces required for handling and installing pipe. Utilize joint design which under actual service conditions is free of measure leakage of water into or out of piping installation. 
8.850. - Copper Piping Systems. 
Copper Tubing System (CuTW) 
1.  Tubing. Copper tubing complying with ASTM B88, Type K suitable or working pressures up to 200 PSIG at 200F water temperature. For underground direct burial installations, sue soft annealed or hard drawn tubing and for all other installation, use hard drawn tubing. 
2.  Fittings. For hard drawn tubing, use solder or brazing type wrought copper or cast bronze pressure fittings complying with ANSI B16.22 or B16.18. For soft annealed tubing use solder or brazing type wrought copper or cast bronze pressure fittings complying with ANSI B16.22 or B16.18 or flare type cast bronze fittings complying with ANSI B16.26. 
3.  Joints. Soldered, silver brazed or flared as appropriate and suitable for the following conditions: 
Maximum working pressure: One hundred fifty (150) PSIG 
Service Temperature: One hundred (100) Degrees F 
8.860. - Non-Metallic Piping Systems. 
Polyvinyl Chloride Piping System Type 1 (PVCPW-1): Two and one-half-inch to eight-inch Diameter Sizes ONLY: 
1.  Pipe. Non-toxic, polyvinyl chloride compound meeting ASTM D1784, Class 12454-A or B material specification, and further meeting requirements of the National Sanitation Foundation. Must conform with requirements of ASTM D2241 for pressure rated pipe of the following class: 
Class 200 (SDR 21)- Furnish Pipe with each section continuously and permanently marked with the following identifying data: 
a.  Nominal size and outside diameter. 
b.  Material code designation. 
c.  Dimension ratio number (SDR or DR). 
d.  Pressure class. 
e.  ASTM or AWWA specification designation. 
f.  Manufacturer's name or trademark and production record code. 
g.  National Sanitation Foundation Seal (NSF) verifying suitability of pipe material for potable-water service. 
2.  Fittings. Ductile iron fittings complying with ANSI A21.10 or A21.11 for two hundred fifty (250) PSI pressure rating. Provide cement mortar interior lining complying with ANSI A21.4, and manufacturer's standard bituminous coating over lining and fitting exterior. Do not use any lining or coating which imparts taste or odor to potable water, or which is toxic to humans. 
3.  Joints (PVC Pipe). Unless otherwise required, use flexible elastomeric seals conforming to ASTM D3139 and ASTM F477. Provide compatible gaskets or adapters as required when joining to different type pipe material. 
4.  Joints (D.I. Fittings). Comply with ANSI A21.11 and unless otherwise required, use at Contractor's option push-on type joint or mechanical joint utilizing corrosion resistant alloy bolts. Provide gaskets or adapters compatible with connecting pipe as required. 
8.870. - Valves and Accessories. 
1.  Gate Valves. 
a.  Gate Valve Type 1 (GVW-1). Cast iron, bonze mounted AWWA C500 gate valves, rated for two hundred (200) PSIG working pressure, with counterclockwise opening, manual operator unless another type operation is shown or specified. Equip gate valves over sixteen-inch size with valved bypasses. Provide gate valves with the following features depending upon installed location of valve. 
1.  Direct burial locations. Mechanical joint ends, non-rising stem, two-inch square opening, 0-ring seals, and square wrench operating nut. Provide one (1) operating wrench for each ten (10) valves furnished, or fraction thereof. Where depth of valve is too great for operations by standard wrench, provide suitable, permanently installed valve stem extension and guide. For valves sixteen-inch size and larger, include enclosed gearbox operator for horizontal valve installation. For each valve, furnish two (2) piece, cast iron or plastic roadway valve box with five and one-quarter-inch minimum shaft size, cast iron top ring and drop type lid with "stay-put" features, and extensions as necessary to adjust top to finished grade. 
2.  All except direct burial locations. Flanged ends, outside screw, conventional and operating handwheel. 
3.  Firms offering products to comply with these requirements including the following: 
a.  M&H Valve and Fittings, Division of Dresser Industries, Inc. 
b.  Mueller A-230-20-MJ. 
b.  Gate Valve Type 2 (GVW-2). Cast iron, resilient seated, AWWA C509 gate valves, rate for two hundred (200) PSIG working pressure, with counterclockwise opening, manual operator unless another type operator is shown or specified. Provide gate valves with the following features depending upon installed location of valve. 
1.  Direct burial locations. Mechanical joint ends, non-rising stem, 0-ring seal and square wrench operating nut. Provide one (1) operating wrench for each ten (10) valves furnished, or fraction thereof. Where depth is too great for operation by standard wrench, provide suitable, permanently installed valve stem extension and guide. For each valve, furnish two (2) piece, cast iron or plastic roadway valve box with five and one-quarter-inch minimum shaft size, cast iron top ring and drop type lid with "stay-put" features, and extensions as necessary to adjust top to finished grade. 
2.  All except direct burial locations. Flanged ends, non-rising stem, 0-ring seal, and operating handwheel. 
2.  Butterfly Valves (BFVW). Rubber seated, bubble-tight closing butterfly valves complying with AWWA C504 Class 150B, suitable for throttling service, and further suitable for both frequent operation and for applications where valve operation occurs after long periods of inactivity. Furnish valves of design and metallurgy such that 18-8 stainless steel or Ni-Resist alloy cast iron forms mating seat against rubber seat, all retaining devices are constructed of corrosion resistant material, valve discs rotate to become streamlined with fluid flow in the full open position, and shaft seals are permanent self-adjusting type. Unless otherwise shown or specified, provide enclosed gear manual operators. Provide butterfly valves with the following features depending upon valve installed location: 
a.  Direct burial locations. Mechanical joint ends with fully gasketed, permanently sealed operating gear box suitable for underground service and submergence in water to twenty-five (25) feet, and equipped with square wrench operating nut. Provide one (1) operating wrench for each ten (10) valves furnished, or fraction thereof. Where depth of valve is too great for operation by standard wrench, provide suitable, permanently installed valve stem extension and guide. For each valve, furnish two (2) piece, cast iron or plastic roadway valve box with five and one-quarter-inch minimum shaft size, cast iron top ring and drop type lid with "stay-put" features, and extensions as necessary to adjust top to finished grade. 
b.  All except direct burial locations. Flanged ends, with gear ox and handwheel operator. 
3.  Check Valves (CV/WL). Iron body, bronze mounted, full opening check valves with flanged ends and outside weight and lever. Provide one hundred twenty-five (125) PSIG flanges (unless two hundred fifty (250) PSIG is indicated on Drawings or is required for connecting work) suitable for one hundred seventy-five (175) PSIG working pressure. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
a.  M&H Valve and Fittings, Division of Dresser Industries, Inc. 
b.  Clow Corporation. 
c.  Mueller. 
4.  Tapping Sleeves and Valves (TSVW). 
a.  Mechanical joint split sleeve and gate valve assembly suitable for working pressure up to two hundred (200) PSI. Use split sleeve having flanged valve connection. Furnish gate valve complying with preceding gate valve specification except provide one (1) valve end flanged as required for attachment to tapping sleeves. 
b.  Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  M&H Valve and Fittings, Division of Dresser Industries, Inc. 
2.  Mueller Company. 
3.  Clow Corporation. 
5.  Flexible Coupling (FCW). Bolted couplings utilized plain pipe ends, and suitable for not less than one hundred fifty (150) PSIG working pressure while permitting angular flexibility without longitudinal restraint of connecting pipe. Fabricate body of welded rolled high strength steel of cylindrical shape with malleable or ductile iron flanges, coupling gaskets of molded synthetic rubber and bolts of corrosion resistant steel alloy. Use couplings compatible with pipe and fittings shown on Drawings. Firms offering products complying with these specifications include the following: 
a.  Dresser (Style 38). 
b.  Smith-Blair, Inc. (Type 411). 
6.  Fire Hydrants (FH). 
a.  Post style, one hundred fifty (150) PSI working pressure, traffic model ("breakable"), compression type, dry barrel fire hydrant complying with AWWA C502. Furnish hydrants with one (1) four and one-half-inch pumper connection and two (2) two and one-half-inch hose connections conforming with National Standard Fire-Hose Coupling Screw Thread. Supply cast iron cap and cap to hydrant securing chain for each connection. Provide cast iron body with harnessing lugs for optional reaction bracing, and with six-inch size inlet connection compatible with connecting pipe. Shop paint hydrant above grade with silver enamel. Apply one (1) field finish coat of bright silver enamel to hydrant barrel. Select depth of bury appropriate to actual hydrant installation (forty-two (42) inches minimum unless otherwise indicated). Provide positive shut-off main valve whose minimum orifice diameter is at least four and one-quarter (4¼) inches, and whose operation is accomplished by means of counter-clockwise opening stem fitted with National Standard pentagon operating nut. Utilize 0-ring stem seals. Furnish one (1) operating wrench for each ten (10) hydrants furnished, or fraction thereof. For standardization with existing system, furnish hydrants from one (1) of the following manufacturers or City approved equal: 
1.  M&H Valve and Fittings Division 129-T Model. 
2.  Mueller Company. 
b.  Blue reflectors shall be installed following pavement application, in the center of the travel lane adjacent to all fire hydrants. 
7.  Water Meter Type 1: Three-quarter-inch (WM-1). 
a.  Cold water meter suitable for one hundred fifty (150) PSIG working pressure, complying with AWWA C700. Use either bronze, split style main case or one (1) piece bronze main case with cast iron bottom cap. Use bronze or brass couplings for connecting pipe or tubing, and brass, bronze composition, or stainless steel external nuts, bolts, and waters. Include vulcanized hard rubber nutating disc, non-ferrous strainer to protect meter from damage by any solid particles contained in the water, and hermetically sealed, easily read register with one hundred (100) equal part test index circle and pointer. Use register which is removable, without breaking water seal or interrupting customer service. 
b.  Provide register reading in U.S. gallons. 
c.  Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  Rockwell. 
8.  Water Meter Type 2: Larger than three-quarter-inch (WM-2). 
a.  Current type cold water meter suitable for one hundred fifty (150) PSIG working pressure and complying with AWWA C701. Use flanged, cast iron or bronze main case with bronze top cover and register housing. Use brass, bonze composition or stainless steel external nuts, bolts, and washers. Provide non-ferrous strainer to protect meter from damage by any solid particles contained in the water. Use hermetically sealed register which is removable without breaking water seal or interrupting customer service. Use easily read register with one hundred (100) equal part test index circle and pointer. 
b.  Provide register reading in U.S. gallons. 
c.  Firms offering products to comply with these requirements including the following: 
1.  Rockwell. 
9.  Pipe Detection Wire. Minimum size fourteen (14) gauge solid copper wire which can be readily detected by electronic pipe locator instruments in general use. 
10.  Coarse Granular Material for Pipe Bedding. Crushed stone, crushed gravel, natural gravel, crushed shell, or similar material complying with ASTM C33, and having No. 67 gradation (three-quarter-inch to No. 4 sieve.) 
11.  Piping Support. Factory fabricate hangers and clamps necessary to securely support pipework without excessive sag or vibration at all non-direct burial locations. 
12.  Service System Components. 
a.  Corporation Stops. Cast brass or bronze with end threads conforming with AWWA C800, and consisting of precision tapered, and individually lapped, key and body surfaces. Shop test each stop for leak-proof shutoff at specified working pressure. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements including the following: 
1.  Ford Meter Box Company. 
b.  Service Saddles for Ferrous Pipe. Extra heavy, hot dipped galvanized malleable iron bodies with galvanized or cadmium plated double straps and nuts, retained neoprene gasket, and outlet threads mating those of corporation stops used. Provide assemblies suitable for five hundred (500) PSIG cold water working pressure. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  Mueller Company. 
c.  Service Saddles for Non-Ferrous Pipe. Heavy cast bronze or water-works brass body and straps, bronze, brass or stainless steel screws or nuts, and bolts, retained 0-rings seal, and outlet threads mating those of the corporation stop used. Provide assemblies suitable for two hundred (200) PSIG cold water working pressure. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  Ford Meter Box Company. 
d.  Curb Stops. Brass of bronze body with resilient plug, permanently non-grease lubricated, and with end connections appropriate to connecting tubing, or pipe. Use stops rated not less than one hundred seventy-five (175) PSIG working pressure eighteen (18) degrees F-. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  Ford Meter Box Company. 
e.  Meter Boxes. High density, reinforced plastic body with one (1) piece cast iron lid, unless otherwise indicated on the Drawings. Provide box of size and height appropriate to installation of meter and accessories required. 
8.880. - General Design Standards. 
1.  [ Changes due to field conditions ] The Drawings are generally schematic. Extend and/or modify construction details, as approved by the City Engineer, when field conditions necessitate such changes to achieve a safe and properly functioning system. 
2.  [ System to be free of breaks and leakage. ] Construct and, if necessary, reconstruct water system work as necessary to obtain system free of breaks or excessive leakage. 
3.  [ Compliance with Methods for Pipe Laying. ] Unless otherwise indicated, lay and join pipe in trenches and on foundations complying with methods proposed by the pipe manufacturer. Methods will not be approved which are likely to result in lower quality of installation than that afforded by requirements contained in the following articles. 
4.  Inspection by City. 
a.  The City shall be notified when specific inspections are required so that the inspection time can be scheduled. 
b.  If directed by the representative of the City, all pipe work shall be left open until the City Inspector views the work. The trench may be backfilled with the approval of the inspector if the work is not inspected by the close of the working day. No valves, fire hydrants, tees, reaction blocking or lot services shall be backfilled without the approval of the inspector. 
5.  Pipe Foundation and Laying. 
a.  Clean interior of pipe and all joints before laying. When pipe laying activity is not in actual progress, tightly cover open ends of pipe. Avoid permitting dirt, mud, or other material from entering pipe at any time. 
b.  Avoid damage or shock in handling pipe and accessories. Inspect each length of pipe and reject any defective piece. Carefully protect pipe in place form damage or displacement until backfilling operations are complete. 
c.  Cut pipe in a manner to avoid damage to pipe or lining, leaving a smooth end at right angles to pipe axis. Smooth and bevel edges of cut pipe for push-on, gasket type joints. 
d.  Lay pipe at depth dictated by field conditions, but with distance from top of pipe to finished grade not less than forty-two (42) inches unless otherwise shown or specified. 
e.  Found pipe on firm soil or course granular material in flat bottom trench with entire pipe barrel bearing uniformly on trench bottom, except for an approximately eighteen-inch gap at pipe balance point for sling removal. Hand excavate and backfill as required to provide uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe. Do not support pipe on hubs or end bells: Consolidate soil under and around pipe up to pipe centerline by tamping. 
f.  Join pipe with bells facing direction in which laying operation is progressing. Lay pipe upgrade wherever line grade exceeds ten (10) percent. 
g.  Control geometric position of pipe to ensure than pipe and fittings accurately conform with grade and alignment requirements. Lay pipe in a straight line or with uniform sweeping horizontal and vertical curves for proper alignment. Do not exceed manufacturer's recommended maximum joint deflection. 
h.  Prevent water from accumulating or running in trench during pipe. Laying operations or before the trench has been backfilled. 
i.  Adjust pipe depth or alignment to accommodate valve, hydrant or fitting setting, and as necessary to meet tie-in requirements or to avoid obstructions. 
6.  Service Tubing Installation. 
a.  At roads, paved drives, retaining walls, and other paved areas, install service tubing by pushing, pulling, or auguring techniques. Do not cut any paved surface without written authorization of City Engineer. 
b.  At all other locations, install service tubing by trenching and backfilling, unless otherwise noted. 
1.  Lay tubing at depth dictated by field conditions, but with not less than eighteen (18) inches cover. 
2.  Bed tubing on firm soil. Remove any rocks, masonry, or any other objectionable material which could damage tubing. 
3.  Lay tubing in compliance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
4.  Restore ground surface to original condition. Replace or repair any damaged improvements. 
7.  Pipe Connections. Make all pipe connections with standard factory fabricated fittings except where special connection details (if any) are shown on Drawings. 
8.  Installing Water Pipe in Tunnel Liner. 
a.  Tunnel Liner: Four (4) inches or smaller - Insert water tubing into tunnel liner using methods which prevent damage to tubing. 
b.  Tunnel Liner: Six (6) inches to forty-two (42) inches - Insert water pipe concentrically into tunnel liner by securing hardwood blocks radially around water pipe at no more than ten-foot longitudinal intervals. Use steel banding for securing wood blocks in place. 
Blow sand into annular space between water pipe and tunnel liner. Starting at the longitudinal center and proceeding outward to each end. Use techniques which assure complete filling of all voids. 
9.  Valves, Fittings and Hydrants. 
a.  Provide valves, fire hydrants, fittings and other appurtenances as indicated on the Drawings, specified herein, and as required by the City Engineer. 
b.  Set fire hydrants plumb and with ground line index within .1 foot of actual final ground level. After installation if complete, fully open fire hydrant and flush to check for proper operation. 
c.  Set valves and valve boxes plumb, with valve box cover level with surface. Set lower section of valve box concentric with valve operating stem. Avoid contact at lower end of valve box with valve body or pipe. Fully open and close completed valve to verify proper operation. 
10.  Anchorage. 
a.  Anchorage detailed on Drawings, if any, represents minimum anchorage to be installed. When field conditions require additional anchorage, such additional requirements and to provide appropriate additional anchorage shall be provided. 
b.  Anchor all bends, valves, tees, fire hydrants, reducers and other pointes of unbalanced pressure as necessary to resist thrust at test and working pressures, with suitable allowance for water-hammer. Also anchor piping system installed on steep slopes where gravitational force might otherwise cause piping displacement. Accomplish anchorage by use of concrete reaction bracing, metal tie roads and bands, pour concrete having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of at least two thousand (2,000) pounds against firm earth and allow it to cure for at least five (5) days before placing main under pressure. Position concrete blocks of sufficient size to counteract the magnitude and direction of the resultant thrust force. Keep joints and hydrant drain opening s clear and accessible. Provide special support blocks at plastic pipes according to manufacturer's recommendation. When using bands and tie rods in conjunction with reaction bracing, provide a separate band for each tie rod. Use corrosion resistant materials throughout. When using restrained joint systems, utilize methods and place these special joints at appropriate fittings and pipe joints in accordance with manufacturer's recommendation. 
11.  Special Construction. Where constructing on piers, supporting pipe on bridges, or for other special work, use safe and generally accepted construction methods to accomplish the required work. 
12.  Service Saddles. 
a.  Cast Iron and Ductile Iron Mains. Install three-quarter and one-inch size corporation stops directly into tapped holes in water main. Use service saddles for all taps larger than one-inch size. 
b.  PVC Mains. Use service saddles for all service taps. 
13.  Pipe Detection Wire. Install pipe detection wire around pipe. Provide pipe detection wire for all non-ferrous water mains unless otherwise noted. 
14.  Line Cleaning. 
a.  Avoid permitting dirt, rubbish, construction materials, etc. to enter lines and appurtenances during construction. Use whatever means are necessary to obtain a clean and internally smooth system prior to final acceptance. 
b.  Limit use of flushing water to rates and quantities which will not interfere with service to water customers. 
15.  Water Leakage. 
a.  General Leakage Requirements. Make entire water line system as near watertight as practicable. Eliminate all detectable leakage regardless of test results hereinafter required. 
b.  Testing. Furnish and use appropriate test equipment and methods. Include gage, meter, pump and connections. Bleed all air from system prior to testing, providing any necessary corporation stops and pipe installations. 
1.  Pressure test all elements of the piping system. Where piping is buried or otherwise concealed, maintain the pressure test for not less than six (6) hours. Visible piping may be tested for a lesser time period, if approved by the City. Conduct pressure testing at two hundred (200) PSIG unless a lower pressure is recommended by a manufacturer of an element of the system. When a manufacturer does recommend a lower test pressure, furnish the Engineer with a detailed written explanation before commencing test work. In no even may the lower test pressure be less than one hundred ten (110) percent of the nominal working pressure of the pipe comprising the system. Measure pressure for testing referred to the elevational datum of the lowest pipe of the line section being tested. 
2.  Where possible, use methods and perform construction work in such sequence as necessary to accomplish pressure testing as work progresses. Do not pressure test more than one (1) mile length of pipe at one time. Provide temporary piping and accessories if required to isolate test sections. 
3.  Makeup water requirements to maintain test pressure in gallons per hour per one thousand (1,000) feet of pipe under test, over the test period may not exceed the quantities shown in the following table: 

 
Repair all breaks, detectable leaks or other defects and retest as many times as necessary to obtain passing test. 
16.  Disinfecting . 
a.  Chlorinate all potable water lines on completion of construction, after flushing and prior to placing in service. Use precaution to prevent backflow to supply system. 
b.  Fill lines with potable water containing sufficient chlorine to show a twenty-five (25) ppm minimum residual at the end of twenty-four (24) hours' retention period. (50 ppm minimum applied). 
c.  Locate application point at beginning of pipeline extension and apply chlorine by means of a solution feed device. Operate all valves and hydrants while filling the pipeline with chlorinating agent. Draw off at taps and hydrants along the line until an orthotolidine test shows a strong indication of residual chlorine. 
d.  Retain chlorinated water in the system for a period of twenty-four (24) hours. Test for twenty-five (25) ppm residual. If residual is twenty-five (25) ppm or greater flush the system with potable water, otherwise repeat entire procedure until satisfactory results are obtained. 
e.  Demonstrate lines to be free of contamination by drawing samples therefrom on two (2) successive days in the presence of the Engineer. Deliver samples to the Engineer for forwarding to a qualified laboratory for examination. On receipt of satisfactory test report from the foregoing laboratory, and with the approval of the Engineer, the lines so tested are to be considered from of contamination and placed in service. In the event contamination persists, re-sterilize as necessary until receipt of satisfactory test report. 
17.  Final Acceptance by the City. 
a.  The Owner/Developer shall before final acceptance present to the City the following: 
1.  Length of water line installed by line size. 
2.  Cost of water line installed by line size. 
3.  Construction Record Drawings. 
4.  Certification of disinfection and leak testing. 
ARTICLE IX. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM 

8.900. - Description of Work. 
1.  Sanitary sewer system work includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Foundation preparation. 
b.  Furnishing and laying gravity sewer pipe. 
c.  Furnishing and laying force-main pipe. 
d.  Furnishing and installing lift stations and appurtenances. 
e.  Furnishing and/or constructing drainage structures and appurtenances. 
f.  Cleaning constructed work. 
g.  Testing constructed work. 
2.  Related Work Specified Elsewhere: 
Trenching and Backfilling, Article V 
Tunneling, Article VI 
Pavement Patching, Article VII 
Drainage Structures and Accessories, Article X 
8.901. - Job Conditions. 
1.  Traffic Control. Schedule and conduct work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flagmen, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by sewer lines. 
2.  Weather Limitations . Conduct all operations during weather conditions appropriate to the work being performed. 
8.910. - Inspection by City. 
1.  Authorized representatives of City shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
2.  The City shall be notified when specific inspections are required so that the inspection time can be scheduled. 
3.  If directed by the representatives of the City all pipe work shall be left open until the City Inspector views the work. The trench may be backfilled with the approval of the inspector if the work not inspected by the close of the working day. 
8.911. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Manufacturer Experience. Furnish manufactured products produced by firms generally recognized as engaged in the manufacture of products which have proven satisfactory in actual service over at least a two-year period, as determined by the City. 
2.  Imperfections. Regardless of tolerances permitted by industry standards specified herein, the City may reject pipe or pre-cast structures at the manufacturing plant or project site, which have cracks, chips, blisters, lack of smooth interior or exterior surface, evidence of structural weakness, porosity, joint defect, significant variation from theoretical shape, or other imperfection which might, in the opinion of the City, contribute to a reduced functional capability, accelerated deterioration, or reduced structural strength. 
3.  Repairs. Do not use patched or repaired pipe or pre-cast structures unless each individual length or element has been approved and marked for repair by the City at the manufacturing plant. Repairs, other than at the manufacturing plant, are not permitted. 
8.920. - Materials. 
1.  Clay Pipe (CLPS). 
a.  Basic Specification. Nominal six-inch to thirty-six-inch diameter size only: ASTM C700 extra strength vitrified clay sewer pipe. 
b.  Joints. ASTM C425; At Contractor option, use factory fabricated gasket, with bell and spigot pipe and fittings, or use factory fabricated resilient compression sleeve. 
2.  Concrete Pipe. 
a.  Basic Specification. Nominal eighteen-inch size and over only: ASTM C76, reinforced sewer pipe furnished in not less than eight-foot lengths, without lift holes, Class 4 or 5 depending on depth and method of bury. 
b.  Additional specification requirement for all concrete pipe. Maximum absorption by standard ASTM test may not exceed six (6.0) percent, and pipe must be aged at manufacturing plant for not less than five (5) days. 
c.  Identification. Stamp each length or joint of concrete pipe at the plant of manufacture, showing strength or reinforcement class, wall thickness designation, date of manufacture, and manufacturer symbol. 
d.  Joints. AWWA C302 O-ring rubber gasket style in which the completed joint confines the O-ring on four (4) sides with nominal clearance not to exceed one-sixteenth-inch, between smooth, accurately formed, bell and spigot surfaces. 
e.  Interior Wall Lining. Apply factory coating of heavy duty, chemically resistant epoxy resin, suitable for sewer service over barrel and joints of pipe. Apply lining in at least coats, and to a total minimum thickness of twenty (20) mils. Over concrete surfaces which have been thoroughly prepared by either sand blasting or etching with acid. 
3.  Plastic Solid Wall Pipe (PVCS). 
a.  Basic Specification. ASTM D3034 bell and spigot sewer pipe with ratio of barrel outside diameter to wall thickness (SDR) no greater than 35.0, and pipe stiffness at five (5) percent deflection per ASTM D2412, no less than 45.0 psi. 
b.  Couplings and adapters. Provide standard couplings and adapters specifically designed to connect the PVC pipe to manholes or to other pipe materials. Manhole adapters shall provide a positive bond between the piping system and the mortar or concrete of the manhole structure. Protect all couplings and adapters by fully encasing in concrete. 
c.  Joints. Elastomeric gasket system having satisfactory performance record as determined by the Engineer. 
4.  Ductile Cast Iron Pipe (DIPS). 
a.  Basic Specification. ANSI 21.51 ductile iron pipe having thickness class as determined from Table 51.1 for Type 2 laying condition and cover for actual installation. 
b.  Coatings. Cement mortar lining per ANSI A21.4 with standard coal tar coating over lining and pipe exterior. 
c.  Joints. Rubber push-on type (ANSI A21.11) except where mechanical joint (ANSI A21.10 and A21.11) with corrosion resistant alloy bolts, or flanged (ANSI B16.1, Class 125) with corrosion resistant alloy bolts and red rubber gasket joints are indicated. 
d.  Fittings. Same design strength, lining, coating and joint as connecting ductile iron pipe. 
5.  Ductile Cast Iron Pipe - Non-Floating (DIPS/NF). 
a.  Basic Specification. Same material, strength joints, coatings and hydraulic characteristics as ductile cast iron pipe. 
b.  Special characteristic. Installed pipe must weigh more than its volume, computed by exterior pipe dimensions, multiplied by sixty-two and one-half (62.5) pounds per cubic foot. This may be accomplished by manufacturing pipe with greater wall thickness, not necessarily concentrically with interior pipe dimensions, or by concrete anchors. If separate concrete anchors are used, they must be secured to underside of each pipe length using a connecting system which will not deteriorate under long term, adverse conditions. Whether integral or separate anchor methods are used, the method must not result in significant reduction in earth cover above pipe or increase in exposure of pipework above finished grade. 
6.  Pipe Fittings. Use standard, factory fabricated adapters, wyes, tees, and other necessary fittings comparable to pipe with which connected. 
7.  Coarse Granular Material for Pipe Bedding. Crushed stone, crushed gravel, natural gravel, or crushed shell meeting ASTM C33, and having no. 67 granulation (three-quarter-inch to No. 4 sieve). 
8.  Fine granular material for Pipe Bedding. Uniformly graded natural or manufactured sand composed of hard, durable particles with one hundred (100) percent passing a No. 4 sieve, not more than twenty-five (25) percent passing a No. 100 sieve, and containing no more than twenty-five (25) percent total of silt and clay. 
9.  Grade Board Construction. Pine of fir, finished or rough sawn, free of warps, splits, or knots which would interfere with stable and accurate support of pipe. Furnish common steel nails of suitable size for securing wood members. 
10.  Sewer System Structures. Conform with applicable provisions of the following sections: 
Drainage Structures and Accessories, Article X 
Concrete Work, Article XI 
8.930. - Sewage Lift Stations. 
1.  Application. 
a.  Gravity sewers will be used wherever practical. Authorization to install sewage lift station/force main systems may be granted at the sole discretion of the City Engineer. 
b.  Requests for authorization to install lift station/force main systems shall be accompanied by technical justification and cost-analysis demonstrating to City Engineer's satisfaction that gravity sewers are not practical for the specific conditions. 
2.  General Design and Construction Criteria. 
a.  All lift stations shall be submersible type, except as otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  All lift stations shall conform to the Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, latest edition, Great Lake- Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers, except as otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
c.  All lift stations shall be designed by a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia. 
d.  Construction plans shall be prepared and submitted for review by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. No construction shall begin prior to approval by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
e.  No sewage overflows shall be permitted. 
f.  Temporary by-pass pumping shall be provided during upgrading of existing lift stations. 
3.  [ Pump specifications. ] Pumps shall be submersible, non-clog, centrifugal type, as manufactured by Davis-EMU Division of Davis Water and Waste Industries, Flight Corporation, or approved equal. 
4.  Design Conditions. 
a.  Pumps. 
1.  Number of pumps: The number of pumping units provided shall be adequate to pump the peak design flow with one (1) pumping unit out of service. 
2.  Minimum discharge size: Three-inch. 
3.  Maximum Speed: One thousand eight hundred (1,800) RPM. 
4.  Configuration: Pumps shall be single stage in parallel. 
5.  Efficiency: Pumps shall be designed to operate at the best efficiency point at the design condition. 
6.  Horsepower requirement: Motors shall be non-overloading along the entire pump curve. 
b.  Wetwells. 
1.  Wetwells and valve pits may be pre-cast concrete sanitary sewer manholes, pre-cast monolithic or sectional pre-cast concrete or poured-in-place concrete. 
2.  A separate check valve and plug valve for each pump shall be provided. Valves shall be enclosed separately from the wetwell. 
3.  No steps shall be provided in pump sump chambers. 
5.  Site Work. 
a.  Adequate land shall be provided to allow sufficient room for maintenance of station and turnaround for vehicles. A minimum area of fifty (50) feet by fifty (50) feet (excluding side slopes) shall be provided. 
b.  A twelve-foot-wide, aspalt paved access road shall be provided. 
c.  Lift station shall be fenced and shall be provided with a ten-foot minimum double access gate. Fence shall be eight-foot high, chain link, security type. 
d.  Surfaces inside fenced area shall be gravel, except where landscaping is desired. 
e.  Cut and fill slopes shall not exceed 3H:1V unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
6.  Equipment and Materials. 
a.  The pump design shall be such that the pump unit will be automatically and firmly connected to its discharge piping when lowered into place on the mating discharge connection, permanently installed in the wetwell. The pump shall be easily removable for inspection or service, requiring no bolts, nuts or other fastenings to be disconnected. For this purpose, there shall be no need for personnel to enter the wetwell. Each pump shall be fitted with stainless steel cable of adequate strength and length to permit raising and lowering the pump for inspection or removal. A safety cable hook shall be provided for attachment of the cable to a hook at the access level. The pump, with its appurtenances and cable, shall be capable of continuous submergence underwater without loss of watertight integrity to a depth of sixty-five (65) feet. All major parts, such as the stator casing, oil casing, sliding bracket, volute and impeller shall be of gray iron. All surfaces coming into contact with sludge shall be protected by a coat of rubber-asphalt paint. All exposed bolts and nuts shall be of stainless steel. 
b.  The impeller shall be gray cast iron of non-clog design, capable of handling three-inch diameter spherical solids, fibrous material and other matter found in normal sewage applications. The impeller shall be constructed with a long throughlet without acute turns. A minimum of two (2) vanes shall be provided. The impeller shall be dynamically balanced. Static and dynamic balancing operations shall not deform or weaken it. The impeller shall be slip fit to the shaft. Non-corroding fasteners shall be used. A wear ring system shall be installed to provide efficient sealing between the volute and impeller. 
c.  Each pump shall be provided with a mechanical rotating shaft seal system running in an oil reservoir having separate, constantly hydro-dynamically lubricated lapped seal faces. The seal unit between the pump and oil chamber shall contain one (1) stationary and one (1) positively driven rotating tugsten-carbide ring. The seal unit between the oil sump and motor housing shall contain one (1) positively driven rotating carbon ring. Each interface shall be held in contact by its own spring system. The seals shall require neither maintenance not adjustment, but shall be easily inspected and replaceable. No seal damage shall result from operating the pumping unit out of its liquid environment. The seal system shall not rely upon the pumped media for lubrication. 
d.  The pump shafts shall be of stainless steel and shall rotate on two (2) permanently lubricated bearings. 
e.  A sliding guide bracket shall be an integral part of the pump unit. The volute casing shall have a machined discharge flange to automatically and firmly connect with the cast iron discharge connection, which when bolted to the floor of the sump and discharge line, will receive the pump discharge connection flange without need of adjustment, fasteners, clamps or similar devices. Installation of the pump unit to the discharge connection shall be the result of a simple linear downward motion of the pump unit guided by no less than two (2) guide bars. No other motion of the pump unit, such as tilting or rotating shall be required. 
f.  Lower guide bar holders shall be integral with the discharge connection. A guide bar system shall be installed for each pump, to permit raising and lowering the pump. Guide bars shall be two-inch stainless steel bar of sufficient length to extend from the lower guide holders on the pump discharge connection to the upper guide holders, a detail shall be shown in the drawings. 
g.  The pump motor shall be housed in an air filled or oil filled watertight casing and shall have moisture resistant insulation. The motor shall be NEMA Design B and designed for continuous duty. Motor shall be designed for sustaining a minimum of six (6) starts per hour and shall be adequate to operate the pump at every point on the performance curve without exceeding the motor nameplate. Motors shall be explosion proof. 
h.  The pump motor cable shall be suitable for submersible pump applications. Cable sizing shall conform to NEC specifications for pump motors and shall be of adequate size to allow motor conversion without replacing the cable. The cable entry water seal design shall be such that it precludes specific torque requirements to insure a watertight and submersible seal. The cable entry junction box and motor shall be separated by a stator lead sealing gland or terminal board which shall isolate the motor interior from foreign materials gaining access through the pump top. 
i.  Each unit shall be provided with an adequately designed cooling system. Thermal radiators integral with the stator housing, case in one (1) unit, are acceptable. Where water jackets alone or in conjunction with radiators are used, separate circulation shall be provided. Cooling media channels and ports shall be non- log by virtue of their dimension. Provisions for external cooling and flushing shall be provided. 
j.  All motors shall be three-phase. 
7.  Controls. 
a.  Pump station installation shall be provided with an automatic control center, equipped with main circuit breaker, combination across-the-line magnetic starters, or reduced voltage starters (where required), electrical alternator, H-O-A pump operation selector switches, run indication lights, extra normally open contracts for remote indication of pump operation, terminal board for connection of level sensors and high water alarm, twenty-four-volt control circuit transformer, NEMA 4 high water alarm light and horn with alarm silencer and all other equipment necessary for a fully operational control system. All components shall be housed in a corrosion resistant NEMA 4 stainless enclosure. Provide a space heater, drain and breather fitting. Programmable logic controllers (PLC's) may be submitted for approval in place of relay logic. 
b.  Liquid level devices, each provided with an adequate length of electrical cable, shall be furnished and installed; a detail must be shown on the drawings. A float cable holder shall be installed at the access level. The starting level and stopping level for each pump shall be independently adjustable. Provide a common separate low water cutoff. The lead-lag sequence and on-off-alarm elevations for the installation shall be shown on the drawings. 
c.  Each pump shall be equipped with anon-resettable elapsed time meter mounted on the front of the control panel enclosure. Meters shall record operating time to tenths of an hour. 
d.  Provide automatic alteration of pumps and use control logic to operate in a lead-lag mode with adjustable levels. Pumps shall alternate in sequence with the use of a timer. Over temperature shut down and phase failure protection shall be provided with manual reset. A motor moisture sensor with indicator light for each motor shall be provided. Provide time delays to prevent simultaneous starting of pumps. Retain low water cutoff and other protective devices in hand mode. 
e.  Neatly arrange wiring and components, and label or code. Provide control diagram and legend on inside of enclosure cover. 
f.  Controls shall be supplied by pump manufacturer. 
8.  Accessories. 
a.  Furnish and install aluminum access frames rated for three-hundred (300) lb./sq. ft., complete with hinged and flush locked mechanism, upper guide holder and level sensors cable holder. Frames shall be securely placed, mounted above the pumps. Frame shall be provided with sliding nut rails to attach the accessories required. Lower guide bar holders shall be integral with the discharge connection. Guide bars shall be of at least standard weight galvanized steel pipe, the size shall be indicated on drawings. The guide bars shall not support any portion of the weight of the pump. Doors shall be of skid proof design. 
b.  Furnish stainless steel lifting chain, eye, and wall mounted hook for each pump. Provide two (2) chain grabs for hoist attachment, designed to slip down over the chain and grab the chain at the bottom of the chain for lifting, and to release and be removed from the chain without entering the wetwell. 
c.  Furnish one-quarter-inch stainless steel lifting chain of adequate length, wall hook, and chain grab, as specified above, for use with the debris basket. Chain grab shall utilize same hoist hook and shall be compatible. 
d.  Provide stainless steel debris basket to screen influent flow to pump station wetwell. Basket shall be provided with two-inch maximum openings and shall be mounted on rails to allow ready removal and cleaning of the basket. 
e.  Automatic Phone Dialer. 
1.  The Automatic Phone Dialer shall monitor up to sixteen (16) status/alarm inputs and be capable of transmitting alarm messages via normal dial-up phone lines. Each of the monitoring contacts shall be individually user programmable to alarm on open or closed states. 
2.  The Dialer shall be capable of dialing from one (1) to eight (8) user entered phone numbers, each up to sixteen (160) digits in length utilizing Touch-tone or pulse dialing. 
3.  The Automatic Phone Dialer shall utilize a solid state voice synthesizer. Individual alarm and normal messages shall he user programmable from a standard 230 word vocabulary. 
4.  The Automatic Phone Dialer shall initiate dial-out when alarm condition occurs. Acknowledgement of the alarm shall be by a touch tone code at the receiving phone or by returning a phone call to the Dialer. 
5.  The user shall be capable of obtaining the current status of the alarm and status contacts by calling the dialer and giving it a Touch Tone Code. 
6.  The Automatic Phone Dialer shall operate on one hundred twenty (120) VAC. A Gel-Cell Battery and charger shall be provided to provide operational back-up for a minimum of six (6) hours. 
7.  The Dialer shall be provided with internal gas tube and solid state surge protection on all inputs including power, phone and signal lines. 
8.  Automatic Phone Dialer shall be compatible with existing equipment currently in service and shall be as required for a complete operating system. 
9.  Emergency Power. 
a.  Power must be provided to lift stations from at least two (2) sources. Acceptable sources are: 
1.  2 Independent power lines from the utility. 
2.  Utility power with a back-up, permanently installed generator; or 
3.  Utility power with a connection for a portable generator and a manual transfer switch. 
b.  Where the secondary sources of power are a portable generator connection, the wetwell must be sized to provide a minimum of six-hour storage. 
10.  Spare Parts. 
a.  One (1) complete set of spare parts shall be furnished for each group of four (4) or less key items of identical equipment. 
b.  Spare parts are defined as all parts and appurtenances identified in the equipment manufacturer's current published parts list and operation and maintenance literature as spare parts recommended for that item of equipment. Parts and appurtenances identified as "optional" or otherwise identified by words or symbols of similar meaning shall be considered spare parts and shall be furnished. 
11.  Painting. 
a.  Pumps shall be primed and finished at the factory. No field painting shall be required except for touch ups. 
12.  Factory Tests. 
a.  The submersible pumps shall be tested at the place of manufacture in accordance with the standards of the Hydraulic Institute for testing of pumps. Each pump shall be tested with the actual drive unit to be furnished on the job. The test reports shall cover the complete range of the pumps and shall contain the information necessary to demonstrate that the units are in conformance with the approved Specifications. The following shall be recorded for each pump tested: 
1.  TDH vs. Capacity 
2.  Pump Efficiency vs. Capacity 
3.  Horsepower vs. Capacity 
4.  Speed of Rotation 
b.  Six (6) copies of all certified test reports shall be submitted. 
13.  Installation. The pumps, drives and accessories shall be installed, tested and adjusted and the installation certified by the pump manufacturer's representative. 
14.  Field Testing. 
a.  Following installation and checkout, the ability of the pumps to operate under actual field conditions without overheating, leakage or excessive wear, vibration, or noise shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Engineer. 
b.  Before placing installation into service the pumps shall be run continuously with the motor not submerged for thirty (30) minutes under full load current with no damage resulting to the pump motor. The pumps shall, during the test, product the designed GPM and TDH condition and experience a heat rise of no more than forty-five (45) degrees C above ambient temperature. 
c.  In the event any of the pumping equipment fails to meet the above test requirements, it shall be modified and retested in accordance with these requirements. 
d.  Each pump's performance shall be documented by obtaining concurrent readings showing motor voltage and amperage, pump suction head and pump discharge head. Such reading shall be documented for at least three (3) pumping conditions. One (1) test shall be at shut-off head. Each power lead to the motor shall be checked for proper current balance. 
e.  The Contractor shall submit six (6) certified copies of all test results prior to acceptance of the installation. 
15.  Pump Warranty. 
a.  The pump manufacturer shall warrant the units against defects in workmanship and materials for a period of five (5) years or ten thousand (10,000) hours. Warranty shall apply to parts and labor prorated over sixty (60) months. For the first eighteen (18) months, one hundred (100) percent parts and labor apply. The warranty shall be in printed form. 
b.  The warranty shall be transferable to the sewage collection system Owner. 
16.  Wash Station. 
a.  At each pump station, provide a freeze-proof yard hydrant with hose bib, concrete splash block, and hose rack capable of storing fifty (50) feet of one-inch hose. 
b.  Main supply shall be protected by a dual check type backflow preventer. Backflow preventer shall be contained in a separate close not subject to flooding by sewage. Backflow preventers equipped with drips shall not be installed in areas subject to flooding by any non-potable source. Such devices shall contain an air-gap type funnel between the drip discharge and the drain line provided. 
8.940. - Pipe Foundation. 
1.  Clay Pipe Foundation. Unless otherwise indicated, lay pipe in trenches and on foundations prepared as selected by the Contractor in conformance with the bedding class, trench width and depth, and pipe size tabulated below: 

 
2.  Concrete Pipe Foundation. Unless otherwise indicated, lay pipe in trenches and on foundations prepared as selected by the Contractor in conformance with the bedding class, trench width and depth, and pipe size tabulated below: 

 
3.  Plastic Pipe Foundation. Lay pipe in trenches and on foundations prepared in accordance with methods proposed by the pipe manufacturer in writing and approved by the Engineer. Such methods must result in long term deflections not greater than five (5) percent. Irrespective of manufacturer recommendations, use a bedding system giving not less than the support afforded by Class C Bedding. Limit maximum trench width to the following values: 

 
4.  Cast and Ductile Iron Pipe Foundation. Unless otherwise indicated, place underground pipe in trenches having a width no greater than nominal pipe diameter plus two (2) feet, using Class C foundation bedding. 
5.  Definition of Pipe Foundation Terms. 
a.  Trench depth is the vertical distance from pipe invert or flow line to finished ground surface. 
b.  Trench width is the horizontal distance between trench walls at any point from one (1) foot above top of pipe to trench bottom. 
c.  Class B Bedding may be achieved by either of the following two (2) construction methods: 
1.  Shaped Bottom with Tamped Backfill. Shape bottom of trench excavation to conform to a cylindrical surface with a radius at least two (2) inches greater than the radius to the outside of the pipe and with a width sufficient to allow 6/10 of the width of the pipe barrel to be bedded in fine granular material fill placed in the shaped excavation. Carefully place and compact backfill at sides of pipe to a thickness of at least twelve (12) inches above tope of pipe. Limit use of this bedding method to trenches with firm bottom and sides. 
2.  Compact Coarse Granular Bedding with Tampered Backfill. Bed pipe in compacted coarse granular materials placed on a flat trench bottom. Thickness of granular bedding must be at least one-quarter the outside pipe diameter, but not less than four (4) inches thick under pipe barrel, and extend at least halfway up the pipe barrel at the sides. Carefully place compacted backfill above the granular material up a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches over the top of pipe. 
d.  Class C Bedding may be achieved by either of the following two (2) construction methods: 
1.  Shaped Bottom. Bed pipe with ordinary care in an earth foundation formed in the trench bottom by a shaped excavation which fits the pipe barrel with reasonable closeness for a width of at least fifty (50) percent of the outside pipe diameter. Place compacted fill to a minimum depth of six (6) inches above tope of pipe. 
2.  Compacted Coarse Granular Bedding with a Tampered Backfill. Bed pipe in compacted coarse granular material placed on a flat trench bottom. Thickness of granular bedding must be at least four (4) inches under the barrel and must extend one-tenth to one-sixth of the outside diameter up the pipe barrel at the sides. Carefully place compacted backfill above the granular material up a minimum depth of six (6) inches over the top of pipe. 
8.950. - Miscellaneous. 
8.951. - Pipe Laying. 
1.  Clean interior of pipe and all joints before laying. When pipe laying is not in actual progress, tightly cover open ends of sewer. Avoid permitting mud or other material from entering sewer at all times. 
2.  Avoid damage or shock in handling pipe and accessories. Inspect each length of pipe, and reject any defective piece. Carefully protect pipe in place from damage or displacement until backfilling operations are complete. 
3.  Lay and joint pipe in strict conformance with manufacturer's written recommendations as submitted to and approved by the Engineer. Lay all pipe upgrade with spigots pointing downgrade. 
4.  Control geometric position of pipe as necessary to ensure that pipe and fittings accurately conform with required grade and alignment after sewer is completed. 
5.  Prevent water from accumulating or running in trench during pipe laying operations, and until the trench or excavation has been backfilled. 
6.  Remove and re-lay any length of pipe which does not accurately conform with required line or grade, is crushed, or is excessively deflected. 
8.952. - Pipe Connections. 
1.  Make all pipe connections with standard fittings, manholes, structures, or special construction detailed on Drawings. Locate building services and connect thereto with standard fittings as authorized. 
2.  At manholes and structures, neatly cut all connecting pipe flush with inside surface, and provide flexible pipe joint within eighteen (18) inches of outer surface. Make pipe connections to manholes and structures by laying pipe in mortar bed or concrete. Use supplemental materials and techniques as required to obtain watertightness. 
3.  Do not connect any sewage flow to new work until authorized by the City. 
8.953. - Installing Sanitary Sewer in Tunnel Liner. 
Tunnel Liner, six (6) inches to forty-two (42) inches. 
1.  Insert sewer pipe concentrically into tunnel liner by securing hardwood blocks radially around sewer pipe at no more than ten-foot longitudinal intervals. Use steel banding for securing wood blocks in place. 
2.  Blow sand into annular space between sewer pipe and tunnel liner starting at the longitudinal center and proceeding outward to each end. Use techniques which assure complete filling of all voids. 
8.954. - Wyes, Tees and Services. 
1.  Provide wyes and/or service tees at points indicated on Drawings, specified herein, an as required by the City Engineer. If wyes or service extensions are not to be connected to a building sewer under this Work, close end of pipe with removable factory fabricated plug or stopper. 
2.  Service lines, unless requested by the City Engineer, are to be run to suit field conditions at a minimum grade of two (2) percent and with a minimum pipe cover of thirty (30) inches. 
8.955. - Line Cleaning. 
Avoid permitting dirt, rubbish, surplus construction material, and other foreign matter to enter structures or pipe during construction. Use whatever means may be necessary to obtain a clean and internally smooth sewer system prior to final acceptance. 
8.960. - Sewer Leakage. 
1.  General Leakage Requirements. 
a.  Make entire sewer line system as near watertight as practicable. Eliminate all visible points of ground water infiltration, and any other significant points of leakage which can be located, regardless of test results obtained as hereinafter required. 
b.  Perform system infiltration test, manhole exfiltration test, and piping or joint air test for all work constructed. 
2.  System Infiltration Testing. 
a.  Measure infiltration into each major section of sewer during wet weather as requested by the Engineer. Use suitable temporary weirs and depth measuring devices, acceptable to the City as giving reasonably accurate flow measurement, furnished, installed and removed by the Contractor. 
b.  Take whatever action may be necessary to permanently reduce infiltration from all water sources into all constructed work, to rates, as determined by tests witnessed by the Engineer, which do not exceed 0.0375 gallons per inch of nominal pipe diameter per foot of pipe per twenty-four (24) hours. 
3.  Manhole Exfiltraton Testing. Test each manhole constructed by temporarily plugging all connecting pipes, filling manhole completely with water, allowing water to stand in manhole for one (1) hour, refilling manhole, and checking for water level drop after a one-hour period. If measurable water level drop occurs, permanently correct leakage source, and test again. Repeat procedure until no measurable water level drop occurs, Permit City to witness successful tests. 
4.  Air Testing. 
a.  Nominal four-inch to forty-two-inch pipe. After completing backfill of a sewer line section, conduct a low pressure air test using methods and devices acceptable to the City Engineer. Perform such tests using the following general procedures: 
1.  Temporarily plug line segment between two (2) manholes using plugs having air tight fittings through which low pressure air can be introduced into the pipe segment being tested. 
2.  Introduce low pressure air into the test pipe segment until the internal air pressure reaches four (4.0) PSIG above ground water pressure, if any. 
3.  Wait at least two (2) minutes for air temperature in the test segment to stabilize while internal air pressure remains no less than three and one-half (3.5) PSIG above ground water pressure. 
4.  Accurately determine the elapsed time for internal pressure to drop one (1.0) PSIG. 
5.  The air test is acceptable if elapsed time is no less than shown by the following table: 

 
b.  Air leakage time is based on pipe being damp. If pipe and joints are dry, dampen line if helpful in-meeting air test time requirement. 
c.  At each manhole constructed where ground water is known to exist, install a small diameter pipe nipple through the manhole wall at the time that the sewer pipe is installed. Locate the nipple immediately above the lowest connecting sewer pipe, and grout the nipple in place concurrently with grouting the sewer pipe. Prior to placing the nipple, wrap it with a continuous length of heavy nylon chord which can be pulled out, thus permitting removal of the nipple after test work is complete. Just before commencing the air test, attach a clear plastic tube to the nipple, and hold the tube end vertically upward. After ground water has stopped rising in the plastic tube, measure the vertical distance from water level to pipe invert in feet. Average this distance observed at manholes on each end of the test segment, and divide the average distance in feet by two and three-tenths (2.3) to obtain the ground water pressure to be used in computing required test air pressure. 
d.  Permanently correct excessive leakage determined by air testing, and repeat operations until Engineer witnesses a successful test on each line segment of joint; then remove nipple through manhole wall without disturbing adjacent grout. Permanently caulk resulting hole watertight. 
8.970. - Final Acceptance by the City. 
1.  The Owner/Developer shall before final acceptance present to the City the following: 
a.  Length of sewer line installed by line size. 
b.  Cost of sewer line installed by line size. 
c.  Construction Record Drawings. 
ARTICLE X. - DRAINAGE STRUCTURES AND ACCESSORIES 

8.1010. - Description of Work. 
1.  The extent of drainage structure is shown on the Drawings. 
2.  Related Work Specified Elsewhere: 
Trenching and Backfilling, Article V 
Sanitary Sewer System, Article VI 
Concrete Work, Article XI 
8.1020. - Materials. 
1.  Clay Brick. ASTM C32 sewer and manhole brick or ASTM C216 facing brick, Grade MW or SW of nominal size eight (8) by two and one-quarter (2¼) by three and three-quarter (3¾) inches. Color and texture as selected by Contractor. 
2.  Concrete Brick. ASTM C55, Grade P-II, of nominal size eight (8) by two and one-quarter (2¼) inches; gray-white concrete color with smooth formed natural texture. 
3.  Rubble Stone. Provide stone not less than six (6) inches thick nor twelve (12) inches wide, and of proper shape to bring masonry structures to true line, shapes, and elevations; smaller stones may be used to fill interior of walls. Provide stone, free of rounded, worn, weathered and scarred surfaces, and also free of segregation, seams, cracks, pyrite intrusions and other defects tending to reduce weather resistance. Select stone having not less than sixty-five (65) percent wear in accordance with AASHTO 96, and having a loss not exceeding fifteen (15) percent after five (5) cycles of the magnesium sulfate soundness test in accordance with AASHTO T 104. 
4.  Pre-cast Concrete Drainage Structures. Use pre-cast concrete drainage structures, including pre-cast concrete pipe sections, adjustment rings, tapered sections, drop inlets, manholes, and other related products which conform to the requirements of ASTM C478. Furnish structure having a minimum wall thickness of four (4) inches or one-twelth the interior diameter, whichever is greater. Accurately cast openings to meet specified project requirements. 
5.  Drainage Structure Steps. Use steps conforming with applicable government safety regulations and the requirements stated below: 
a.  Provide individual steps, mortared or cast into walls and conical tops of all manholes and similar structures. Alien steps so as to form a continuous ladder with steps equally spaced vertically, no more than sixteen (16) inches apart, using steps having a minimum length of ten (10) inches and which project a minimum clear distance of four (4) inches from the wall. Use steps designed to prevent the foot from sliding off the end, and whose exposed parts are free of any hazardous sharp edges, burrs or projections. 
b.  Steps, fastenings and installation must be capable of supporting a single concentrated load of three hundred (300) pounds. Use designs based on imposed loads being concentrated at such points as will cause maximum stresses in the structural element being considered. 
c.  Construct individual steps as one (1) piece, ferrous casting, unless otherwise approved by the City or its designated representative. 
6.  Metal Castings. Provide castings of uniform quality, free from blowholes, porosity, hard spots, shrinkage, distortion or other significant defects and having smooth surfaces free of casting sand, fins and burrs. Use component parts which fit together uniformly, in a secure fashion. Where casting have lids or covers, make provisions for non-rocking fit. 
a.  Use the following casting material: 
1.  Gray Iron Castings - ASTM A48, Class 30. 
2.  Shop paint all casting surfaces with a single coat of asphaltic paint. 
7.  Mortar Materials. 
a.  Cement - Portland Cement ASTM C150, Type I or II 
b.  Sand - ASTM C114, well screened, clean, hard sharp, siliceous, tree from loam, silt and other impurities. Provide the following grain size distribution: 
1.  #10 sieve, passing ninety-five (95) to one hundred (100) percent. 
2.  #50 sieve, passing fifteen (15) to forty (40) percent. 
3.  #100 sieve, passing zero to five (5) percent. 
4.  Removal by decantation zero to five (5) percent. 
8.  Mortar Mix Proportions. Provide mortar mixed in the proportion of one (1) part cement to three (3) parts sand which only enough water to allow good workability of the mix. Hydrated lime may be added in amounts not exceeding ten (10) percent of the cement weight. 
9.  Cast-In-Place Concrete. Conform with applicable provisions of the following: 
Concrete Work, Article XI 
10.  Reinforcement. Conform with applicable provisions of the following: 
Concrete Work, Article XI 
8.1030. - Inspection. 
Conform to provisions for inspections listed in Article IX, Sanitary Sewer System and Article VIII, Water System. 
8.1040. - Execution. 
1.  Excavation and Backfill. Conform with applicable provisions of Article V, Trenching and Backfilling. 
2.  Cast-In-Place Concrete. Conform with applicable provisions of Article XI, Concrete Work. 
3.  Pre-Cast Concrete Units. Set pre-cast units plumb and to exact grade on approximately three-inch thickness of compacted sand bedding. 
a.  In the event field conditions necessitate additional pipe connections for which no holes have been cast, neatly chip necessary holes, being careful not to crack portions of unit to remain. Replace any units excessively damaged as a result of field modification. 
b.  For sanitary sewer manholes, fill joints between sections with bituminous mastic especially formulated for sewer service. Use mortar or concrete to seal joints between units and connecting pipe. Supplement connecting joints with manufactured waterstops or seals when recommended by pipe manufacturer or necessary to minimize leakage. 
4.  Masonry Structures. 
a.  Store cement and lime in a dry place. Store masonry units above ground on level platforms which allow air circulation around and under stacked masonry units. 
b.  Handle and store masonry units so as to avoid damage. 
c.  Masonry units before installation and reject all units which are cracked, damaged, or in any way fail to meet this Specification. 
d.  Use only clean masonry units, free of dirt and debris which would adversely affect mortar bond. Do not use frozen materials, or materials mixed or coated with ice or frost. 
e.  Set masonry units, free of dirt and debris which would adversely affect mortar bond. Do not use frozen materials, or materials mixed or coated with ice or frost. 
f.  When using multi-wythe construction, make every fifth coarse a header coarse. 
g.  Do not install masonry when air temperature is below forty (40) degrees F and falling. 
h.  Do not backfill against masonry structures until they are at least seven (7) days old. In cold weather delay backfilling for a longer time to allow additional curing time for mortar. 
5.  Metal Castings. 
a.  Inspect each casting before installation, and reject all castings which are cracked, damaged or in any other way fail to meet the Specifications. 
b.  Clean castings of dirt, mud and grease before installation. 
c.  Set castings according to location and arrangement shown on the Drawings; rigidly support castings to maintain true alignment and elevation. Where castings are located in concrete or mortar construction, thoroughly work concrete or mortar around the casting so as to eliminate voids and provide solid bearing surfaces and rigid construction. 
d.  Make frames, subject to traffic, firm and stable tinder actual traffic conditions. When constructed in paved areas, set frames to conform with exact pavement surface including tilting frame where necessary to match pavement surface. 
6.  Sanitary Sewer Manholes. 
a.  Shape inverts and channels neatly so as to permit smooth hydraulic flow. 
b.  For masonry manholes, saturate outside wall of each manhole with water, and plaster with a smooth, ½ inch thick minimum coat of mortar as specified under PART 2, except that the mortar shall be mixed with one (1) part cement to two (2) parts sand. Do not add hydrated lime to plaster mortar. 
c.  Use whatever care, materials and construction technique may be required to achieve permanent watertight joints and connections. For testing and inspection requirements, refer to section 02720, Sanitary Sewer System. 
ARTICLE XI. - CONCRETE WORK 

8.1100. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Codes and Standards. Comply with the provisions of the following codes, specifications and standards, except as otherwise shown or specified. 
a.  ACI 301 "Specifications for Structural Concrete for Buildings" 
b.  ACI 311 "Recommended Practice for Concrete Inspection" 
c.  ACI 318 "Building Code Requirements for Reinforced Concrete" 
d.  ACI 347 "Recommended Practice for Concrete Formwork" 
e.  ACI 304 "Recommended Practice for Measuring, Mixing, Transporting and Placing Concrete" 
f.  Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute, "Manual of Standard Practice" 
g.  Where local building code requirements exist, comply with provisions of such codes which are more stringent than the preceding codes and standards. 
2.  Workmanship. The Contractor is responsible for correction of concrete work which does not conform to the specified requirements, including strength, tolerances and finishes. Correct deficient concrete as directed by the City Engineer. 
3.  Construction Tolerances. 
a.  Variation from Plumb. For lines and surfaces of piers, and walls do not exceed inch in ten (10) feet nor more than one-inch total; except for exposed corners, control joints and other conspicuous lines, do not exceed one-quarter-inch in any story or twenty-foot maximum, nor one-half-inch in forty (40) feet or more. 
b.  Variation from Grade. For grades shown for slab soffits do not exceed inch ten (10) feet, three-eighths-inch in any bay or twenty-foot maximum, nor three-quarter-inch in forty (40) feet or more. 
c.  Variation in Cross-sectional Dimensions. For thickness of slabs and walls, do not exceed minus inch nor plus inch. 
8.1110. - Mix Design. 
1.  Compressive Strength. Design mixes for a specified strength for three thousand (3,000) psi at twenty-eight (28) days using a minimum of five and one-quarter (5¼) bags of cement (ninety-four (94) pounds), and a maximum of six (6) gallons of water per bag or cement, unless otherwise indicated. 
2.  Admixtures. Use air-entraining admixture in all concrete, unless otherwise shown or specified. Add air-entraining admixture at the manufacturer's prescribed rate to result in concrete at the joint of placement having air content by volume within the following limits: 
a.  Six (6) percent to nine (9) percent for maximum aggregate one-half-inch and under. 
b.  Four (4) percent to six (6) percent for maximum aggregate over one-half-inch through one and one-half-inch. 
c.  Two and one-half (2.5) percent to four and one-half (4.5) percent for maximum aggregate over one and one-half-inch. 
3.  Slump Limits. Proportion and design mixes to result in concrete slump at the point of placement as follows: 
4.  Ramps and Sloping Surfaces. Not more than three (3) inches. 
5.  Reinforced Foundation Systems. Not less than one (1) inch and not more than 3 inches. 
6.  All Other Concrete. Not less than one (1) inch and not more than four (4) inches. 
8.1120. - Materials. 
8.1121. - Form Materials. 
1.  Forms for Exposed Finish Concrete. Unless otherwise shown or specified, construct all formwork for exposed concrete surfaces with plywood, metals metal-framed plywood-faced or other acceptable panel-type materials, to provide continuous, straight, smooth, exposed surfaces. Furnish in largest practicable sizes to minimize number of joints and to conform to joint system shown on Drawings. Provide form material with sufficient thickness to withstand pressure or newly-placed concrete without bow or deflection. 
2.  [ Plywood used in formwork. ] Where plywood is used in formwork provide material complying with U.S. Product Standard PS-1 "B-B High Density Overlaid Concrete Form", Class I, unless otherwise acceptable to Engineer. 
3.  Forms for Unexposed Finish Concrete. Form concrete surfaces which will be unexposed in finished structure with plywood, lumber, metal or other acceptable material. Provide lumber dressed on at least two (2) edges and one (1) side for tight fit. 
8.1122. - Reinforcing Materials. 
1.  Reinforcing Bars. ASTM A 615, Grade 60 unless otherwise shown. 
2.  Steel Wire. ASTM A 82, plain, cold-drawn, steel. 
3.  Welded Wire Fabric. ASTM A 185, welded steel wire fabric. 
4.  Supports for Reinforcement. Provide supports for reinforcement including bolsters, chairs spacers and other devices for spacing, supporting and fastening reinforcing bars and welded wire fabric in place. Use wire bar type supports complying with CRSI recommendations, unless otherwise specified. Wood, brick and other devices will not be acceptable. 
a.  Slabs-on-grade. Use supports with sand plates or horizontal runners where wetted base materials will not support chair legs. 
b.  Exposed-to-view concrete surfaces. where legs of supports are in contact with forms, provide supports with legs which are hot-dip galvanized, or plastic protected or stainless steel protected. 
8.1123. - Concrete Materials. 
1.  Portland Cement. ASTM C 150, Type 1, unless otherwise acceptable to Engineer. 
Use only one (1) brand of cement throughout the project, unless otherwise acceptable to City Engineer. 
2.  Aggregates. ASTM C 33, and as herein specified. Provide aggregates from a single source for all exposed concrete. 
a.  Fine Aggregate. Clean, sharp, natural sand free from loam, clay, lumps or other deleterious substances. 
b.  Coarse Aggregate. Clean, uncoated, crushed granite or similar hard stone processed from natural rock or stone, and containing no clay, mud, loam or foreign matter. 
c.  Maximum Aggregate Size. Not larger than one-fifth of the narrowest dimension between sides of forms, one-third of the depth of slabs, nor three-quarter of the minimum clear spacing between individual reinforcing bars or bundles of bars. Size limitations may be waived if, in the judgment of the Engineer, workability and methods of consolidation are such that concrete can be placed without honeycomb or voids. 
d.  Water. Clean, fresh, and safely drinkable by humans. 
e.  Air-Entraining Admixture. ASTM C 260. 
8.1124. - Related Materials. 
1.  Grout. Ready mixed Portland cement, sand and water mixture conforming with materials and mix design of highest strength project-required concrete except for deletion of coarse aggregate. 
2.  Non-shrink Grout. Factory premixed cementitious material containing no corrosive material is non-shrink from time of placement and shows no expansion after final set when tested under ASTM C 827, has an initial setting time of not less than forty-five (45) minutes, has a twenty-four-hour compressive strength of not less than three thousand (3,000) psi under ASTM C 109 for a trowelable mix, and is selected and applied in conformance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
3.  Absorptive Cover. Burlap cloth made from jute or kenaf, weighting approximately nine (9) ounces per square yard, complying with AASHTO M182, Class 2. 
4.  Moisture-Retaining Cover. One (1) of the following, complying with ASTM C171: 
a.  Waterproof Paper; 
b.  Polyethylene Film; 
c.  Polyethylene-coated burlap. 
5.  Membrane-Forming Curing Compound. ASTM C309, Type 1 unless other type acceptable to City Engineer. 
8.1130. - Concrete Mixing. 
1.  Job-Site Mixing. Mix materials for concrete in an acceptable drum type batch machine mixer. Fro mixers of one (1) cubic yard, or smaller capacity, continue mixing at least one (1) minute, but not more than five (5) minutes after all ingredients are in the mixer, before any part of the batch is released. For mixers of capacity larger than one (1) cubic yard, increase the minimum one (1) minute of mixing time by fifteen (15) seconds for each additional cubic yard, or fraction thereof. 
2.  [ Batch ticket. ] Provide a batch ticket for each batch discharged and used in the work, indicating the project identification name and number, date, mix time, quantity, and amount of water introduced. 
3.  Ready-Mix Concrete. Comply with the requirements of ASTM C94 and as herein spec fled. 
a.  Delete the references for allowing additional water to be added to the batch for material with insufficient slump. Addition of water to the batch will not be permitted. 
b.  During hot weather, or under conditions contributing to rapid setting of concrete, a shorter mixing time than specified in ASTM C94 may be required. 
c.  When the air temperature is between eighty-five (85) degrees F and ninety (90) degrees f, reduce the mixing an delivery time from one (1) hour to seventy-five (75) minutes, and when the air temperature is above ninety (90) degrees F, reduce the mixing and delivery time to sixty (60) minutes. 
8.1140. - Forms. 
1.  Design, erect, support, brace and maintain formwork to support vertical and lateral loads that might be applied until such loads can be supported by the concrete structure. Construct formwork so concrete members and structures are of correct size, shape, alignment, elevation and position. 
2.  Design formwork to be readily removable without impact, shock or damage to cast-in-place concrete surfaces and adjacent materials. 
3.  Construct forms complying with ACI 347, to sizes, shapes, lines and dimensions shown, and to obtain accurate alignment, location, grades, level and plumb work in finished structures. Provide for openings, offsets, sinkages, keyways, recesses, moldings, rustications, reglets, chamfers, blocking, screeds, bulkheads, anchorages and inserts, and other features required in work. Use selected materials to obtain required finishes. Solidly butt joints and provide back-up at joints to prevent leakage of cement paste. 
4.  Fabricate forms for easy removal without hammering or prying against the concrete surfaces. Provide crush plates or wrecking plates where stripping may damage cast concrete surfaces. Provide top forms for inclined surfaces where slope is too steep to place concrete with bottom forms only. Kerf wood inserts for forming keyways, reglets, recesses, and the like, to prevent swelling and for easy removal. 
5.  Provide temporary openings where interior area of formwork is inaccessible for cleanout for inspection before concrete placement, and for placement of concrete. Securely brace temporary openings and set tightly to forms to prevent loss of concrete mortar. Locate temporary openings on forms at inconspicuous locations. 
6.  Chamfer exposed corners and edges are shown, using wood, metal, PVC or rubber chamfer strips fabricated to produce uniform smooth lines and tight edge joints. 
7.  Form Ties. Factory-fabricated, adjustable-length, metal form ties, designed to prevent form deflection, to prevent spilling concrete surfaces upon removal, and to prevent passage of water along tie surface through concrete. 
Provide ties so portion remaining within concrete is at least one-inch inside concrete, and do not leave holes larger than one-inch diameter in concrete surface. 
8.  Cleaning and Tightening. Thoroughly clean forms and adjacent surfaces to receive concrete. Remove chips, wood, sawdust, dirt or other debris just before concrete is placed. Retighten forms after concrete placement if required to eliminate mortar leaks. 
9.  Edge Forms and Screed Strips for Slabs. Set edge forms or bulkheads and inter-mediate screed strips for slabs to obtain the required elevations and contours in the finished slab surface. Provide and secure units sufficiently strong to support the types of screeds required. Align the concrete surface to the elevation of the screed strips by the use of strike-off templates or accepted compacting type screeds. 
8.1141. - Preparation of Form Surfaces. 
1.  Coat the contact surfaces of forms with a form-coating compound before reinforcement is placed. 
2.  Thin form-coating compounds only with thinning agent of type, and in amount, and under conditions of the form-coating compound manufacturer's directions. Do not allow excess for-coating material to accumulate in the forms or to come into contact with concrete surfaces against which fresh concrete will be placed. Apply in compliance with manufacturer's instructions. 
3.  Coat steel forms with a non-staining, rust-preventative form oil or otherwise protect against rusting. Rust-stained steel formwork is not acceptable. 
8.1150. - Placing Reinforcement. 
1.  Comply with the specified codes and standards, and Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute's recommended practice for "Placing Reinforcing Bars", for details and methods of reinforcement placement and supports, and as herein specified. 
2.  Clean reinforcement of loose rust and mill scale, earth, ice, and other materials which reduce or destroy bond with concrete. 
3.  Accurately position, support and secure reinforcement against displacement by formwork, construction, or concrete placement operations. Locate and support reinforcing by metal chairs, runners, bolsters, spacers and hangers, as required. 
4.  Place reinforcement to obtain at least the minimum coverage for concrete protection. Arrange, space an securely tie bars and bar supports to hold reinforcement in position during concrete placement operations. Set wire ties so ends are directed into concrete, not toward exposed concrete surfaces. 
5.  Install welded wire fabric in as long lengths as practicable. Lap adjoining pieces at least one (1) full mesh and lace splices with wire. Offset end laps in adjacent widths to prevent continuous laps in either direction. 
8.1151. - Joints. 
1.  Construction Joints. Locate and install necessary construction joints, which are not shown on the Drawings, so as not to impair the strength and appearance of the structure, as acceptable to the Engineer. 
2.  Provide keyways in all construction joints in walls, slabs and between walls and footings; accepted bulkheads designed for this purpose may be used for slabs. Construct keyways one (1) inch deep unless otherwise detailed. 
3.  Place construction joints perpendicular to the main reinforcement. Continue all reinforcement across construction joints. 
4.  Isolation Joints in Slabs-on-Ground. Construct isolation joints in slabs on ground at all points of contact between slabs on ground and vertical surfaces, such as column pedestals, foundation walls, grade beams and elsewhere as indicated. 
5.  Form control joints by inserting a pre-molded hardboard or fiberboard strip into the fresh concrete until the top surface of the strip is flush with the slab surface. After the concrete has cured, remove inserts and clean groove of loose debris. 
8.1152. - Installation of Embedded Items. 
Set and build into the work anchorage devices and other embedded items required for other work that is attached to, or supported by, cast-in place concrete, Use setting drawings, diagrams, instructions and directions provided by suppliers of the items to be attached thereto. 
8.1160. - Concrete Placement. 
1.  Pre-Placement Inspection. Before placing concrete, inspect and complete the formwork installation, reinforcing steel, and items to be embedded or cast-in. Notify other crafts to permit the installation of their work; cooperate with other trades in setting such work, as required. Thoroughly wet wood forms immediately before placing concrete, as required where form coatings are not used. 
2.  Coordinate the installation of joint materials and moisture barriers with placement of forms and reinforcing steel. 
3.  General. Comply with ACI 304, and as herein specified. 
4.  Construction Sequence. Before placing any concrete, complete blasting, heavy earthwork and other construction operations which might cause damage to concrete structures. 
5.  Deposit concrete continuously or in layers of such thickness that no concrete will be placed on concrete which has hardened sufficiently to cause the formation of seams or planes of weakness within the section. If a section cannot be placed continuously, provide construction joints as herein specified. Deposit concrete as nearly as practicable to its final location to avoid segregation due to rehandling or flowing. 
6.  Placing Concrete in Forms. Deposit concrete in forms in horizontal layers not deeper than twenty-four (24) inches and in a manner to avoid inclined construction joints. Where placement consists of several layers, place each layer while preceding layer is still plastic to avoid cold joints. 
7.  Do not use vibrators to transport concrete inside of forms. Insert and withdraw vibrators vertically at uniformly spaced locations not farther than the visible effectiveness of the machine. Place vibrators to rapidly penetrate the placed layer of concrete and at least six (6) inches into the preceding layer. Do not insert vibrators into lower layers of concrete that have begun to set. At each insertion limit the duration of vibration to the time necessary to consolidate the concrete and complete embedment of reinforcement and other embedded items without causing segregation of the mix. 
8.  Placing Concrete Slabs. Deposit and consolidate concrete in a continuous operation, within the limits of construction joints, until the placing of a panel or section is completed. 
9.  Consolidate concrete during placing operations so that concrete is thoroughly worked around reinforcement and other embedded items and into corners. 
10.  Bring slab surfaces to the correct level with a straightedge and strike-off. Use bull floats or derbies to smooth the surface, leaving it free of humps or hollows. Do not sprinkle water on the plastic surface. Do not disturb the slab surfaces prior to beginning finishing operations. 
11.  Maintain reinforcing in the proper position during concrete placement operations. 
12.  Cold Weather Placing. 
a.  Protect concrete work from physical damage or reduced strength which could be caused by frost, freezing actions, or low temperatures, in compliance with ACI 306 and as herein specified. 
b.  When air temperature has fallen to or is expected to fall below forty (40) degrees F, uniformly heat all water and aggregates before mixing as required to obtain a concrete mixture temperature of not less than fifty (50) degrees F and not more than eighty (80) degrees F at point of placement. 
c.  Do not use frozen materials or materials containing ice or snow. Do not place concrete on frozen subgrade or on subgrade containing frozen materials. 
d.  Do not use calcium chloride, salt and other materials containing antifreeze agents or chemical accelerators, unless otherwise accepted in writing by the City Engineer. 
13.  Hot Weather Placing. 
a.  When hot weather conditions exist that would seriously impair the quality and strength of concrete, place concrete in compliance with ACI 305 and as herein specified. 
b.  Cool ingredients before mixing to maintain concrete temperature at time of placement below ninety (90) degrees F. Mixing water may be chilled, or chopped ice may be used to control the concrete temperature provided the water equivalent of the ice is calculated to the total amount of mixing water. 
c.  Cover reinforcing steel with water-soaked burlap if it becomes to hot, so that the steel temperature will not exceed the ambient air temperature immediately before embedment in concrete. 
d.  Wet forms thoroughly before placing concrete. 
e.  Do not use retarding admixtures without the written acceptance of the Engineer. 
8.1170. - Finish of Formed Surfaces. 
1.  Concealed Surfaces. For formed concrete surfaces not exposed-to-view in the finished work, leave surface finish imparted by the form facing material used, with defective areas and form tie voids repaired and patched as specified, and fins and other projections exceeding inch in height rubbed flush. 
2.  Visible Surfaces. For formed concrete surfaces exposed-to-view, including those surfaces of water or other material holding structures visible when the structure is empty, or surfaces that are to be covered with a thin or flexible finish material bonded to the concrete, perform finish operations as specified above under "Concrete Surfaces", and in addition wet and rub entire surfaces with a carbo-rundum stone of medium fineness until all form marks and other surface irregularities have been removed and a uniform surface appearance, achieved. Do not create a plaster coating on concrete. 
3.  Unformed Visible Surfaces. At tops of walls, horizontal offsets and similar unformed surfaces occurring adjacent to formed surfaces, strike-off smooth and finish with a texture matching adjacent formed surfaces. Continue final surface treatment of formed surfaces uniformly across adjacent unformed surfaces. 
8.1171. - Monolithic Slab Finishes. 
1.  Float Finish. Apply float finish to monolithic slab surfaces that are to receive trowel finish and other finishes are hereinafter specified, and slab surfaces which are to be covered with membrane or elastic waterproofing, membrane or elastic roofing, or sand-bed terrazzo, and as shown on Drawings or in schedules. 
a.  After screening and consolidating concrete slabs, do not work surface until ready for floating. Begin floating when surface water has disappeared or when concrete has stiffened sufficiently to permit operation of floats. Consolidate surface with power-driven floats, or by hand-floating if area is small or inaccessible to power units. Check and level surface plane to a tolerance not exceeding inch in ten (10) feet when tested with a ten-foot straightedge. Cut down high spots and fill low spots. Uniformly slope surfaces to drains. Immediately after leveling, re-float surface to a uniform, smooth, granular texture. 
2.  Trowel Finish. Apply trowel finish to monolithic slab surfaces that are to be exposed-to-view, unless otherwise shown, and slab surfaces that are to be covered with resilient flooring, paint or other thin film finish coating system. 
a.  After floating, begin first trowel finish operation using a power-driven trowel. Begin final troweling when surface produces a ringing sound as trowel is moved over surface. Consolidate concrete surface by final hand-troweling operation, free of trowel marks, uniform in texture and appearance, and with a surface plane tolerance not exceeding one-eighth-inch in ten (10) feet when tested with a ten-foot straightedge. Grind smooth surface defects which would telegraph through applied floor covering system. 
3.  Non-Slip Broom Finish. Apply non-slip broom finish to exterior concrete platforms, steps and ramps, and elsewhere as shown on Drawings or in schedules. 
a.  Immediately after trowel finishing, slightly roughen concrete surface by brooming with fiber bristle broom perpendicular to main traffic route. Coordinate required final finish with the City Engineer before application. 
8.1172. - Concrete Curing and Protection. 
1.  General. Protect freshly placed concrete from pre-mature drying, and excessive cold or hot temperature, and maintain without drying at a relatively constant temperature for a period of time necessary for hydration of cement and proper hardening. 
a.  Start initial curing as soon as free water ahs disappeared from concrete surface after placing and finishing. Weather permitting; keep continuously moist for not less than seventy-two (72) hours. 
b.  Begin final curing procedures immediately following initial curing and before concrete has dried. Continue final curing for at least seven (7) days and in accordance with ACI 301 procedures. Avoid rapid drying at end of final curing period. 
2.  Curing-Methods. Perform curing of concrete by one (1) or more of the following methods as selected by the Contractor: 
a.  Provide moist curing by covering concrete surfaces with specified absorptive cover, thoroughly saturating cover with water and keeping continuously wet. Lap absorptive covers at least four (4) inches. 
b.  Provide moisture cover curing by covering concrete surfaces with moisture-retaining cover, placed in widest practicable width with sides and ends lapped at least three (3) inches and sealed by waterproof tape or adhesive. Immediately repair any holes or tears during curing period using cover material and waterproof tape. 
c.  Provide membrane curing by applying compound to damp concrete surfaces as soon as film has disappeared. Apply uniformly in two-coat continuous operation by power-spray equipment in accordance with manufacturer's directions. Recoat areas which are subject to heavy rainfall within three (3) hours after initial application. Maintain continuity of coating and repair damage during curing period. 
d.  Do not use membrane curing compounds on surfaces which are to be covered with a coating material applied directly to concrete or with a covering material applied directly to concrete or with a covering material bonded to concrete, such as other concrete, liquid floor hardener, waterproofing, damp-proofing, membrane roofing , flooring, paining, and other coatings and finish materials, unless otherwise acceptable to the City Engineer. 
3.  Curing Formed Surfaces. Cure formed concrete surfaces, including undersides of beams, supported slabs and other similar surfaces by moist curing with forms in place for full curing period or until forms are removed. If forms are removed, continue curing by methods specified above, as applicable. 
4.  Curing Unformed Surfaces. Initially cure unformed surfaces, such as slabs, floor topping, and other flat surfaces by moist curing. 
5.  [ Final. ] Final cure unformed surfaces, unless otherwise specified, by methods specified above, as applicable. 
8.1180. - Form Removal. 
In all cases, time and sequence of concrete form removal is at Contractor discretion. Formwork supporting weight of concrete such as beams and slabs must remain in place at least fourteen (14) days and until concrete has attained minimum design twenty-eight-day compressive strength. Formwork not supporting weight of concrete such as sides of beams, walls and columns, may be removed no sooner than forty-eight (48) hours after placement of concrete or when concrete is sufficiently hard as not to be damaged by form removal operations. 
8.1181. - Re-use of Forms. 
1.  Clean and repair surfaces of forms to be re-used in the work. Split, frayed, delaminated or otherwise damaged form facing material will not be acceptable. Apply new form coating compound material to concrete contact form surfaces as specified for new formwork. 
2.  When forms are extended for successive concrete placement, thoroughly clean surfaces, remove fins and laitance, and tighten forms to close joints. Align and secure joints to avoid offsets. Do not use "patched" forms for exposed concrete surfaces, except as acceptable to City Engineer. 
8.1190. - Concrete Surface Repairs. 
1.  Patching Defective Areas. Repair and patch defective areas with cement mortar immediately after removal of forms, but only when acceptable to Engineer. 
a.  Cut out honeycomb, rock pockets, voids over one-half-inch diameter, and holes left by tie rods and bolts, down to solid concrete but, in no case to a depth of less than one (1) inch. Make edges of cuts perpendicular to the concrete surface. Before placing cement mortar, thoroughly clean, dampen with water and brush-coat the area to be patched with neat cement grout. Proprietary patching compounds may be used when acceptable to Engineer. 
2.  Exposed-to-view Surfaces. blend white Portland cement and standard Portland cement so that, when dry, patching mortar will match color of surrounding surface. Provide test areas at inconspicuous location to verify mixture and color match before proceeding with patching. Compact mortar in place and strike-off slightly higher than surrounding surface. 
3.  Repair of Formed Surfaces. Remove and replace concrete having detective surfaces if detects cannot be repaired to satisfaction of Engineer. Surface defects, as such, include color and texture irregularities, cracks, spills, air bubbles, honeycomb, nine (9) ties rods and bolts; fins and rock pockets and holes left by other projections on surface; and stains and other discolorations that cannot be removed by cleaning. 
4.  Repair concealed formed surfaces, where possible, that contain defects that adversely affect the durability of the concrete. If defects cannot be repaired, remove and replace the concrete. 
5.  Repair of Unformed Surfaces. Test unformed surfaces, such as monolithic slabs, for smoothness and to verify surface plane to tolerances specified for each surface and finish. Correct low and high areas as herein specified. Test unformed surfaces sloped to drain for trueness of slope, in addition to smoothness, using a template having required slope. 
6.  Repair finished unformed surfaces that contain defects which adversely affect durability of concrete. Surface defects, as such, include crazing, cracks in excess of 0.01 inch wide or which penetrate to reinforcement or completely through non-reinforced sections regardless of width, spilling, pop-outs, honeycomb, rock pockets, and other objectionable conditions. 
7.  Correct high areas in unformed surfaces by grinding, after concrete has cured at least fourteen (14) days. 
8.  Correct low areas in unformed surfaces during, or immediately after completion of surface finishing operation by cutting out low areas and replacing with fresh concrete. Finish repaired areas to blend into adjacent concrete. Proprietary patching compounds may be used when acceptable to the Engineer. 
9.  Repair defective areas, except random cracks and single holes not exceeding one-inch diameter, by cutting out and replacing with fresh concrete. Remove defective areas to sounds concrete with clean, square cuts and expose reinforcing steel with at least three-quarter-inch clearance all around. Dampen concrete surfaces in contact with patching concrete, and brush with a neat cement grout coating or concrete bonding agent. Place patching concrete before grout takes its initial set. Mix patching concrete of same materials to provide concrete of the same type or class as original concrete. Place, compact and finish to blend with adjacent finished concrete. Cure in the same manner as adjacent concrete. 
10.  Repair isolated random cracks and single holes not over one (1) inch in diameter by dry-pack method. Groove top of cracks and cut-out holes to sounds concrete and clean of dust, dirt and loose particles. Dampen cleaned concrete surfaces and brush with neat cement grout coating. Place dry-pack before cement grout takes its initial set. Mix dry-pack, consisting of one (1) part Portland cement to two and one-half (2½) parts fine aggregate passing a No. 16 mesh sieve, using only enough water as required for handling and placing. Compact dry pack mixture in place and finish to mat adjacent concrete. Keep patched areas continuously moist for not less than seventy-two (72) hours. 
11.  Repair methods not specified above may be used, subject to acceptance of Engineer. Agreement by the City Engineer to permit repair or patching of concrete does not waive the City Engineer's authority to require complete removal and replacement of defective concrete pours should the patch not prove satisfactory to the City Engineer, due either to deficiency in strength, function or appearance. 
Chapter IX - TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 12, 2016(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), repealed the former Ch. IX., §§ 9.100—9.103, 9.200, 9.300—9.307, 9.400—9.408, App. A—F, and enacted a new Ch. IX as set out herein. The former Ch. IX pertained to tree preservation standards and derived from the publication of this Land Development Code and an ordinance adopted Nov. 14, 2016(4), §§ 1, 2. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL INFORMATION 

9.100. - Findings. 
The Mayor and City Council of the City hereby finds that the protection and preservation of trees, the planting of new trees and other landscape material as part of the land development process is a public purpose and provides for the public health and general welfare. This Ordinance is intended to further the City's policy that all development sites where trees are most commonly removed will achieve upon project completion, a uniform standard related to preserved tree coverage, planted tree coverage and buffers. 
A healthy urban forest will increase the fiscal and psychological value of property, reduce the urban heat island effect and contribute to the community's aesthetic quality. These benefits are crucial to the long-term health and welfare of Woodstock's citizens, workers, and visitors. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.101. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to firmly establish the value of trees to the community and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by recognizing the standards within this article. Tree canopy preservation and tree replacement will be promoted as an integral part of the land development and construction process in the City. Specific benefits to our citizens attributed to trees include: 
1.  Trees facilitate a harmonious community and help to conserve natural resources as well as provide wildlife habitats. 
2.  Trees provide a more attractive place to live and enhance the aesthetic character of the community. 
3.  Trees mitigate harmful vehicle emissions by reducing carbon dioxide levels. 
4.  Trees are recognized for their importance in the production of oxygen, shading and cooling, noise and wind reduction, prevention of soil erosion, dust filtration and fostering improved air quality. 
5.  Trees contribute to the economic value of real property. 
6.  Trees help reduce the glare of motor vehicle lights, and enhance the appearance of open automobile parking areas and lands used for commercial, public/institutional, office, industrial, and residential purposes. 
7.  Trees can enhance the natural functions of streams and related buffers. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.102. - Applicability. 
The regulations included in this Ordinance shall apply to all properties located within the City unless otherwise noted in this chapter. Please note: Based on proposed development patterns submitted by applicants within Form Based Code (FBC) designated areas of the City, staff shall have sole discretion over whether Section 18.410 or this chapter will apply. 
1.  Single-Family Residential Outside of LOP. 
a.  The removal of five (5) or fewer trees, other than specimen trees, is allowed with a permit (no fee associated with this permit) on any Residential Lot within a single calendar year. 
b.  Trees under three (3) inch caliper that were not planted to meet the minimum one hundred (100) inches per acre can be removed without a permit. 
c.  Exemptions will be allowed to the five (5) tree per year limit by City staff if the property owner must remove trees in order to build a newly permitted structure, or to build an addition to or to make improvements to an existing structure, or to improve the health of other trees in the landscape. 
d.  With regard to private property owners and/or residential lots not incidental to development, a tree removal permit is required for specimen tree removal. A permit will be granted if the specimen tree is clearly dead, dying, diseased with no chance for recovery or presenting imminent danger to life, limb or property. If City staff cannot adequately assess the condition of the tree, then the property owner shall be required to provide a letter stating such from a certified arborist. (See Section 9.302 [1. and 2.].) 
e.  Dead standing trees that are a danger to human life or property must be removed by the property owner after receiving notice from the City code enforcement division. Dead tree determinations to be made by a certified arborist or designated City staff who have been successfully trained in basic tree evaluation. 
2.  Non Single-Family Residential Outside of LOP: 
a.  Any new construction, renovation, or alteration of a building that results in an expansion or alteration of the total square footage of the building footprint shall invoke the requirements contained in Section 9.200. The Tree Ordinance shall be enforced by the City, designated agent, and/or the municipal court of the City. 
b.  If specimen tree removal is requested, refer to the standards set forth in Section 9.302. 
c.  Trees under three (3) inch caliper that were not required by ordinance or conditions of zoning can be removed without a permit. 
d.  Trees three (3) inch caliper and greater that do not meet the specimen tree criteria require a tree removal permit. City staff shall determine whether portions of the Tree Ordinance apply on a case by case basis. 
e.  Dead standing trees that are a danger to human life or property must be removed by the property owner after receiving notice from the City Code enforcement division. Dead tree determinations to be made by a certified arborist or designated City staff who have been successfully trained in basic tree evaluation. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A); Ord. No. 5202-B-2018, § 1, 7-9-2018) 
9.103. - Definitions. 
All words in these standards have their customary dictionary definition except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. 
Arborist: The City's designee responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
Basal Area: A forestry industry standard used to describe the cross-sectional area of a tree expressed in square inches, of a tree measured at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground or diameter at breast height (DBH). 
Berm: A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to screen one (1) site or property from the view of another. 
Boundary Tree: Boundary tree means a tree fifteen (15) inches DBH or larger located on any part of a property adjacent to a permitting property with any portion of the root plate extending into the permitting property. (See root plate.) Boundary trees must be in good health as determined from the vantage point of the property to be developed (pre-construction digital photographs required). This provision shall not authorize the trespass on private property abutting the site. 
The applicant shall notify the adjoining property owner of a boundary tree in writing that the root plate of a boundary tree is to be disturbed and if the tree should thereafter be damaged or die due to construction impacts, it will be handled as a civil matter between the applicant and the boundary tree owner. The applicant must provide a copy of any letter and the certificates of mailing prior to permit issuance. 
Buffer: A naturally existing area, a landscaped area or a combination of both designated for screening or around the perimeter of a parcel provided to soften the view of two (2) adjacent lots or parcels from one another. (See Chapter XI for more detailed definitions related to specific uses and See Appendix B for typical buffer details.) 
Buildable Area: Portion of a parcel excluding the required yards, easements, planting areas, environmental (streams, wetlands) and areas within the future right-of-way. 
Caliper (or Cal.): American Association of Nurseryman standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six (6) inches above the ground for up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, and twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Critical Root Zone (CRZ): The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance for survival. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the CRZ of any given tree on the applicant's property shall be represented by a concentric circle with a radius equal to twelve (12) times the diameter of the tree trunk. No inches will be given if these minimum criteria are not met. (See Section 9.300.) 
Deciduous Tree: A tree which sheds leaves annually. 
Density Factor: A unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. The site density factor for areas within the corporate limits of the City is one hundred (100) inches per acre. Please note: one hundred (100) year floodplain, wetlands and fifty (50) foot and twenty-five (25) foot stream buffers shall be excluded from the acreage calculation but will remain protected and undisturbed on site during construction. (See Section 9.300.) 
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): Means the standard measure of a tree size for those trees existing on a site that have a caliper of at least two (2) inches at a height of four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. If a tree has two (2) or more trunks below four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground, refer to Section 9.300. 
Genus Cap: A term used to describe a limit determined by this Ordinance in which the quantity of a particular genus cannot exceed thirty (30) percent of the total number of replacement trees on a site. This limit is put in place to prevent the creation of a monoculture. 
House Location Plan (HLP): Site plan required by builder's representative for records/documentation at the time an individual home permit is applied for/purchased. 
Land Disturbance Permit (LDP): A permit necessary to begin land-disturbing activity. 
Landscape Plan: A scaled plan that clearly delineates buildings, vehicular use areas, and displays and describes all proposed planting as required per zoning conditions and/or the Tree Ordinance. 
Lot: A measured parcel of land having fixed boundaries and designated on a plot or survey. 
Monoculture: A plant culture (i.e. vegetation) that results from growing only one (1) type of plant which creates the opposite condition of biodiversity and can sometimes be responsible for the spread of plant diseases. 
Opaque Buffer: A landscaped area planted in such a manner as to be impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
Open Space: Unoccupied portion of a lot or building site that is open to the sky and may contain, outdoor structures, or recreational facilities as it relates to Chapter IX. 
Overstory Tree: Means those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than forty (40) feet. 
Parking Lot Trees: Trees required pursuant to Section 9.200 herein. 
Pervious Area: Area of a parcel or lot left over after impervious areas (see Chapter II definitions) are subtracted. 
Replacement Planting: The planting of trees on a site that before development had more trees, and after development shall have fewer trees per acre. (Please note: All properties applying for an LDP must meet the minimum one hundred (100) inches per acre whether or not a site had trees prior to development). 
Replacement Tree: A new tree planted on a site outside of a tree protection area that is used to meet the required one hundred (100) inches per acre. 
Residential Lot: A lot shown on a subdivision plat as recorded in the records of Cherokee County. 
Root Barrier: For the purpose of this Ordinance, a mechanical guide (typically hard plastic) that redirects root down and away from sidewalk driveway or other built structures. 
Root Plate: The area of the root zone comprised of pedestal roots, the zone of rapid taper and roots under compression, the directional radius of which based upon the tree trunk diameter at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. The root plate will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the trees trunk with a radius equal in feet to one-half (0.5) times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. (Failure of the tree could result if roots in this area are damaged or destroyed. Example: The root plate radius of a twenty (20) inch diameter tree is ten (10) feet.) 
Screening: Solid fencing, walls, berms, or dense vegetation used to conceal a lot or part thereof from view. 
Sidewalk Landscape Zone: The portion of a sidewalk area, adjacent to the street curb and reserved for the placement of trees, groundcover, and street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. Note: The following may cross in a perpendicular manner but shall not be located within the Sidewalk Landscape Zone: storm drain lines, sanitary sewer lines, water lines, electrical lines and any other utilities not specifically mentioned (see Appendix B). 
1.  If existing underground utilities are present, the director may allow alternative proposals on a case by case basis. 
2.  In the event that existing overhead power lines prohibit the planting of required overstory trees, an appropriate understory tree species may be selected and approved for required inches according to accepted horticultural standards and as approved by the impacted utility (see Appendix A). 
Specimen Tree: Any tree as defined by Section 9.302. 
Tree: Any living, self-supporting woody or fibrous plant which normally obtains a diameter breast height (DBH) of at least three (3) inches and typically has one (1) main stem or trunk and many branches and shall be on the approved City street tree list (see Appendix A). 
Tree Preservation Trust Fund: Fund established to purchase, install, and maintain trees throughout the City's public areas, including parks, green spaces, right-of-way, and government building sites (see Section 9.401). 
Tree Save Area: Means a protected area designated for the purpose of meeting the one hundred (100) inches per acre requirements, saving natural trees and/or preserving natural s. 
Tree Protection Fencing: A barrier installed at and around the perimeter of a tree protection area to prevent intrusion of construction-related activities in which fencing is a minimum of four (4) feet in height and is at the CRZ. 
Understory Tree: A tree that, under normal forest conditions, may grow to maturity beneath overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of at least ten (10) feet but less than forty (40) feet (see Appendix A). 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS 

9.200. - General Plan Requirements. 
An appropriately-scaled tree protection plan and/or tree replacement plan shall be submitted and approved as part of the pre-development site plans as required by the provisions of this Ordinance. No plans shall be accepted by City staff unless tree protection and/or tree replacement plans are included in the initial submittal. All commercial parcels and residential lots under development shall comply with street tree and parking lot tree requirements. Street tree requirements are subject to the zoning categories identified within the City of Woodstock Zoning Ordinance (see Chapter VII). 
1.  The Sidewalk Landscape Zone in the Downtown District and any areas with trees between the sidewalk and back of curb shall be designed so that required street trees are planted in a suitable soil volume. Planting environment shall provide an average soil depth greater than or equal to three (3) feet. Each street tree shall have a minimum area suitable for root growth of two hundred (200) square feet provided. 
a.  In addition to or in conjunction with the tree protection areas, each single-family residential lot seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or greater shall contain a minimum of two (2) two (2) inch caliper overstory trees, at least one (1) of which must be located in the front yard (for the purpose of this Ordinance, the seven (7) foot landscape zone may be considered part of the front yard where applicable). Root barrier, along with lateral pipe locations, shall be shown on HLP (see Section 9.103). 
2.  In addition to or in conjunction with the tree protection areas, each single-family residential lot less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet shall contain a minimum of two (2) two-inch caliper trees (one (1) overstory and one (1) understory), at least one (1) of which must be located in the front yard. (For the purpose of this Ordinance, the seven (7) foot landscape zone may be considered part of the front yard where applicable and in the Downtown District). Root barrier, along with lateral pipe locations, shall be shown on HLP (see Section 9.103). 
3.  Requests for a reduction of landscape zone from seven (7) feet shall only be considered under the following circumstance: 
Developer shall submit a design and implementation protocol incorporating a series of subsurface structural cells for approval by City staff (see Appendix D). 
b.  Parking lot trees shall be provided in landscape islands in parking areas proposing ten (10) or more spaces parking areas with fewer than ten (10) spaces and multi-level parking decks are exempt. 
c.  A sufficient number of three (3) inch caliper (minimum) trees must be planted in interior portions of parking lots so that no parking space is more than fifty (50) feet from a parking lot tree. Show a fifty (50) foot radius dashed circle for each parking lot tree on tree replacement plan to verify graphically. Up to twenty (20) percent of parking lot trees may be planted along the perimeter of the parking lot. Landscaped islands shall terminate each row of parking and all landscaped islands planted with trees shall provide a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet per tree. Light poles are not permitted in parking lot islands, peninsulas and medians unless they are a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any planted tree (see Appendix C). 
d.  The tree replacement plan shall be designed so that all parking lot trees are planted in a suitable soil volume. Planting environment shall provide an average soil depth greater than or equal to three (3) feet. Each parking lot tree shall have a minimum area suitable for root growth of two hundred (200) square feet, provided, however if this minimum square footage is not provided, subsurface soil cells shall be incorporated into the tree replacement plan. All applicable details to show an industry standard subsurface soil cell design shall be attached as part of the tree replacement plan (see Appendix D). 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE III. - TREE REPLACEMENT AND PROTECTION 

9.300. - Tree Density Requirements. 
The applicant shall provide a development plan demonstrating both responsible canopy preservation (excluding any 50-foot and 25-foot stream buffers) and tree replacement inches on sites submitted for development. Any trees saved (with undisturbed CRZs) or replaced in the 75-foot impervious zone will receive appropriate inches. Please note: All properties applying for an LDP must meet the minimum one hundred (100) inches per acre whether or not a site had trees prior to development. 
All trees designated for replacement shall be on an inch-for-inch basis. The density of one hundred (100) inches per acre may be achieved as follows: 
1.  Counting existing trees (inches measured at DBH) to be preserved with no impact to CRZ. 
2.  Planting new trees (minimum two (2) inch caliper) for lots that do not have the required one hundred (100) inches per acre. 
Formula: 
Acreage x 100 inches = required inches per acre 
Example: 3.2 acres x 100 inches = 320 inches required 
The minimum required inches per acre shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula as shown above and calculations shall be in a prominent location on the tree preservation and replacement plan. All applicable sites brought in for land development must maintain a minimum of one hundred (100) inches per acre. Street trees and/or parking lot trees planted after the minimum required inches per acre for the site has been satisfied can be counted toward specimen tree recompense. 
3.  For planted evergreen trees, the following conversions shall apply: 

 
4.  For multi-trunk trees (see formula in Appendix B): 
5.  Tree form shrubs shall not be given credit. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.301. - Preservation of Existing Trees. 
An emphasis of this Ordinance is the preservation of as many existing trees as possible. Thus, inch for inch credit will be given for preserving existing trees. No credit will be allowed for shrubs or for trees with impact to their CRZ. Please note: Administrative variances for encroachment into CRZ shall not be considered. 
1.  All trees to be counted toward meeting the required one hundred (100) inches per acre must be inventoried. Existing tree inventory information (caliper at DBH and genus) must be shown on the tree protection plan and must be provided by an ISA certified arborist, forester, surveyor or landscape architect along with a statement that the provider conducted the inventory in the field. If the plan is unclear or does not match current GIS information, a tree survey shall be required. Please note: Specimen trees must have a surveyed location. 
2.  Tree protection fencing is required to be placed at the CRZ for all trees to be saved and locations shall be clearly delineated on the tree protection plan. All tree protection fencing shall be installed prior to and maintained throughout the land disturbing and construction process, and should not be removed until final landscaping is installed, inspected and final approval granted by the City. 
3.  Plot-sample surveys may be used to determine tree densities for large forested areas with a minimum size of five (5) acres or greater that is to be preserved. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a plot sample is defined as an area measuring fifty (50) feet by fifty (50) feet, for a minimum size of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Sampling areas must be located within the limits of a tree protection area. The sample must be taken in a portion of the site that is representative of its cover-type. The tree protection plan must delineate all ground cover-types and provide a general description of the types of trees present within the tree protection area (i.e., hardwoods, pine/hardwood mix, etc.). Other sampling and/or inventory methods must be approved by the City's designated representative. 
4.  No credit inches will be given for trees preserved in mandatory stream buffers as required by Chapter XVII, Stream Buffer Protection. The area (measured in acres) of the undisturbed stream buffers shall be excluded from the total site acreage when calculating required inches per acre. Any trees saved (with undisturbed CRZs) or replaced in the seventy-five (75) foot impervious setback zone will receive appropriate inches. 
5.  To aid preservation efforts, land owners shall have the option of moving existing trees to prevent their damage or destruction by development activities. To receive credit for transplanted trees, the following standards must be adhered to: 
a.  Trees must be less than ten (10) inches caliper measured six (6) inches above grade; 
b.  Trees must remain within the planting areas of the parcel; 
c.  Trees shall not be moved to or from stream buffers or wetlands. 
6.  Tree protection areas for subdivisions should be located in common areas, or in buffers required to be undisturbed by zoning or other regulations, or within building setbacks. If tree protection areas must be located on individual lots, the lots must be of sufficient size to reasonably expect the trees to be preserved at the completion of the building process. Please note: Staff shall have sole discretion over whether the lot is of sufficient size. 
7.  With regard to subdivision developments, the City shall require that improvements be located so as to result in minimal disturbance to the natural topography of the lots and the protection of a maximum number of mature trees on the lot. Damage to mature trees located within setback and required yard areas be minimized as much as possible under the particular circumstances, as determined by City staff. 
8.  Every lot in a subdivision shall have trees, either preserved or planted for which an LDP is obtained after the adoption of this Ordinance. These trees can be counted as part of the required one hundred (100) inches per acre for the development. All planted trees must be a minimum of two (2) inch caliper and must be shown on the required house location plan (HLP). This requirement shall apply to the developer or homebuilder, whoever is the responsible party at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the individual lot. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.302. - Preservation, Replacement and Removal of Specimen Trees. 
A specimen tree is any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type and condition. The following criteria are used by the City to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify. 
1.  Minimum Size Criteria: 
a.  Twenty-four (24) inch caliper at DBH—Oak, Beech, Ash, Blackgum, Sycamore, Hickory, Maple (does not include Silver Maple), Pecan, Walnut, Magnolia (does not include Bigleaf Magnolia), Persimmon, Sourwood, Cedar, Cypress or Redwood. 
b.  Thirty (30) inch caliper at DBH—Tulip Poplar, Sweet Gum, River Birch, Silver Maple or Pine. 
c.  Ten (10) inch caliper at DBH—American Holly, Dogwood, Redbud or other genus as determined by the City arborist such as Bigleaf Magnolia. 
2.  Condition Criteria: 
a.  Life expectancy greater than fifteen (15) years. 
b.  Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or significant structural deficiencies. 
c.  No more than two (2) major and several minor dead limbs (excluding pine for minor limbs). 
d.  A radial trunk dieback of no more than twenty (20) percent or a canopy dieback of no more than thirty (30) percent. 
3.  Small trees can be classified as specimen if of a rare or unusual species, of exceptional quality, or socio-historical significance. Small trees may also qualify as specimen if used in a landscape as a focal point of the design. In order to claim this credit, the applicant must submit a letter from a certified arborist stating that the tree(s) meet these qualifications. 
4.  An arborist report for each specimen tree that is shown to be impacted by a proposed development requiring an LDP must be submitted to the City to determine whether that tree meets the condition criteria for specimen status. The report must be prepared and signed by a certified arborist or a registered forester. The report must contain the following information. 
a.  Site plan showing an accurate surveyed location of the tree. 
b.  Identification/verification of the tree's size, genus and species. 
c.  Description of the surrounding site conditions. 
d.  Detailed description of the tree's condition. 
e.  Digital photographs to illustrate any defects which would disqualify the tree from specimen status. 
5.  The final determination of specimen tree status will be made by City staff after reviewing the report. 
a.  If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for removal must be submitted to the City. 
b.  The removal of any specimen tree impacted by a proposed development must be mitigated by replacing the removed specimen tree with minimum four (4) inch caliper trees of comparable species on an inch-for-inch replacement basis. 
Example: Twenty-four (24) inch Oak would require replanting six (6) four (4) inch caliper trees [24 / 4 = 6]. These recompense trees are in addition to the minimum one hundred (100) inches per acre for a particular site. 
c.  Any person who removes a specimen tree in violation of this Ordinance shall be assessed a fine in accordance with Section 9.401. In regard to specimen trees removed after being designated for preservation on an approved plan, the removed tree must also be replaced on an inch-for-inch basis with tree species with potential for comparable size and quality, regardless of the one hundred (100) inches per acre requirement. If a tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition, size alone will be the determining factor for replacement. In regard to specimen trees removed on a residential lot that is not currently being developed, the fine shall be paid as referenced, however there shall be no requirement for replacement of the specimen tree. 
6.  In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of new development projects, the following incentive is offered: 
Preserved specimen trees will receive one and one-half (1.5) x inches DBH (thirty (30) inch Oak x one and one-half (1.5) = forty-five (45) inches). 
Under no circumstance will this incentive allow the requirements of the Tree Preservation Ordinance to be reduced administratively. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.303. - Tree Protection Standards. 
Allowing enough space for a tree's root system is a critical factor in tree protection throughout the development process. Disturbance within this critical root zone (CRZ) can directly affect a tree's chances for survival. In order to protect trees, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  The CRZ for each tree or group of trees shall be represented on the plan by a circle the size of the CRZ (see definition Critical Root Zone). 
2.  Site layout should be designed to accommodate tree protection areas. 
3.  Construction activities shall be arranged to prevent encroachment into tree protection areas. 
4.  No disturbance whatsoever shall occur within tree protection areas without prior written approval by the City. Disturbance permitted with approval from the City shall be limited to general maintenance (i.e., removal of dead trees and/or cleaning of underbrush by hand). Use of machinery shall not be allowed within the tree protection area. 
5.  Active protective tree fencing shall be installed along the outer edge of and completely surrounding the CRZs of all specimen trees or stands of trees designated for preservation prior to land disturbance. 
6.  Tree protection fencing shall be minimum four (4) feet high and made of orange laminated plastic netting with wooden posts and rail fencing or other equivalent material as approved by the City. 
7.  All protection zones should include signage in English and Spanish that identifies the areas as tree protection and preservation zones and include the name and phone number of the developer or designated agent. 
8.  All tree save fencing must be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing, or grading and must be maintained in functioning condition throughout all phases of development and construction. 
9.  Once tree protection areas are established and approved, any changes are subject to review and approval by the City. 
10.  Developer shall notify any adjacent property owner a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to construction dates (copy of notification to be provided to City for permit file) if visual assessment identifies boundary tree root plates are potentially within the proposed limits of disturbance (see Section 9.103 definitions). Any and all subsequent tree matters shall be a civil matter between the property owner and the developer. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.304. - Tree Replacement Standards. 
1.  The replacement of trees shall occur within the required yards, buffers, open space, parking lots, and landscape areas, as specified in the Zoning Ordinance and Tree Preservation and Replacement Ordinance. The following standards for replacement will be used to evaluate proposed tree planting plans: 
a.  Existing tree coverage, size, and type. 
b.  Number of trees to be removed from the lot or parcel. 
c.  Area to be covered with structures, parking, and driveways. 
d.  Grading plan and drainage requirements. 
e.  Character of the site and its environs. 
2.  Replacement trees shall be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site, contribute to the diversity of the urban forest, and add to the overall aesthetic quality of the City. 
3.  The spacing of replacement trees must be compatible with spatial site limitations with responsible consideration towards species sizes when mature. Typical spacing for overstory/street trees is thirty (30) feet on center, with no overstory tree being planted less than twenty-five (25) feet on center from any other tree. Spacing of understory trees and/or trees in parking lots shall be subject to approval of the City and within accepted horticultural standards. 
4.  In the event that existing overhead power lines prohibit the planting of required overstory trees, an appropriate understory tree species may be selected and approved for required inches according to accepted horticultural standards and as approved by the impacted utility (see Appendix A). 
5.  Trees selected for planting may be a species from the recommended tree species lists shown in the appendices. Use of a species not shown on these lists is subject to approval of the City, according to accepted horticultural standards (see Appendix A). 
6.  Replacement trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper measured six (6) inches above grade, and be protected by a twelve (12) month guaranteed maintenance surety (one hundred ten (110) percent of installed amount) beginning at the date of planting. 
7.  Planting of replacement trees within utility, storm drainage, or sanitary sewer easements is not acceptable and no credit will be allowed toward the required inches per acre. City staff shall determine whether or not the applicant will be required to install root barriers to prevent future conflicts for trees planted directly adjacent to proposed easements or utility locations. 
8.  Trees and plants selected for planting must meet the minimum requirements as provided in the "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Standards latest edition). 
9.  Tree planting may be delayed up to six (6) months in the case of unfavorable climate conditions (drought, flood, extreme heat or cold). Property owners must provide the City with a performance bond or cash escrow that identifies a target date for when the required numbers, sizes, and species of trees will be planted to meet the requirements of this Ordinance. 
10.  Each development site (parcel) should contain trees of sufficient number, size, and type to achieve the minimum required one hundred (100) inches per acre, which is determined according to the size of the parcel and is intended to be consistent across uses and underlying zoning categories. Total replacement units should be gathered by using as diverse a palette of species of trees as possible. However, a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the total replacement units required for any parcel must be achieved in the form of overstory trees. When fewer than ten (10) trees are shown to be planted on a project, one (1) species may be specified. When ten (10) to fifty (50) trees are shown, a minimum of three (3) species of trees are required. When more than fifty (50) trees are shown, a minimum of five (5) species of trees are required. 
11.  When ten (10) or more trees are to be planted, no single genus shall represent more than thirty (30) percent of the required inches per acre. 
12.  Buffer planting standards are as follows: 
An opaque buffer is a designated area along a property line that is required to be planted for the purpose of screening. Buffers may be required as a condition of zoning or in areas where incompatible land uses exist (i.e., commercial adjacent to residential). 
The opaque buffer shall consist of evergreen plant materials that must form an eighty (80) percent visual barrier within two (2) years and a one hundred (100) percent visual barrier within five (5) years. Trees must be minimum six (6) feet height at installation, and shrubs must be minimum twenty-four (24) inch height at installation. 
a.  Existing buffer to remain undisturbed: Sparsely vegetated or previously disturbed portions of this undisturbed, existing buffer must be replanted to comply with the definition above. 
b.  Buffer width twenty (20) feet or less: This buffer shall consist of a minimum of one (1) row of evergreen trees and one (1) row of evergreen shrubs (see Appendix B). 
c.  Buffer width twenty-one (21) to thirty-five (35) feet: This buffer shall consist of a minimum of two (2) rows of evergreen trees and one (1) row of evergreen shrubs (see Appendix B). 
d.  Buffer width greater than thirty-five (35) feet: This buffer design shall be subject to approval by the City. 
Evergreen trees planted within buffer areas may be counted for inch credit toward the minimum. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.305. - Acts of Nature. 
In the case of an act of nature, be it drought, flood, tornado, lightening, hurricane, wind, insects, snow, ice, rain, or hail, that destroys a tree after the twelve (12) month performance bond or cash escrow has expired, the owner(s) of an affected parcel are excused from replacing those trees as required by the procedure established by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.306. - Tree Removal. 
Tree removal should be considered a secondary option for meeting the requirements of this Ordinance, and should be pursued only if all avenues to preservation have been exhausted. 
1.  The tree is located in the buildable area or street right-of-way of a parcel or lot on which improvement is to be made and the tree unreasonably restricts the permitted use of the property. 
2.  The tree is diseased, injured beyond restoration, in danger of falling, or interferes with utility services. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.307. - Tree Species. 
A diversity of tree species facilitates the long-term health of the urban forest. Lists of tree species deemed acceptable by the City for use in meeting the requirements of this Ordinance are found in Appendix A. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPLEMENTATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

9.400. - Public Trees. 
No person shall remove, destroy, break, cut, or deface any tree or shrub growing in any public right-of-way, easement or city park under any circumstances. No person shall directly or indirectly place stone or cement or similar substances about any tree growing in the public right-of-way which impedes the entrance of water and air to the roots of the tree. No person shall attach or place any rope, wire, sign poster, handbill or any other thing on any tree or shrub growing in any public right-of-way or city park. In the case of erection, demolition, or repair of any structure, the developer/owner shall implement best management practices per accepted industry standards around all nearby trees in a public right-of-way to prevent harm or injury. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.401. - Tree Preservation Trust Fund. 
This Ordinance hereby establishes the Woodstock Tree Preservation Trust Fund. The fund will be used exclusively to purchase, install, and maintain trees throughout the City's public areas, including parks, green spaces, right-of-way, and government building sites and, upon resolution of the City Council, to improve the City's parks and/or green spaces as specified by the council in such resolution. 
1.  Occasionally a project site does not have the capacity or will not bear the required one hundred (100) inch per acre of trees. If a property owner or developer cannot meet the minimum site density requirement for tree replacement and/or specimen tree recompense, a mitigation fee for each tree required by this Ordinance but not planted will be paid to the tree preservation fund or, upon resolution of the Council, the owner or developer may be allowed to make improvements to the City's parks and/or green spaces as specified by the council in such resolution. A schedule of mitigation fees is presented below: 

 
2.  A fine for each protected tree or specimen tree removed without a permit issued by the City will be paid to the tree preservation fund. Fine amounts will be based on the fee schedule shown above. 
Article III.—Section 10.200: 
Any person or entity violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. At the discretion of the appropriate court, a violator of this code may be given a reasonable length of time to rectify or correct the violation. 
• DBH measurement shall be rounded to the nearest whole number 
• Money collected from mitigation fees and fines under this Ordinance shall be deposited into the tree preservation trust fund. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.402. - Easements. 
The City is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the owners of private property located within the City for the purpose of acquiring easements to plant trees. Private property owners shall acquire ownership of trees after planting provided agreement to maintain the trees is reached and the City is absolved of any liability attributable to the planting or presence of the trees. No agreement may be longer than two (2) years and all shall limit the City's interest to an area sufficient to allow planting of trees. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.403. - Inspection. 
1.  Every development within the City shall be required to undergo landscape inspection by the City's designated agent prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The inspection will determine whether the tree preservation or replacement plan has been implemented as required by this Ordinance. At the time of inspection, the City shall collect an inspection fee. This fee will be determined by the Mayor and City Council and used to cover the cost of labor and materials for performing tree and/or landscape inspections. 
2.  Once completed, a written report will be prepared outlining the findings of the inspection and transmitted to the property owner or developer. If the inspection shows that tree planting has been implemented according to plan, and all other departments have signed off on final inspections, a certificate of occupancy will be issued. If the inspection reveals deficiencies between the approved tree protection and replacement plan and the condition of the development site, the property owner or developer will be notified of the nature and extent of the problems uncovered during inspection. Upon issuance of the report, all deficiencies must be corrected before a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.404. - Violation and Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or society to violate the provisions of this Ordinance. The removal or destruction of each tree shall constitute a separate offense. Violation of this Ordinance shall constitute grounds for revoking or suspending any permit granted for the construction, demolition, or renovation of a structure on the lot or parcel. Upon revocation or suspension of permit, no new permit for construction, demolition, or renovation of any structure on the site shall be issued for not less than one (1) month, and a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be levied for violating the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.405. - Appeals. 
In the event an applicant disputes the decision of the City regarding tree removal and/or replanting, applicant may file a written appeal with the Mayor and City Council. The written appeal should detail the reasons why the decision of the City staff should be vacated. Upon receiving the written appeal, the Mayor and City Council shall hear arguments and decide whether to uphold the administrative decision, modify the administrative decision, or negate the administrative decision. The decision of the Mayor and City Council shall be final. A written copy of the findings and decision of the Mayor and City Council shall be transmitted to the applicant and City. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.406. - Validity. 
Should any section of this provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared invalid. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.407. - Repeal of Conflicting Provision. 
The provisions of any part of resolutions in conflict herewith are repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.408. - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall become effective upon approval by the Mayor and Council on date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
APPENDIX A. - THE CITY OF WOODSTOCK COUNTY TREE SPECIES LIST 
The City of Woodstock tree species list is intended to support site planning and design activities for tree preservation and replacement, tree maintenance planning and decision making in general. The list is arranged alphabetically by the tree's common name with the "genus" listed first. The Latin name is also listed for more definitive species identification. 
This list can also be found on the city's website at http://www.woodstockga.gov/DocumentCenter/View/6479 . 
Key to Symbols and Tree Species Characteristic Descriptions 
(As adapted from the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List) 

 
  


  


(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
APPENDIX B. - TYPICAL PLANTING DETAILS 
Multi-trunk tree formula for inches 
Example—Triple-trunk Maple: 
Add each trunk at DBH (5" + 6.5" + 10") = 21.5" 
Convert ____ to ____ 

 
Convert square inches back to diameter 
131.3 / 3.14 = 41.82 
Find the square root of the diameter 
41.82 square root = 6.46 radius 
6.46 x 2 = 12.9" diameter 
12.9" = resulting inches to be used in calculation for credit for the triple trunk maple 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
APPENDIX C. - LIGHT POLE/PARKING LOT DETAILS 
APPENDIX D. - SUBSURFACE STRUCTURAL CELLS—SILVA CELL OR OTHER 

(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
Chapter X - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION 

10.100. - Definitions. 
1.  Administrative Official shall mean the person, including but not limited to, the City Manager, from whom an appeal is requested pursuant to Section 10.162 below, concerning any error in any order, requirements, development permit, decision, determination or refusal made by that person in the administration or enforcement of any provision of the Land Development Ordinance. 
2.  Commission shall mean the Planning Commission of the City. 
3.  Council shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City. 
4.  Development Process Committee (DPC) shall mean a staff group appointed at the discretion of the City Manager, composed of those staff members deemed by the City Manager as responsible for development within the City as specified in this chapter. Staff members shall also be deemed to include consultants or vendors, as well, engaged by the City of Woodstock to provide professional services. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2017(1)) 
10.101. - City Council. 
1.  Duties and Responsibilities. The Council shall have the following responsibilities: 
a.  To adopt this code and amendments thereto, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map. 
b.  To adopt the Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto. 
c.  To enter into agreements with landowners and developers concerning the improvement and development of land. 
d.  To review and consider application for Annexations, Rezoning, Variances and Appeals for final action. 
e.  The Council may at its discretion determine additional activities for their final action. 
10.102—10.109 - Reserved. 
10.110. - Planning Commission. 
1.  Composition; term of office; compensation. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members; one (1) appointed by the Mayor and one (1) appointed by each Councilmember from within their ward or residing within five hundred (500) linear feet of a ward boundary or residing in a platted subdivision within five hundred (500) linear feet of a ward boundary. Members shall be nominated by the respective Council member or mayor at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting and shall be approved by a majority vote of those present. A member's term shall run concurrently with the term of the individual who appointed the member. 
b.  Appointees shall be residents of the City and shall hold no other public office and shall not be employees of the City. A member's term shall run concurrently with the term of the individual who appointed the member. Members may be appointed to successive terms without limitation. 
c.  Each member shall be compensated at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting for attendance and participation in Planning Commission meetings. No member shall receive compensation if no meeting is held in a given month or if such member fails to attend a scheduled meeting. 
2.  Removal from office; vacancies. 
a.  Planning Commission members serve at the will of the City Council and can be removed at any time at the sole discretion of the City Council by majority vote or by the Councilmember that made the appointment. Any member who is removed may request a hearing before the Council and present their position to the Council should they desire. 
b.  Any vacancy, whether due to resignation or removal, shall be filled if possible within thirty (30) days for the unexpired term only, in the same manner as the original appointment. 
c.  If a member moves, no longer complying with the residency provisions of Section 10.110(1)(a), that shall constitute a resignation from the Commission, which shall be effective on the date of such residency change. 
d.  Any member who fails to attend three (3) consecutive meetings without being excused shall automatically be removed from the Commission, and a replacement member shall be nominated for Council approval by the Councilmember or the Mayor, who appointed the member who was removed. The Council may excuse, for good reason as determined in the sole discretion of the Council, any member and in such event the member shall not be automatically removed. Along with such approval for an excused absence the Council may establish a period of time for a leave of absence at its discretion or provide that the leave is until a time as determined by the Council. Additionally, the Council may appoint a temporary replacement or authorize the Council member in whose ward the excused member resides to appoint a temporary replacement to serve until such time as the excused member returns, at which time the temporary replacement shall no longer serve. 
3.  Officers; quorum and voting; procedural rules. 
a.  At its first meeting of each calendar year, the Planning Commission shall, by majority vote of the membership (excluding vacant seats), elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson and preside over the Commission's meetings and one (1) member to serve as vice chairperson. The individuals so designated shall serve in such capacities for a period of one (1) year, with eligibility for re-election. Vacancies in these offices shall be filled for the unexpired terms by majority vote of the Commission membership (excluding vacant seats). 
b.  A quorum for the Commission shall consist of a majority of the Commission membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the Commission to take official action. All actions of the Planning Commission shall be taken by majority vote of the quorum present to pass any motion. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. 
c.  The chairperson or acting chairperson may take part in all deliberations and discussions and may vote on official business. 
d.  The Planning Commission shall be provided an employee of the City for clerical support as necessary. 
e.  The Planning Commission shall follow the rules of procedure of the City Council with respect to public hearings and meetings and determine the time and dates of meetings, not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. 
f.  All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and all records of the Commission shall be public records. Minutes shall be kept of all Commission meetings. 
4.  Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall have the power and duty to: 
a.  Consider requests for annexations of property into the City limits and make recommendations to the City Council regarding approval of such requests; 
b.  Consider requests for rezoning of property within the City limits and make recommendations to the City Council regarding approval of such requests; 
c.  Make recommendations to the City Council regarding proposed zoning map and zoning ordinance changes according to the procedures contained in the Land Development Ordinance; 
d.  Consider request for variances and waivers for new development from the Land Development Ordinance within the City limits in accordance with the variance and waiver provisions of this chapter and Section 10.160 and make recommendations to the City Council. 
5.  The Planning Commission may: 
a.  Make studies and recommend to the City Council plans, goals and objectives relating to the growth, development and re-development of the City, as will best promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens; 
b.  Develop and recommend to the City Council policies, ordinances, administrative procedures and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient manner; and 
c.  Prepare a comprehensive land use plan, or parts thereof, for the future development of the City, for consideration and adoption by the City Council. 
6.  Staff; Finances. The Planning Commission may request from Council such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and/or may request of the Council to contract with the state Planning agency and City planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City Council. 
7.  Powers and Duties. 
a.  The Commission shall hear and consider applications for variances from the Land Development Ordinance and make a recommendation to Council. 
b.  The Commission shall consider only those applications where the strict application of the development requirements of this Ordinance would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon the owner of such property. The Commission shall ensure that the spirit of the ordinance is observed and that public safety and welfare is secured, and substantial justice is done. 
c.  The Commission shall review the variance application in accordance with Section 10.160 of this chapter and make a recommendation to the Council. 
d.  In recommending granting of a variance, the Commission may recommend attaching thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of the Land Development Ordinance will be served. 
e.  No variance shall be considered until the applicant has demonstrated and the Commission finds that the variance conditions have been met as set forth in the Land Disturbance Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(2), § 1) 
10.111—10.139. - Reserved. 
10.140. - Development Process Committee. 
1.  Organization. The City Manager may organize a Development Process Committee (DPC) to perform duties as specified by the City Manager. The membership and procedures, if any, of the DPC shall be established at the sole discretion of the City Manager. In the absence of the organization of a DPC, responsibilities of the DPC in the Land Development Ordinance shall reside solely with the City Manager, or designee. 
2.  Powers and Duties. If the City Manager establishes a DPC, the DPC may: 
a.  Review all applications for annexations, rezoning and variances including public input meeting comments, then meet with applicant to determine appropriate recommendation. 
b.  Provide the recommendation in writing to the Mayor and Council via the Planning Commission. 
c.  Review applications for administrative variances for reduction of parking spaces or required pervious parking up to twenty (20) percent of the required number of spaces; for reduction of Buffer and Setbacks up to twenty (20) percent from the required buffer and setbacks; Tree and Landscaping up to twenty (20) percent of any tree or landscaping requirements; to relocate fences that are required either by code or as a condition of zoning in order to maximize the effectiveness of said fence in terms of privacy, safety and/or aesthetics. An administrative variance shall not add to an existing variance. The DPC shall make a finding of approved, denied or forward and the finding shall be signed by the City Manager or designee. If the determination is to forward an administrative variance application a written recommendation along with the finding of the DPC shall be attached. The application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission as provided for by the variance process. 
d.  Hold pre-application meetings for site plans and subdivisions of land, providing assistance to applicant for designing to comply with City codes. 
e.  Review all plats for compliance with the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance and approve preliminary and final subdivision plats when in compliance. Variances or waivers shall be approved through the appropriate process before approval. The City Manager or designee shall sign to approve plats when such plats meet all requirements and have been signed as approved by all departments. 
f.  Perform such other duties as may be specified in the Land Development Ordinance, required by the City Manager or reasonably appropriate to effect the provisions of the City's ordinances. 
g.  Review and determine if crosswalks installed with new development shall include pedestrian activated equipment, signaling that pedestrians are entering the crosswalk for passage across the street. 
3.  Fees. Fees shall be set by the Council by separate schedules adopted as ordinances. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2016(3), § 1; Ord. of 9-25-2017(1); Ord. of 12-11-2017(1)) 
10.141—10.149. - Reserved. 
10.150. - City Staff. 
City Manager: The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this Code. The City Manager may designate other City staff or professional personnel to assist with the administration of this Ordinance. The City Manager may establish such other procedures, either written or verbal, as shall be reasonable to carry out the intent of these ordinances. Any permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provision of this Code shall be void. 
10.151—10.159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES 

10.160. - Variances. 
1.  The following conditions must be considered before a variance from the requirements of the City's ordinances can be considered by the Commission and granted by the Council: 
a.  There is exceptional and extraordinary conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question, due to its size, shape or topography; and, 
b.  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and, 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and, 
d.  A literal interpretation of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are allowed; and, 
e.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment of the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of the Ordinance. 
In granting a variance, the Council may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served. 
However, the Council shall not be authorized to grant a density variance or a use variance to permit a use in a district in which the use is prohibited without a rezoning. 
2.  No variance shall be authorized unless the Council finds that all of the following conditions exist; 
a.  That the special circumstances or conditions applying to the building or land or building and land in question are peculiar to such premises and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity; and, 
b.  That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a property right and not merely to serve as a convenience to the applicant; and, 
c.  That the condition from which relief or a variance is sought did not result from willful action by the applicant; and, 
d.  That the authorizing of the variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion of public streets, increase the danger of fire, imperil the public safety, unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding areas or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals or general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
Following the review and consideration of a variance application by the Commission a recommendation shall be made by the Commission to the Mayor and Council to approve, approve with conditions or deny. 
10.161. - Time Limitation. 
1.  Any improvements associated with the granting of a variance must be commenced within eighteen (18) months from the date of approval. If work is not started that is associated with the variance project within the eighteen (18) months time the variance shall expire. The Council may grant an extension if before the expiration date the holder of the variance shall make a written request for an extension providing satisfactory justification. 
2.  Any request for variance that has been denied by the Council may not be reinitiated for a twelve-month time period beginning from the date of final decision on the requested variance. This time limit applies to the same or similar request that had been denied by the Council. This section will not restrict multiple appeals or requests for distinctly different requests for variance on the same piece of property within the twelve-month time period. The provision for reapplication for variance is not an appeal of the decision of the Council and will be treated as a new application and request for variance. 
3.  An applicant may petition the Council to waive the twelve-month waiting period after a five-month period from the date of the decision by the Council. The applicant is charged with demonstrating that the facts or conditions present at the time of the approval or denial of the requested variance have materially changed or that the request is materially different. If the waiver is granted by the Council, the application of request of variance shall be treated as a new application. 
10.162. - Appeals. 
The Mayor and Council shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirements, development permit, decision, determination or refusal made by an Administrative Official of the City in the administration or enforcement of any provision of the Land Development Ordinance. Such appeals shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or any governmental officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision with respect to this Ordinance may file an appeal to such action as identified above. Such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days following notification of the decision appealed from, by filing with the City Manager a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The City Manager shall forthwith transmit to the Council all documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
2.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Administrative Official who's action is being appealed certifies to the Council, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and/or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
3.  The Council shall conduct a hearing at which the Administrative Official, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall present the code sections and justification for the action taken. The appellant may then present any evidence, statements or documents pertaining to the matter being appealed. 
4.  The Council may, in conformity with this section, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all powers of the Administrative Official. The Council may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the Administrative Official to carry out the decisions of the Council. 
10.163. - Interpretation of Zoning Map (Ref. 7.303). 
The Council shall apply the following standards in arriving at a decision: 
1.  Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the center lines of alleys, streets, rights-of-way, or water courses, unless such zoning district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning Map. 
2.  Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
3.  In undivided property, or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of any such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on the Zoning Map, shall be determined by the use of the map scale shown thereon. 
4.  If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty still exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary, the Council shall determine and fix the location of said line in a reasonable manner. 
10.164. - Special Exceptions and Interpretations. 
The council shall hear and decide the following exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance provided that such exceptions shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards: 
1.  The extension of a district for a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of the passage of this Ordinance. 
2.  Questions relating to interpretation of use restrictions. 
3.  Questions relating to the existence of a non-conforming use. 
Prior to the council's determination of any of the matters set forth in this Section 10.164, staff shall follow the notice and public hearing procedures set forth in Chapter XI of the City's Land Development Ordinance. 
10.165. - Amendments. 
The Woodstock Zoning Ordinance and the Official Woodstock Zoning Map may be amended from time to time subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in this section and in Chapter XL. Amendments include, but are not limited to, amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, zoning property from one zoning classification to another and annexation of property into the city limits. 
1.  No amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall have sixty (60) days within which to submit its report. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within sixty-day period, it shall be deemed to have recommended the proposed amendment to the Council. 
2.  Amendments may be initiated by any one (1) of the following: 
a.  The City Council 
b.  The Planning Commission 
c.  All of the owners of property affected by a proposed amendment. 
d.  The City Manager 
3.  Before enacting an amendment to this article, the City Council shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4 and in conformance with Chapter XI. 
4.  Amendments initiated by property owners may only be initiated once in a twelve-month period of time with respect to the same parcel of land. The twelve-month time period shall begin on the date the Mayor and Council take official action on the proposed amendment. However, this limitation shall not apply to those properties affected by an amendment initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission. The City Council or Planning Commission may file and propose an amendment with respect to any parcel at any time. 
5.  An applicant may petition the City Council to waive the twelve-month waiting period by demonstrating that the facts or conditions present at the time of the approval or denial of the requested amendment have materially changed or if the request is materially different. If the waiver is granted by the City Council, the application for the zoning change shall be treated as a new application. 
6.  The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may place a conditional use provision on a zoning district designation. The zoning district in this case shall include a suffix "C" and shall be effective until otherwise amended. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2), §§ 1, 2) 
10.166. - Official Woodstock Zoning Map. 
The Official Woodstock Zoning Map shall be updated on a semi-annual basis, in January and July of each year. These updates shall include all annexations and rezonings adopted by ordinance during the previous six-month period. Such updates shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for amendments contained in this chapter and in Chapter XI. 
The City Council may at its option, delay adopting updated maps in its sole discretion. Any failure of the Council to adopt an updated map shall not be deemed a violation of the Ordinance and the previously adopted map shall remain in full force and effect. 
10.167. - Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses. 
1.  The City Manger shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, rezoning and variance applications, special home occupations and other matters pertaining to the Ordinance, which fee schedule is subject to review and approval by the City Council. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the City Clerk's Office. 
2.  No action shall be taken on any application or appeal until such time as 
a.  All required documents have been submitted, and 
b.  All applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Council may waive these requirements either explicitly or implicitly, i.e. by approving an application or appeal which did not meet these requirements. 
10.168. - Public Hearings. 
The Council shall hold a public hearing before making its decision on all requests for Annexations, Variances, Rezoning, Zoning Map Interpretations, Special Exceptions and Appeals, and shall act within a reasonable time after receiving an application, in accordance with Georgia law and the provisions of Chapter X. 
10.169. - Applications. 
1.  Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements, all applications for public hearing and recommendation by the Commission and decision by City Council shall be filed with the City Manager on forms provided, in accordance with submittal guidelines established by the Development Process Committee. Each application shall contain such information as the City Manager and Development Process Committee determine to be necessary for the Commission and/or Council to make an informed decision. 
2.  Any applicant wishing to defer a proposed public hearing application shall file a written request for deferral with the City Manager or designee, two (2) business days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. Each written request for deferral shall be accompanied by a postponement fee established by City Council with resolution from time to time. 
3.  Deferrals may be granted by the City Manager or designee up to two (2) times for any public hearing application. No application shall be granted a request for a third deferral. Applicants seeking to defer an application for a third time, shall withdraw the application and submit a new application when prepared to do so in accordance with the public hearings schedule. The applicant may submit a new application without prejudice with respect to the twelve-month limitation established in this Chapter. No fees shall be refunded and all fees are due upon the submittal of a new application. 
4.  The DPC shall evaluate the completeness of an application to proceed to the Planning Commission. Should an application remain incomplete, lacking sufficient information for the Planning Commission and City Council to make informed decisions, the DPC is authorized to reject the application. Upon rejection of an application, the applicant may submit a new application when prepared to do so in accordance with the public hearings schedule without prejudice with respect to the twelve-month limitation established in this Chapter. No fees shall be refunded and all fees are due upon the submittal of a new application. 
5.  The City Council may allow an application to be withdrawn, postponed or amended, in its sole discretion, at any time prior to its final vote on the application without prejudice with respect to the twelve-month limitation established in this Chapter. 
6.  No public hearing application or written request for deferral will be accepted without the submission of applicable fees. The failure to submit applicable fees constitutes a rejection of the public hearing application or written request for deferral. Upon rejection of an application, the applicant may submit a new application when prepared to do so in accordance with the public hearings schedule without prejudice with respect to the twelve-month limitation established in this Chapter. No fees shall be refunded and all fees are due upon the submittal of a new application. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2), § 3) 
10.170. - Hearing Procedures. 
The Commission shall utilize the hearing rules established by council for the conduct of hearings. Said rules shall be published and available to the public. 
10.171. - Appeals from Action of Council. 
Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of the Council may within thirty (30) days thereafter appeal to the Superior Court or court of like jurisdiction. The appellant shall furnish the City a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which appeal is taken. In case of such appeal, the Council shall cause a certified copy of the record of proceedings to be provided to the City Attorney for response to the court to which the appeal is taken. 
10.172—10.199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

10.200. - Violations and Penalties. 
1.  This chapter shall be enforced by the City Manager or his/her designee, Code Enforcement Officer or Law Enforcement Officer. 
2.  Any person or entity violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. At the discretion of the appropriate court, a violator of this code may be given a reasonable length of time to rectify or correct the violation. 
3.  In addition to any other remedies and after due notice to the owner of the violation, the City may: 
a.  Issue a citation for violation of City Code which shall require the presence of the violator in Municipal Court. 
b.  May institute an action for injunctive relief or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, land clearing or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
4.  The Building Official or his/her designee may, in addition to other remedies, notify utilities to withhold service there from until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of this Code. 
Chapter XI - ZONING POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

11.100. - Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Policy and Procedures Ordinance of the City of Woodstock, Georgia". 
11.101. - Purpose. 
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the requirements contained in O.C.G.A. Tit. 36, Ch. 66. It is the intention of this Ordinance to establish minimum procedures governing the exercise of the City's zoning powers. The minimum procedures are designed to ensure that due process is afforded the general public when the City regulates the use of property through its zoning power. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS 

11.200. - Annexation and Rezoning of Annexed Areas. 
The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission shall review annexation and rezoning applications and shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council of the proposed zoning district of the annexation area. The Planning Commission shall have the option to conduct a public hearing on the zoning of the area proposed for annexation or it may choose not to hold a formal public hearing. 
The Mayor and City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed annexation. The official zoning action by the Mayor and City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.205 of this article. 
11.201. - Zoning Amendments Initiated by the City. 
The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission shall review and make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council on all zoning amendments initiated by the City. The Planning Commission may conduct a public hearing following the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.205 of this article. 
The Mayor and City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment. The official zoning action by the Mayor and City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.9203 of this article. 
11.202. - Zoning Amendments Initiated by Property Owners. 
The property owner(s) or a person having the owner(s) written authority to act on their behalf, may apply to the Mayor and City Council for an amendment to the Woodstock Zoning Ordinance. The applicant shall make application at City Hall on forms provided for the requested change. The applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the requirements of section 10.103. 
1.  Applications to amend the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map shall include the following information: 
a.  A legal description of the tract(s) proposed to be rezoned; 
b.  A plat drawn to scale showing the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s) prepared by a Engineer, Architect, Land Planner or Land Surveyor, whose Georgia State registration is current and valid and whose seal shall be affixed to the plat; 
c.  The present and proposed zoning classifications for the tract(s); 
d.  Responses to the criteria stated in section 11.205; and 
e.  Any other requirements as may be required from time to time by the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  This applicant shall be allowed to submit renderings, site plans and other exhibits purporting to depict the proposed development should a map amendment be approved. The applicant may, however, be required to develop according to such plans if approved by the Planning Commission, or the Mayor and Council. Any deviation from approved plans shall require submission of modified plans to the Planning Commission for their approval. 
The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission shall review the application and make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council with regard to the proposed zoning amendment. The Planning Commission shall have the option to conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment following the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.205 of this article. 
The Mayor and City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment. The official zoning action by the Mayor and City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.205 of this article. 
11.203. - Public Notice. 
A public hearing shall be held on all proposed amendment to this Ordinance. Prior to such public hearing, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4 requires that public notice be provided. Public notice of a proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall consist of an onsite sign, legal notice in the official organ of the City and notice to the applicant and property owner of the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
1.  The on-site sign shall be displayed on the subject property and shall b e clearly visible from a public street. The sign shall be posted a minimum of fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing on the proposed amendment. The sign shall announce the time, date, place and purpose of the public hearing, and the present and proposed zoning district. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences which limit the effectiveness of such public notice shall not void the proceedings or actions taken under this section. 
2.  The legal notice shall appear in the official legal organ of the City and shall be published at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The legal notice shall state the name of the applicant, the property owner, location of the subject property, the present and proposed zoning district, the current and proposed use of the subject property, and the time, date and place of the public hearing. 
3.  The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the date, time and place of the public hearing by certified mail to the address indicated on the application. Such notice shall be mailed no later than ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Receipt of such letter by the applicant or his legal representative shall constitute notice to be present at the public hearing to discuss the application. Failure of the applicant or his representative to be present at the public hearing constitutes grounds by which the City Council may deny the application, unless the applicant shows just cause for the absence. 
4.  If the City has not designated an official legal organ, then the notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the City according to the provisions of section 11.203.2. 
5.  Public Input Plan Required. See Council Policy Manual #700-0008. 
a.  Goals of the Plan: The proposed Public Input Plan is designed to facilitate on-going communication among the applicant, the potentially impacted property owners, elected officials and staff during the application review process. Specifically, the Plan is aimed at ensuring the following: 
i.  That the potentially impacted property owners have adequate opportunity to learn about an application that may affect them and to work with applicants to resolve concerns at an early stage of the process. 
ii.  The applicants pursue early and effective citizen input in conjunction with their applications, giving them the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real or perceived impacts that applications may have on the community. The proposed plan is not intended to produce complete consensus on all applications, but to encourage applicants to be good neighbors and to foster an atmosphere for informed decision making. 
b.  Requests Requiring Public Input Plan: The following requests require preparation, submittal and execution of a Public Input Plan, as determined by the Community Development Department: 
i.  Rezoning and Zoning Condition Amendments; 
ii.  Conditional Use Permit; 
iii.  Variances from architectural standards; 
iv.  Variances from lot standards; and 
v.  Other requests, as determined by the Community Development Department. 
c.  Contents of the Plan: A copy of the Public Input Plan shall be submitted as part of the application. At a minimum, the Public Input Plan shall include the following information: 
i.  Property owners, political jurisdictions and public agencies which may be affected by the application; 
ii.  How those potentially impacted by an application will be notified that an application has been made; 
iii.  How those potentially impacted parties will be informed of the substance of the development proposed by the applicant; 
iv.  How those potentially impacted will be afforded an opportunity to discuss the applicant's proposal with the applicant and express any concerns, issues or problems that they may have with the proposal, in advance of the public hearing; 
v.  The applicant's schedule for completion of the Public Input Plan process. 
d.  Public Input Meeting Notification: The applicant is required to notify the potentially impacted parties of the Public Input Meeting. This notice is required to be postmarked at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled Public Input Meeting and shall include the following: 
i.  All properties that lie within five hundred (500) feet but a minimum of three (3) parcels in depth in each direction of the legal boundary of the subject property. 
ii.  Any homeowner's associations (HOA) which represent subdivisions or properties that fall within the 500 foot boundary including each member of the Board of Directors for the HOA, a list of which is maintained by the Woodstock Police Department. If the HOA is represented by a management company, the agent or community manager for the respective HOA shall also be notified in accordance with this section. The applicant shall verify with the management company that the list of Board of Directors is correct. 
iii.  City of Woodstock Department of Community Development to be kept in the case file. 
At a minimum, the notification shall include: 
i.  The date, time and location of the Public Input Meeting; 
ii.  The date, time and location of the Planning Commission and Mayor and City Council Public Hearings; 
iii.  Summary of applicant's request 
A listing of all property owners and addresses notified of the Public Input Meeting, including HOA Board Members and the community manager through the management company (if managed) shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. 
e.  Public Input Meeting Requirements and Protocol: 
i.  The applicant or authorized representative shall be available to answer questions of the general public for at least thirty (30) minutes; 
ii.  The meeting location shall be held at a publicly accessible facility within the community; 
iii.  The meeting shall not begin prior to 7:00 pm on the evening the meeting is to be held; 
iv.  A copy of the complete application package including supporting documents (i.e.: site plans, zoning maps, etc), as accepted by the Community Development Department, shall be made available at the meeting. 
f.  Public Input Meeting Report: 
i.  In order to formalize the Public Input Plan process, the applicant shall provide a written report on the results of the Public Input Meeting to the Community Development no later than 12:00 p.m. on the Friday prior to the scheduled Development Process Committee Meeting. This report will be attached to the Staff Report, which is prepared for each case and is sent to the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission the Mayor and City Council. At a minimum, the Public Input Report shall include the following information: 
Details of methods the applicant used to involve the public, including: 
- Dates and locations of all meetings where citizens were invited to discuss the applicant's proposal; 
- Content, dates mailed and numbers of mailings, including letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other publications; 
- List of property owner addresses receiving notices or other written materials; and 
- The number of people that participated in the process. 
A summary of concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process, including: 
- The substance of the concerns, issues and problems; 
- How the applicant has addressed or intends to address concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process; and 
- Concerns, issues and problems the applicant is unable or unwilling to address and why. 
6.  The City Council may waive the requirements of Section 11.203(5) at a regular or called meeting of the Council. Once waived by City Council, all requirements within Section 11.203(5) are deemed waived, including the public input plan, public input meeting, and notification requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015(1); Ord. No. 5359-2018, § 1—4, 9-10-2018) 
11.204. - Public Hearing. 
Before taking action on any proposed zoning amendment, the City Council shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the following procedures. Printed copies of these procedures shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
1.  Public hearings shall be held in conjunction with regular meetings of the City Council, at a time and place provided in the published notice of hearing. 
2.  The hearing moderator shall begin the public hearing by stating the subject matter of the hearing and informing those present of the rules which shall be followed during the hearing. Proposed zoning amendments shall be considered in the order indicated on the published notice. 
3.  The hearing shall be conducted by the City Attorney or other hearing officer designated by the City Council. 
4.  A verbal staff report shall be made, stating the recommendation of the Planning Commission and summarizing the written report submitted for the hearing. 
5.  The hearing officer shall allow the applicant or his/her designee to present the case for the rezoning. Failure of the applicant or his representative to be present at the public hearing shall cause an automatic termination of the proceeding on the request, unless the applicant shows just cause for the absence. 
6.  The hearing officer will next give those opposed to the petition an opportunity to be heard. Each speaker shall identify himself or herself and state his/her address. 
7.  The hearing officer may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against the proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for discussion o the proposed zoning amendment. 
8.  If there are a large number of persons present to speak, the hearing officer may request that a spokesperson be designated. The hearing officer will allow as many people to be heard as necessary to present all relevant information. Speakers will not be permitted to continue with redundancy, in the discretion of the hearing officer. 
9.  The hearing officer shall afford the applicant a brief period of time to rebut the issues raised by the opposition. If any new issues are raised by the applicant during this rebuttal period, the opposition shall be given an opportunity to address the new issues. 
10.  Because of time constraints in hearings, interested parties shall be encouraged to submit petitions, studies, letters, and other materials requiring prior study in advance so that such materials can be included in the final packets distributed to the Council Members before the hearing. The City Council shall have the discretion to accept such materials at the hearing. Such materials, if presented orally at the hearing, shall be subject to the time limitation for presentation by each party. 
11.  Upon conclusion of public comments, as determined by the hearing officer, conduct of the meeting shall be returned to the presiding Official of the City Council. The City Council shall have the discretion to call on previous speakers as necessary for clarification of views or materials submitted. 
12.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the hearing officer to maintain decorum in the conduct of a hearing, or to assure that the hearing is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
13.  The City Council shall have the discretion to continue a hearing to a later date if the materials submitted or views expressed require more time for study and consideration than may reasonably be allocated in one (1) meeting. 
14.  The City Council shall discuss the written application, any City staff report, and the presentations of the applicant and opposition during the public hearing and render a decision on the petition. The meeting shall be held in public, without interruption by members of the public audience. 
11.205. - Zoning Standards. 
1.  All applications for rezoning shall be evaluated according to the following criteria: 
a.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
b.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use of usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
c.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
d.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
e.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; and 
f.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
2.  The applicant is responsible for submitting responses to the above criteria for evaluation by the Planning Commission and City Council. 
3.  The following factors shall also be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council in evaluating an application for rezoning: 
a.  Impact on the road system and traffic flow; 
b.  Adequacy of the water service system to the area proposed for development; 
c.  Availability or adequacy of sanitary sewer systems or whether the soils in the area proposed for development are suitable to absorb the projected flows from septic tank systems; 
d.  Impact on economic values in the area; 
e.  Impact on the health, safety, and general welfare of the area; and 
f.  Suitability of the site for the proposed use in overall size, topography and neighborhood compatibility. 
11.206. - Official Action. 
1.  The Planning Commission shall take the information presented in the application, the information presented by City Staff and any other information presented at the Planning Commission meeting with respect to the criteria and factors outlined in section 11.205. If the Planning Commission determines that the rezoning proposal will not adversely impact the criteria and factors, they shall recommend that the Mayor and Council approve the rezoning application. 
2.  If the Planning Commission determines that the rezoning will have a significant adverse impact on some or all of the criteria, and if no mitigation measures are proposed, then the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and Council that the rezoning application be denied. 
3.  The Planning Commission may recommend approval of the rezoning application, subject to conditions or mitigation measures regarding the location, character and other features of proposed structure(s) or use(s) as it deems advisable so as to protect or improve the quality of life through prevention of air, water and noise pollution and promotion of aesthetic conditions. 
4.  The Planning Commission's written recommendation to the Mayor and Council shall state the impact of the proposed rezoning application on each of the criteria identified in section 11.205. 
5.  The Planning Commission shall have sixty (60) days from the date of presentation of the application to make its recommendation to the Mayor and City Council. If no recommendation is made to the Mayor and City Council within the sixty (60) days, then the application shall be deemed as approved by the Planning Commission. 
6.  The Mayor and City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application according to the provisions of sections 11.203 through 11.204. 
7.  The Mayor and Council shall consider the information presented at the public hearing, the recommendation by the Planning Commission, information presented by City Staff and evaluate it in respect to the criteria outlined in section 11.205 and make a decision within sixty (60) days of the public hearing. The "zoning decision" by the Mayor and City Council shall be considered the final administrative action on a rezoning application. If the Mayor and City Council shall deem appropriate they shall have the authority to send back to the Planning Commission any such plans that have deviated from the original recommended plans for further review and recommendation within sixty-day decision period. If the Mayor and City Council send plans back to the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall consider the revised plans under the same procedures as a new application after which the Council shall receive the recommendation of the Planning Commission and reconsider the application under its normal procedures. 
11.207. - Campaign Contribution Disclosure. 
1.  All applicants, or person(s) representing an applicant seeking a zoning change, must complete and sign a disclosure form as part of the application process. Such form will disclose any campaign contribution(s) totaling two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) of greater to any local government official, which contribution was made within the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
2.  Any opponent to a request for zoning change shall complete and sign the above described disclosure form prior to speaking at the public hearing in opposition to the zoning change. 
Chapter XII - SPRINKLER STANDARDS 
This section includes standards for use of sprinkler systems in multi-family and commercial buildings. 
ARTICLE I. - SCOPE AND EXCLUSIONS 
1.  All commercial buildings and multi-family residential structures within the City of Woodstock, Georgia shall be construed with an approved sprinkler system throughout, as defined by NFPA #13. 
2.  This Ordinance shall apply to multi-family residential structures and commercial structures over three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet and structure that are not covered by other codes. 
3.  This Ordinance shall not apply to a duplex or free standing single family residence. 
4.  An NFPA # 13 R system will only be permitted in structures up to three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. Anything above three (3) stories or three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet in size must have an NFPA 13 System. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS THREE STORIES OR LESS, THAT ARE NOT REQUIRED TO BE SPRINKLED BY OTHER CODES 
1.  A combination fire protection sprinkler system may be allowed in commercial buildings that are three (3) stories in height or less and which are not required to have sprinkler systems by other codes. A combination sprinkler system shall comply with the following: 
a.  No anti-freeze solution or any other additive shall be allowed in any combination sprinkler system. 
b.  When dead end systems are used, the sprinkler system shall be isolated form the domestic water supply by not less than a dual check valve assembly. That conforms to underwriters laboratories standards and is approved by the City of Woodstock. A union and full port shut off, acceptable to the City of Woodstock fire service, shall be installed on both sides of the check valve assembly to facilitate removal for test and repair. 
If the sprinkler system exceeds one hundred seventy-five (175) psi a pressure reducing valve must be used. 
c.  When the dual check valve and shut-off valves are installed outside the structure, they shall not be buried in the earth, but shall be protected form freezing, at a location acceptable to the City of Woodstock fire service. For example, in a pre-cast concrete valve pit with cover. The top of the protective housing shall extend one-half-inch above the finished landscaping and be installed in an area approved by the City of Woodstock Fire Service. 
d.  A water meter shall not be required for the fire protection water line. The City of Woodstock City Council shall establish a monthly sprinkler fee to be added to the water bill. All shut-offs in the sprinkler system shall be secured in an acceptable method to prevent tampering and shall be locked in the open position. A sign shall be placed on the valves which shall read, "Fire Department shall be notified when valves are turned off and turned back on". All shut-offs shall be readily accessible to the fire service at all times. Locking devices will be inspected on a routine basis by the Woodstock Fire Service. If locking devices are broken or not in place, it shall be the responsibility of the owner/tenant to notify the fire service within twenty-four (24) hours. If notification is not made within the twenty-four-hour limit, the business would be fined up to the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence. If a third violation is noted upon inspection, business shall be required to install a water meter at their own expense. 
e.  All sprinkler heads shall be UL-Listed. Spacing of all sprinkler heads shall be in accordance with U.L. Listings and manufacturers recommendations. 
f.  Sprinkler heads are not required in bathrooms, closets and hallways that are not to be used as means of exit or in attics. All other areas require sprinkler heads including drive-in garages and basements (finished or unfinished). Exception: Sprinkler heads must meet hazardous area hourly fire rating for drive in garages. 
g.  All mechanical rooms shall have one hundred thirty-five (135) to one hundred sixty-five (165) degree commercial sprinkler heads with a maximum three-eighths-inch orifice. 
h.  Dropped escutcheons shall be used if a sprinkler head is obstructed by light fixtures, beams, pipes, or other features. Additional sprinkler heads may be used for areas where obstructions block spray pattern. 
i.  When ceiling fans are used, sprinkler heads shall be located so fan housing does not interfere with the pattern. Installation of sprinkler heads shall still conform to spacing requirements. If sprinkler head location exceeds spacing requirements, additional heads shall be used. 
j.  All spacing of sprinkler heads in relation to head products equipment and heaters shall be sprinkled top manufacturers requirements. 
k.  All sprinkler piping in unheated areas shall be protected from freezing. 
l.  An accepted water flow switch with a bell that can be heard from no less than five hundred (500) feet away is required. Both shall be accessible for checking and repair. 
m.  Each system shall have an accessible inspectors test drain valve at the most remote point away from the system water supply. 
n.  If a sprinkler system issued for more than one (1) living unit and separate electric service is used for each unit, the alarm switch with bell shall be on house electric service. 
o.  All condominiums shall have the following wording in the recorded declaration of covenants and a copy of the document shall be provided to the City of Woodstock fire service and the City of Woodstock Building Inspector. 
"Sprinkler system: In the event that any unit be equipped with fire sprinkler system heads, compromising any part of the system nor shall any sprinkler head by painted, covered, or otherwise tampered with, or altered". 
"Prior to any alterations, amendments, modifications, or change, business will submit such alterations, amendments, modifications or change to the City of Woodstock fire service for their approval and agree to comply with all domestic sprinkler requirements of the City of Woodstock, Georgia". 
p.  The installer of any sprinkler system shall be a licensed Georgia Fire Protection Sprinkler Installer. 
q.  The fire service sprinkler connection shall be located on the front (street side) of the building. The sprinkler connection shall be equipped with a one and one-half-inch national standard thread (NST) female swivel. The connection shall be unobstructed and clearly marked to be seen from the road. 
ARTICLE III. - INSPECTION OF SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
1.  The fire service shall have access to all sprinkler systems for the purpose of inspections. Inspections may be made annually or as often as deemed necessary by the fire service. Inspections shall include but not be limited, to the following: 
a.  Procedures for inspection the sprinkler system shall be set forth by the Fire Chief or Fire Inspector. A copy of which may be obtained from the Woodstock Fire Service. 
b.  A sprinkler inspection form shall be filled out in duplicate one (1) copy shall be given to the owner or occupant and one (1) copy shall be kept for permanent files of the fire service. 
c.  Each riser manifold shall be tagged. The tag shall show date of in inspection and inspector's signature. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCEPTIONS TO THE BUILDING CODE 
1.  In buildings up to five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet per floor, no fire wall is required. 
2.  In single story buildings divided into occupant units, one-hour fire walls extending up thirty-six (36) inches above the roof an out flush with the roof overhang are required when an approved sprinkler system is in place. If no sprinkler system is in place four-hour walls are required between units. 
3.  Standard one-half-inch gypsum wall board may be substituted for five-eighths-inch type "X" gypsum board relating to one-hour tenant separation walls. 
4.  Standard one-half-inch gypsum wallboard may be substituted for five-eighths-inch type "X" gypsum wallboard. One-half-inch plywood may be substituted for three-quarter-inch plywood relating to one-hour floor-ceiling assemblies. 
5.  Fee simple townhouses may have one-hour rated party walls in lieu of two-hour rated party walls. 
6.  Attic smoke stops at three thousand (3,000) square feet will be allowed in lieu of smoke stops between every unit. 
7.  Exit travel may be extended thirty-five (35) feet in lieu of the existing twenty (20) feet. 
8.  Tenants egress may pass by other tenants doors and windows without those doors and windows being rated. 
9.  Interior finishes shall be class "C" or better instead of class "A" finish. 
10.  One-hour rating of walls and door of hazardous areas as noted by the City Fire Service will be required. 
11.  Unless otherwise specified within this code, all other requirements of applicable codes of the City of Woodstock, Georgia shall be complied with. 
12.  Certification of flow must be acceptable to the City of Woodstock Fire Service. 
13.  In the interest of life safety, other exceptions may be allowed when warranted by the City of Woodstock fire service. 
14.  All new construction must submit sprinkler plans to the City of Woodstock fire service for approval before construction of sprinkler systems commences. 
Chapter XIII - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION 
It is hereby determined that: 
The flood hazard areas of the City of Woodstock, Georgia (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "City"), are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can (1) Protect human life and health; (2) Minimize damage to private property; (3) Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Georgia law have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the City of Woodstock, Georgia, does ordain this Ordinance and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
All defined terms throughout this chapter are capitalized, and the definitions are contained in Chapter II of this Land Development Ordinance. 

13.210. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
13.220. - Applicability. 
This Ordinance shall be applicable to all areas within the City. 
(Ord. No. 5697-2019, § 3, 3-25-2019) 
13.230. - Designation of Ordinance Administrator. 
The City Manager, or his designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Ordinance (the "Administrator"). 
13.240. - Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard—Flood Area Maps and Studies. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (hereinafter sometimes "FIS"), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. The maps can be viewed on the internet at or by contacting the City's GIS Division. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the one-hundred-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City; or 
(b)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City's Community Development Department (hereinafter "Community Development Department"). 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City; or 
(b)  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia, which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Community Development Department. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Woodstock City Hall. 
13.250. - Compatibility with Other Regulations. 
This Ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other Ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this Ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
13.260. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Ordinance. 
13.270. - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Woodstock or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

13.310. - Permit Application Requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any Land Development Activities on a site where an Area of Special Flood Hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this Ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this Ordinance, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a Development Activity shall submit to the Community Development Department a permit application on a form provided by the Community Development Department for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this Ordinance. 
13.320. - Floodplain Management Plan Requirements. 
Any application for a Permit with Areas of Special Flood Hazard located on the site must include a Floodplain Management Plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
(a)  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
(b)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
(c)  Proposed and existing locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
(d)  Proposed and existing locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
(e)  Proposed grading plan; 
(f)  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
(g)  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
(h)  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(i)  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the Lowest Floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 13.520(2); 
(d)  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 13.510(5). 
(e)  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable State and Federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this Ordinance. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all Land Development Activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and Development Activity is not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
13.330. - Construction Stage Submittal Requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a Floodplain Management Plan, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator a certified as-built FEMA issued elevation certificate or flood-proofing certificate for non-residential construction including the Lowest Floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the Lowest Floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final Elevation Certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any Lowest Floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall result in the issuance of a stop work order for the project. 
13.340. - Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. 
Duties of the Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including but not limited to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Articles IV and V of this chapter.; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the Lowest Floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the Administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article VI of this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined by FEMA, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
ARTICLE IV. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

13.410. - Definition of Floodplain Boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish Base Flood Elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the Future-Conditions Flood Elevations shall be provided by the City's GIS Division (the "Woodstock GIS Division"). If Future-Conditions Elevation data is not available from the Woodstock GIS Division, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Community Development Department. 
13.420. - Definition of Floodway Boundaries. 
(1)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the Regulatory Floodway shall be provided by the Community Development Department. If Floodway data is not available from the Community Development Department, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Community Development Department. 
13.430. - General Standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within the Future-Conditions Floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(a)  Raising the Base Flood Elevation or Future-Conditions Flood Elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(b)  Reducing the Base Flood or Future-Conditions Flood storage capacity; 
(c)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the Base Flood or Future-Conditions Flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the Development Area; or, 
(d)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the Base Flood Elevation for the Base Flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the Future-Condition Flood Elevation for the Future-Conditions Flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(b)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two (2.0) percent; 
(c)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(d)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 13.440; 
(e)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate (in the case of all water lines) infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(f)  Any significant physical changes to the Floodplain shall be submitted as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (hereinafter "CLOMR") or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (hereinafter "CLOMA"), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Administrator using the FEMA Community Consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
13.440. - Engineering Study Requirements for Floodplain Encroachments. 
An engineering study is required whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the Future-Conditions Floodplain (except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodways for which the provisions of section 13.540 apply). This study shall be prepared by a currently registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Community Development Department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the Future-Conditions Floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or Floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Community Development Department. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information shall be obtained whenever available. Computations shall be shown duplicating FIS results and shall then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all encroachments in to the future-conditions floodplain. 
13.450. - Floodway Encroachments. 
Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard are areas designated as Floodway. A Floodway as used herein is an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, Floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the Base Flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development, within the Floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project Base Flood Elevations, Floodway elevations, or Floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the Floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the Floodway shall be issued by the Community Development Department until an affirmative CLOMR is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the Community Development Department. 
13.460. - Maintenance Requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a Floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The Community Development Department may direct the property owner (at owner's sole cost and expense) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Community Development Department. If said property owner does not perform this restoration, then said property owner shall be subject to the penalties provided for herein. 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

13.510. - General Standards. 
In all Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvement of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated Buildings - All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the Lowest Floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and, 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(b)  So as not to violate the Lowest Floor criteria of this Ordinance, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the Future Conditions Flood Elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State of Georgia requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and, 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or Future Condition Elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 5697-2019, § 4, 3-25-2019) 
13.520. - Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Within the Future Conditions Floodplain. 
For Structures and Buildings within the Future-Conditions Floodplain, the following provisions, in addition to those in section 13.510, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential Buildings. 
(a)  New Construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met, all new construction shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the Future-Conditions Flood Elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(b)  Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(2)  Non-Residential Buildings. 
(a)  New Construction. New Construction of principal buildings including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met, all new construction shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the Administrator. 
(b)  Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of principal buildings including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). Substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the Administrator. 
(3)  Accessory Structures and Facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 13.510(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All Recreational Vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(b)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for Residential Buildings—Substantial Improvements (subsection 13.520(1)(b)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
(a)  New and Substantially Improved Manufactured Homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met; 
(b)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The Lowest Floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(7). 
(Ord. No. 5697-2019, §§ 5—7, 3-25-2019) 
13.530. - Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Authorized Adjacent to the Future Conditions Floodplain. 
(1)  Residential Buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home located adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain, the elevation of the Lowest Floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(2)  Non-Residential Buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building located adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain, the elevation of the Lowest Floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(Ord. No. 5697-2019, § 8, 3-25-2019) 
13.540. - Building Standards for Residential Single-Lot Developments on Streams Without Established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway (A-Zones). 
For a residential single-lot development, not part of a subdivision, that has one (1) or more Special Flood Hazard Areas but no base flood data have been provided (i.e. A-Zones), the Administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, Base Flood Elevation and Floodway data, or Future Conditions Flood Elevation data available from a Federal, State, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this Ordinance. 
If data is not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including Structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the Top Of Stream Bank, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In Special Flood Hazard Areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection 13.510(5). 
13.550. - Building Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO-Zones). 
Areas of Special Flood Hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the Lowest Floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(2)  New and substantial improvements of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and, 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
13.560. - Standards for Subdivisions. 
(1) All Subdivision proposals shall identify the Special Flood Hazard Area and provide Base Flood Elevation data and Future Conditions Flood Elevation data; 
(2) All residential lots in a Subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the Future Conditions Floodplain such that encroachments into the Future Conditions Floodplain for residential Structures will not be required; 
(3) All Subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed Structures in accordance with section 13.320. 
(4) All Subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5) All Subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(6) All Subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Woodstock to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCE AND APPEALS 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a Permit by the Woodstock Development Process Committee (hereinafter referred to as "DPC") or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Applications for variances from the requirements of this Ordinance shall be submitted to the DPC. All such requests shall be heard by the DPC within fourteen (14) days of submission. The committee shall make a finding of "approved", "denied" or "forward". The finding shall be signed by the chairperson of the Development Process Committee. All affected parties shall be given notice prior to the DPC meeting and be given the opportunity to be heard at the DPC meeting. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Woodstock Development Process Committee shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Mayor and Council as per Chapter 10, section 10.162, of this Land Development Ordinance. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Cherokee County, Georgia, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the Woodstock Development Process Committee and the Mayor and Council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this Ordinance. 
(8)  Conditions for Variances: 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
(b)  The provisions of this Ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed Lowest Floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced Lowest Floor elevation. 
(d)  The Administrator for the City of Woodstock shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Woodstock Development Process Committee and the Mayor and Council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this Ordinance, the Woodstock Development Process Committee and the Mayor and Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(11)  Variances shall not be retroactive (i.e. issued after the fact). 
ARTICLE VII. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Ordinance or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 

13.710. - Notice of Violation. 
If the Community Development Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person and served on that person by U.S. mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested). Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site by U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested). 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Community Development Department by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation. 
13.720. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing sent by U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested) of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Community Development Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop Work Order. The Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The Community Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Community Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the Community Development Department shall deem appropriate or such lesser period (in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Community Development Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the Community Development Department may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Ordinance, the Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person served by U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested), requiring such person to appear in Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall remain uncured shall constitute a separate offense. 
Chapter XIV - STORMWATER STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connections, Ch. 58, Article II, section 58-44, City Code of Ordinances. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for stormwater and sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION, PURPOSE AND INTENT 

14.110. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
Land Development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase Stormwater Runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
Land Development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased Non-Point Source Pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
The impacts of Post-Development Stormwater Runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of Stormwater Runoff quantity and quality from New Development and Redevelopment, by the use of both Structural Stormwater Control as well as Nonstructural Stormwater Management Practice, such as the conservation of Open Space and Greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and Greenspace for Stormwater Management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those Greenspace areas which provide Stormwater Management quality and quantity benefits; 
Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both State and Federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of Post-Development Stormwater Runoff quality and Non-Point Source Pollution; 
Therefore, the City of Woodstock, Georgia (sometime hereinafter referred to as "City") has established this set of Stormwater Management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of Post-Development Stormwater Runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate Post-Development Stormwater Runoff Discharge in order to control and minimize increases in Stormwater Runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and Non-Point Source Pollution associated with Post-Development Stormwater Runoff. 
14.120. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this chapter of the Land Development Ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the City of Woodstock, Georgia by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased Post-Development Stormwater Runoff and Non-Point Source Pollution associated with New Development and Redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of Post-Development Stormwater Runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This Ordinance seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
1.  Establish decision-making processes surrounding Land Development Activity that protects the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
2.  Require that New Development and Redevelopment maintain the Pre-Development hydrologic response in their Post-Development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce Flooding, Stream Bank erosion, Non-Point Source Pollution and increases in Stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of Stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
3.  Establish minimum Post-Development Stormwater Management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of Stormwater Runoff quantity and quality; 
4.  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of Structural Stormwater Control Facilities that can be used to meet the minimum Post-Development Stormwater Management standards; 
5.  Encourage the use of Nonstructural Stormwater Management Practices and Stormwater Better Site Design, such as the preservation of Green Space and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include Green Space, with the City's Green Space protection plan; 
6.  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of Structural Stormwater Control and Nonstructural Stormwater Management Practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
7.  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of Stormwater Management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
All defined terms throughout this chapter are capitalized, and the definitions are contained in Chapter II of this Land Development Ordinance. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, Subdivision applications, and Grading applications, unless specifically exempted. This article describes the applicability of this chapter to Developments in the City of Woodstock, Georgia 

14.210. - Responsibilities. 
1.  The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the City; specific applicability and exemptions are defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (hereinafter "GSMM") and this article. See section 14.260 for information regarding obtaining this document. 
2.  The City Manager or designee shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
3.  The application of this article and the provisions expressed in this article shall be the minimum Stormwater Management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other local requirements authorized by state statute. Other Stormwater project improvements, as defined under state law, may be required. 
14.220. - Applicability. 
These standards apply to any New Development or Redevelopment site that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
1.  New Development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of Impervious Cover, or that involves other Land Development Activity of one (1) acre or more; 
2.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of Impervious Cover, or that involves other Land Development Activity of one (1) acre or more; 
3.  Any New Development or Redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the City to be a Hotspot; or, 
4.  Land Development Activity smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items 1 and 2, above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct Land Development Activity may take place at different times on different schedules. 
14.230. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from this Ordinance: 
1.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a Subdivision or a phased development project; 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures exempted above; 
3.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
4.  Repairs to any Stormwater Management Facility or practice deemed necessary by the City. 
14.240. - Compatibility. 
This Ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this Ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
14.250. - Severability 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivisions or clause of this Ordinance. 
14.260. - Stormwater Management design manual. 
The City will utilize the policy, design criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the GSMM. A copy of the GSMM can be viewed in the office of the City's Department of Public Works or can be accessed at www.georgiastormwater.com. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

14.310. - Permit Application Requirements. 
No Owner or Developer shall perform any Land Development Activity without first meeting the requirements of this Ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this Ordinance, any owner or developer proposing a Land Development Activity shall submit a permit application to the City on a form provided for that purpose that can be obtained from the Department of Community Development. Unless otherwise exempted by this Ordinance, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater Management plan in accordance with section 14.320; 
(2)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Article V, if applicable; 
(3)  Permit application and plan review fees. 
14.320. - Stormwater Management Plan Requirements. 
The Stormwater Management plan shall detail how Post-Development Stormwater Runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this chapter, including the performance criteria set forth in Article IV, Stormwater Development Standards. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered Professional Engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all Stormwater Management Facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the GSMM. 
The Stormwater Management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this chapter are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse Post-Development Stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed Stormwater Management System. The plan shall include all of the information required in the Stormwater Management site plan checklist found in the GSMM. This includes: 
1.  Common address and legal description of site. 
2.  Vicinity Map. 
3.  Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis: The existing condition hydrologic analysis for Stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing Stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
4.  Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis: The Post-Development hydrologic analysis for Stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the Post-Development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of Post-Development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the Post-Development Stormwater Management performance criteria in Article IV; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Article IV must be met for the Stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
5.  Stormwater Management System: The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed Post-Development Stormwater Management System, which shall include: 
a.  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the Stormwater Management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural Stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
b.  A narrative describing how the selected structural Stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
c.  Cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural Stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
d.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the Stormwater Management System for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
e.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the Stormwater Management System adequately meets the Post-Development Stormwater Management performance criteria in Article V of this chapter; 
f.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed Stormwater conveyance elements including Stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and, 
g.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the Stormwater Management System corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local Greenspace protection plan. 
6.  Post-Development Downstream Analysis: A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of Post-Development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
7.  Construction-Phase Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan written in accordance with Chapter IV of this Ordinance or a NPDES Permit for Construction Activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent Stormwater controls. 
8.  Landscaping and Open Space Plan: A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to Stormwater Management Facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: 
a.  The arrangement of planted areas, natural and Greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
b.  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
c.  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; 
d.  Density of plantings; 
e.  Descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and, 
f.  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the Stormwater Management Facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
9.  Operations and Maintenance Plan: Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for Stormwater Management Facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a Stormwater Management Facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
10.  Maintenance Access Easements: The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to Stormwater Management Facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
11.  Inspection and Maintenance Agreements: Unless an on-site Stormwater Management Facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site Stormwater Management Facility or practice (approved template located in Appendix D of the Land Development Ordinance). 
12.  Evidence of Acquisition of Applicable Local and Non-local Permits: The applicant (and their Professional Engineer) shall certify and provide documentation to the City that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the Stormwater Management plan. 
13.  Modifications for Off-Site Facilities (if applicable): The Stormwater Management plan for each land development project shall provide for Stormwater Management Measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage Stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of Stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional Stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A Stormwater Management plan must be submitted to the City which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of State water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
14.330. - Stormwater Management Inspection and Maintenance Agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a Stormwater Management Facility or practice hereunder and for which the City requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site Stormwater Management Facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement (see Appendix D of the Land Development Ordinance), and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the Community Development Department prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the Stormwater Management Facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the Stormwater Management Facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
The City, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future Stormwater Management Facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this Ordinance and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all Stormwater Management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance: 

14.410. - Water Quality. 
All Stormwater Runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a Stormwater Management System complies with this requirement if: 
1.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the GSMM; 
2.  Appropriate structural Stormwater controls or Nonstructural Practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the GSMM; and, 
3.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural Stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
14.420. - Stream Channel Protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three (3) approaches: 
1.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer. 
2.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be waived by the Development Process Committee for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, lakes, estuaries, or tidal waters where the reduction in the smaller flows will not have an impact on streambank or channel integrity. 
3.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
14.430. - Overbank Flooding Protection. 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the Post-Development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm under section 14.420 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the twenty-five-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the Development Process Committee for sites where the Post-Development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled Post-Development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled Post-Development conditions. 
14.440. - Extreme Flooding Protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the Development Process Committee for sites where the Post-Development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled Post-Development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled Post-Development conditions. 
14.450. - Structural Stormwater Controls. 
All structural Stormwater Management Facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the GSMM, adopted by reference in Article II of this chapter. All structural Stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural Stormwater controls not included in the GSMM, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City before being included in the design of a Stormwater Management System. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of Stormwater Runoff or increased non-point source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the GSMM for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural Stormwater control. 
14.460. - Stormwater Credits for Nonstructural Measures. 
The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required by this article. The applicant may, if approved by the City, take credit for the use of Stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the GSMM. 
14.470. - Drainage System Guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, Stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one (1) parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Methods to calculate Stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Stormwater design manual; 
2.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the Stormwater Management plan using the methods included in the GSMM; and, 
3.  Design and construction of Stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the GSMM. 
14.480. - Dam Safety Standards. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

14.510. - Construction Inspections. 
Inspections to Ensure Plan Compliance During Construction 
Periodic inspections of the Stormwater Management System construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by them. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved Stormwater Management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
1.  The date and location of the inspection; 
2.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved Stormwater Management plan; 
3.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
4.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved Stormwater Management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
Final Inspection and As Built Plans 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved Stormwater Management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any Stormwater Management Facilities, or practices, after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all Stormwater Management Facilities and practices and must be certified by a Professional Engineer. See Chapter III of this Land Development Ordinance for specific submittal requirements. A final inspection by the Community Development Department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
14.520. - Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance. 
Long-Term Maintenance and Inspection 
Stormwater Management Facilities, and practices included in a Stormwater Management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement, must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this Ordinance. 
A Stormwater Management Facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the Stormwater Management Facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. 
The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City, may correct the violation as described in the "Failure to Maintain" section below. 
Inspection programs by the City may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in Stormwater Management Facilities; and evaluating the condition of Stormwater Management Facilities and practices. 
Right-of-Entry for Inspection 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this Ordinance is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this Ordinance. 
Records of Maintenance Activities 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a Stormwater Management Facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City. 
Failure to Maintain 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City, after thirty (30) days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND LIABILITY 

14.610. - Violations. 
Upon determination that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a Permit, an approved Stormwater Management plan or the provisions of this Ordinance, the Community Development Department, shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured a Permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the Owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the Permit, the Stormwater Management plan or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Community Development Department, by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation. 
14.620. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Community Development Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop Work Order. The Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The Community Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has other wise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the Land Disturbance Permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the Community Development Department in its sole discretion may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures in the time frame set forth in the notice of violation or if no time frame is stated, fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the Community Development Department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Community Development Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the Community Development Department in its sole discretion may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Ordinance, the Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Woodstock Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation remains uncured shall constitute a separate offense. 
14.630. - Property Owner Liability; Supplemental Charges. 
Any person in violation of any portion of this article shall pay for all costs associated with the violation, including, but not limited to, sampling, testing, containment, cleanup, injury, legal and any other costs. 
Chapter XV - STREET, SIDEWALK, TRAIL, AND ADDITIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4010, § 1, adopted July 11, 2016, renamed Ch. XV from "Street Lighting Standards" to "Street, Sidewalk, Trail, and Additional Infrastructure Standards." An ordinance adopted June 8, 2015(4) repealed the former Ch. XV, §§ 15.100—15.180, and enacted a new Art. XV as set out herein. The former Ch. XV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the publication of this Land Development Ordinance. 

ARTICLE I. - STREET LIGHTING STANDARDS 

15.100. - Conformance by Developer: Acceptance of Public Ways. 
1.  The owner, developer or other person developing a subdivision is required to provide street light services and shall be required to conform to all of the standards herein provided for and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement Department prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
2.  The owner, developer or other person developing a shopping center, industrial park, office park or like development, shall install street lights along public rights-of-way adjoining that property in conformance with the standards herein provided for; and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement Department prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
3.  The Building Inspector shall not accept any facilities proposed to be dedicated until such time as the provisions hereof have been complied with. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.101. - Lighting in Developments Other than Single-Family Residential. 
Street lighting in developments other than single-family residential shall be permitted only: 
1.  With the approval of the Building Inspector subject to the safety, economic and other factors involved; and 
2.  Upon final approval by the City; and 
3.  Upon compliance with the standards herein provided for. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.102. - Installation and Operation Standards Adopted: Exceptions. 
In order to insure adequate illumination of public right-of-way and promote safety and security. The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standard Institute (1983), as amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the City with the following exceptions: 
1.  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 

 
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third (0.33) of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be not less than one-sixth (0.166) of this average. 
2.  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the Code Enforcement Department for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the Building Inspector disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the Building Inspector may be appealed to the City Manager. 
If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the Building Inspector, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the Building Inspector within thirty (30) days from the date following the written notice of disapproval. It shall be the responsibility of the Building Inspector to transmit forthwith to the City Manager all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, and to insure that the appeal is promptly handled. The City Manager may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. 
3.  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as "security lights" or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public street, shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite for the street, and shall be oriented in such a manner to insure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from the objectionable glare. The approval of the Building Inspector shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
4.  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.103. - Exceptions to Terms of Article. 
The City may grant exceptions to the literal terms of this article where special conditions or hardships exist. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.104. - Federal, State Laws to Prevail in Conflicts. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the City that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.105. - Right of Appeal. 
Any person or agency dissatisfied with any decision or action of the City Manager shall have the right to appeal in writing from said decision to the City Council within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision or action. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.106. - Availability of Adopted Standards. 
The American National Standards Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1983), as amended, shall be made available by the Building Inspector for public reference. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.107. - Procedures to be Followed by Subdivision Developers. 
Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions except, however, subdivisions containing only lots which are five (5) acres or larger are exempted from the requirements of this paragraph. The term "subdivision" shall be as defined in Chapter II of this Code. At the time of and as a requirement of the submission of the final plat, the developer shall: 
1.  Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the subdivision. This drawing must be approved by the Building Inspector prior to obtaining any building permit within that subdivision. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facility and by the City. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet above the ground, and shall have approximate arm length to place the light over the street. No arm shall be less than two and one-half (2.5) feet long. One (1) light shall be located at each street intersection within the subdivision. 
2.  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures, and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
3.  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the Building Inspector. 
4.  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.108. - Subdivisions with Underground Electric. 
In subdivisions utilizing underground cable for electrical service, the developers shall be required to accomplish the same items listed in the preceding section hereof. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.109—15.199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
All streets, whether public or private, which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a major subdivision shall comply with the following design and improvement standards. See the end of this chapter for standard street design details. 

15.200. - General Subdivision Standards. 
1.  Access to Arterials and Collectors. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector route, the Development Process Committee may require that access to such street be limited by: 
a.  The subdivision of lots so as to back on the arterial or collector route and front on a parallel minor route; 
b.  A series of cul-de-sac, "U" shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial or collector route; or 
c.  A marginal access or service street, separate from the arterial or collector route by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points. 
d.  The number of residential or local streets entering on arterial or collector routes shall be kept to a minimum. 
2.  Reserve Strips. The creation of reserve strips adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street shall not be permitted. 
3.  Development Entrances. All proposed developments such as residential, commercial, industrial subdivisions, apartments, commercial lots, mobile home parks, private subdivisions, etc., shall construct acceleration/deceleration to the following requirements: 
a.  Residential Subdivisions. 
1.  Residential subdivisions not exceeding twenty (20) lots whose entrance is on an unclassified or minor collector county or city road or street shall install offset radii and fifty-foot tapers as shown in the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1. 
2.  All other residential subdivisions shall construct full acceleration/deceleration lanes to conform to the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1. 
3.  Residential subdivision exceeding two hundred (200) lots shall be required to provide the Public Works Director with a traffic study. 
b.  Commercial/industrial subdivisions exceeding two (2) businesses. 
1.  Full acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be installed per the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1. 
2.  If the Public Works Director determines that the project's size warrants a center turn lane and longer acceleration/deceleration lanes, then this may be required: 
c.  Small commercial businesses (two (2) or less). 
1.  On unclassified and minor collector roads offset radii and fifty-foot tapers per the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1. 
2.  Small commercial businesses shall install full acceleration/deceleration lanes per the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1, if accessing a major collector or an arterial road. 
3.  Commercial businesses on corner lots, which have frontage on interior subdivision streets, shall have access only from the main city or county road or street. 
4.  Commercial businesses on corner lots, which have frontage on an unclassified or minor collector city or county road or street, shall install an additional lane out to the intersection. 
d.  Large Commercial Businesses. The Public Works Director may require a center turn lane or longer acceleration/deceleration lanes if the traffic the project generates and the existing city or county road or street warrants it. 
e.  Access onto a state highway shall meet existing Georgia DOT requirements only, except that the entrance must be paved. A copy of the Georgia DOT permit shall be submitted to the Community Development Department before the plans can be approved. 
f.  The developer shall be required to upgrade the existing city road or street to meet the sight distance and lane requirements of the applicable herein standard detail and Section 15.201.1. In cases involving rock cuts, deep fills or cuts, proximity to flood plain, etc., the requirements of pavement widening for full acceleration/deceleration lanes may be modified or waived by the Public Works Director. 
4.  Intersections. Intersections of new street in a subdivision shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Street shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees shall not be permitted. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one (1) point unless specifically approved by the Public Works Director. 
b.  Proposed new intersections along one (1) side of an existing street shall coincide, wherever practicable, with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Jogs within street shaving center line offsets of less than on hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected streets have separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect arterial or collector routes, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of arterial or collector streets shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart. 
c.  Where a street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting sight distance, the subdivider shall cut such ground or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the street right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance. 
d.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two (2) percent grade for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the back of curb of the intersecting street. 
5.  Street Names. Street or roads that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing named streets, shall bear that name. The names of new streets and roads shall be subject to the approval of the Development Process Committee and shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place, or court. 
6.  Railroads and Limited Access Highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows: 
a.  In residential areas, a buffer strip at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth in addition to the normally required depth of the lot may be required adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening; the placement of structures within said strip is prohibited." 
b.  In commercial or industrial areas, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth of commercial or industrial sites. 
c.  Streets parallel to a railroad, where intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade, shall to the extent practical, be at a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
7.  Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the Public Works Director, shall be constructed at the full expense of the subdivider without reimbursement from the City. The sharing of the expenses for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the Public Works Director, shall be fixed by special agreement between the City and the subdivider. The cost shall be charged to the subdivider pro-rata as to the percentage of his development so served. 
The engineering design of all bridges shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for review and approval prior to construction. The Public Works Director may consult with consultants or state agencies on the design of proposed bridges. 
8.  Private Streets. Private streets may be permitted by the Public Works Director in developments where controlled access or privacy is desired by the developer, provided such streets meet the standards of a public street and that a legal provision is drawn up that will guarantee the continued maintenance of the streets. 
9.  Half Streets. Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
10.  Split Level Streets. Streets which are constructed so as to have two (2) traffic ways, each at different level within the same right-of-way shall provide such additional right-of-way as necessary to meet the requirements of and a paved traffic surface meeting the requirements of a marginal access street on each level. The slope between the two (2) traffic ways should not be less than two (2) to one (1). 
11.  One-Way Streets. If permitted by the Public Works Director, one-way street shall meet the minimum right-of-way and pavement widths of a marginal access street and have a pavement width of eighteen (18) feet. 
12.  Alleys. Alleys are permitted in any zoning category. 
13.  Dams. No city road or street shall be constructed on or across an existing or proposed dam. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.201. - Design Standards. 
Design of proposed roads, streets and storm drains shall conform to these specifications: 
1.  Geometric Standards. 
a.  Required Speed Design/Maximum Grades. Minimum design speeds and maximum grades in the City by street classification shall be as prescribed in AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highway and Streets, 1990 Edition ("The Green Book") and as follows: 

 
* Maximum grade of eighteen (18) percent are allowable on vertical tangents of two hundred (200) feet or less in length. Maximum grade on any street without curb and gutter shall be fourteen (14) percent. Minimum grade on cul-de-sac shall be one and one-half (1.5) percent to maintain one (1) percent in curb line. 
b.  Horizontal Curves. Horizontal curves and super elevation shall be as prescribed in AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1990 ("The Green Book") and as follows: 

 
Super elevation may be eliminated on streets with speed design thirty (30) mph or less. Minimum tangent between reverse curves on streets without super elevation shall be fifty (50) feet. Tangent between reverse curves on street with super elevation shall be sufficient to accommodate full super elevation run out as prescribed by "The Green Book". 
c.  Vertical Curves. Vertical curves shall be as prescribed in "The Green Book". Length of vertical curves shall be determined by the formula L=KA where: 

 
  

 
d.  Sight Distance. Horizontal sight distance of intersections shall be measured from the centerline of ingress/egress road extending to either side of abutting street along thoroughfare as shown in standard detail for Subdivision Entrance Sight Distance (horizontal). See the end of this chapter for design standard details. Vertical sight distance shall be measured as shown in standard detail for Subdivision Entrance Sight Distance (vertical). Minimum stopping sight distance shall be: 

 
The design speed for sight distance at subdivision entrance intersections shall be the existing road speed limit plus five (5) mph. 
2.  Storm Drainage Design Standards. 
a.  Storm drainage design shall comply with the requirements of Chapter XIII, flood damage prevention standards, and Chapter XIV, storm water standards. 
b.  Permitting, sizing and location of all existing and proposed drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor, subject to approval by the Public Works Department. 
c.  Storm drainage pipes, also known as the stormwater conveyance system, shall be designed according to the methods and criteria found in the stormwater management design manual and Article IV of Chapter XIV, stormwater standards, of this chapter. 
d.  Corrugated metal pipes (CMP) are not permitted within City right-of-way. Reinforced concrete pipes (RCP) shall be used within City right-of-way. High density polyethylene pipes (HDPE) may be used within City right-of-way but are not permitted within the roadway. The use of HDPE is expressly limited to the type with a smooth interior. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A); Ord. of 11-14-2016(2), § 1) 
15.202. - Construction. 
Road, street and storm drainage construction shall comply with the following requirements; and with the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges of the Georgia Department of Transportation as amended by the latest published supplemental specifications, if any, of the Department of Transportation, unless otherwise specifically set forth herein. 
1.  Clearing and Grubbing. The entire area within construction limits shall be cleared and grubbed. Disposal of all debris shall be done in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. No burial of debris within the right-of-way will be permitted. 
2.  Grading. 
a.  Grading shall be accurately done to the lines and grades shown on the plans. Embankments shall be compacted to a density of ninety-five (95) percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHO Method T-99. If it is necessary in order to obtain this compaction, the contractor shall add moisture to the material as placed. 

 
The depth of cut referred to above shall be constructed to be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one (1) section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or full. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon written approval of the Public Works Director. 
c.  Typical grading section shall be as shown in the applicable herein standard detail for residential or commercial/industrial street. 
3.  Storm Drainage. Storm drainage shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction plans. Trench construction and back fill shall be in accordance with Georgia DOT Standard No. 1030-D (latest version). Deviation from storm drainage as shown in the approved plans is not permitted unless specifically approved by the Public Works Director prior to installation. 
a.  Cross Drain Pipes: 
1.  Not less than eighteen (18) inches in size when under the street. 
2.  Have headwalls or flared end sections of an approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. 
3.  Extend twenty (20) feet past the rear of the building if thirty (30) inches or smaller. 
4.  Extend from edge of right-of-way to edge or right-of-way if larger than thirty (30) inches. 
5.  Maximum continuous length of pipe shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
6.  Junction boxes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of Georgia DOT Standard 1030D (or most current). 
b.  Materials and Installation: 
1.  Concrete Pipes: 
A.  Shall be reinforced within the right-of-way but may be plain pipe outside of the right-of-way, if diameter is eighteen (18) inches or less. 
B.  Flat bottom and circular pipe sections shall be laid in a preparation trench with the socket ends pointing upstream. Sections may be joined by mortar joins, bituminous plastic cement joints, rubber-type gasket joints, O-ring gasket joints, or pre-formed plastic gasket joints. In bituminous plaster cement joints, the annular space shall be filled with joint material and the inside of each joint wiped smooth. Mortar joints shall be thoroughly wetted before filling with joint material. After the initial set, the mortar on the outside shall be protected from the air and sun with thoroughly wet earth or burlap cover. Rubber-type, O-Ring, and pre-formed plastic gasket joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
2.  Metal Pipe: 
A.  Metal pipe shall be fully coated inside or outside of the right-of-way. 
B.  Workmanship and Finish. Culvert pipe on which the shelter coating has been bruised or broken either in the shop or in shipping, or which shows defective workmanship, shall be rejected. Among others, the following defects are specified as constituting poor workmanship and the presence of any or all of them in any culvert pipe shall constitute sufficient cause for rejection: 
• Uneven laps; 
• Elliptical shaping; 
• Variation from a straight centerline; 
• Ragged or diagonal sheared edges; 
• Loose, unevenly lined or space rivets; 
• Poorly formed rivet heads; 
• Unfinished ends; 
• Illegible brand; 
• Lack of rigidity; 
• Bruised, scale, or broken shelter coating; 
• Dents or bends in the metal itself. 
C.  Coupling Bands. Field joint shall be made with bands of the same metal as the culverts. The bands shall be not less than seven (7) inches wide for diameters of eight (8) inches to thirty (30) inches, inclusive: not less than twelve (12) inches wide for culverts with diameters thirty-six (36) inches to sixty (60) inches. Such bands shall be so constructed as to lap on an equal portion of each of the culvert sections to be connected at the ends by galvanized angles having minimum dimensions of two (2) inches by three-sixteenths (0.1875) inches. The seven (7) band shall have a least two (2) galvanized bolts not less than one-half (0.5) inch in diameter. The one-half (0.5) band shall have three (3) and twenty-four (24) inch band shall have five (5) one-half (0.5) inch bolts. Other equally effective methods of connecting the coupling bands may be used if approved by the Public Works Director. 
D.  Gauge Determination and Tolerances. The gauge of the culvert metal will be determined from the thickness of the galvanized sheets. The mean thickness and the permissible variations therefrom for each gauge are as shown: 
WEIGHT AND GAUGE TOLERANCES 

 
*Thickness measured on tangent of corrugation. 
E.  Corrugated Aluminum or Steel Pipe and Pipe-Arches. Pipe sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and with longitudinal joints at the sides. Coupling bands, fastened by two (2) or more bolts, shall join the section. The space between adjoining sections shall be not more than the width of one (1) corrugation. 
F.  All damaged spots in galvanized coating that expose the base metal shall be required before the structure is back filled. All damage spots in bituminous coating that expose the base metal shall be recoated with asphalt before the structure is back filled. 
3.  Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted back fill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. Any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe shall be removed by the developer as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. 
4.  Minimum clearances are: 
A.  One (1) foot between the bottom of the base or sub-base, if used, and the exterior crown of the culvert. 
B.  A minimum of one-half (0.5) foot between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
5.  Storm drainage pipe shall be bedded in Type 57 gravel, if firm soil is not available. 
6.  A certification by the supplier of the pipe specifications for each pipe shall be required before installation. 
A.  Bridge piling shall be driven to Georgia DOT standards for loading. Certification of pile load shall be by a professional engineer. 
B.  Changes in construction plans caused by field conditions shall be made at the direction of the Public Works Director with the cost of such changes to be paid by the developer. 
C.  Ditches. Where storm water velocity exceeds five (5.0) fps, the ditch shall be rip-rapped. 
4.  Sub-Grade. Sub-grade width shall include at least one (1) foot on each side outside the width of the base course, or one (1) foot on each side outside the location of curb and gutter forms. 
a.  After the earthwork has been completed, all storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed under the roadbed, and the back fill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the sub-grade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross section shown on the plans. 
b.  If any sections of the sub-grade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the authorized representative of the City and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
c.  When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of No. 3 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer so desires. This material shall not be used as part of the base material. It may be worked into the sub-grade, if not, shall be removed before the base course is placed. 
d.  The top six (6) inches of sub-grade shall be compacted to a density of one hundred (100) percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99. The contractor shall add moisture if necessary to obtain this compaction. 
e.  Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
1.  Provide break in the berm section when the curbing has not been constructed. 
2.  Use two and one-half (2.5) inches of six-inch pipe sections to provide drainage under curb to side slopes. 
5.  Curb and Gutter. Shall be vertical or roll-back type having the sections and dimensions shown in the applicable detail herein. 
a.  Residential Curb: 
1.  Concrete shall have a minimum strength of two and one-half (2.5) PSI at twenty-eight (28) days. 
2.  Typical minimum section shall be six (6) inches by twenty four (24) inches by nine (9) inches (6" x 24" x 9"). 
b.  Industrial or Commercial Curbing: 
1.  Concrete shall have a minimum strength of three thousand (3,000) PSI at twenty-eight (28) days. 
2.  Typical minimum section shall be six (6) inches by thirty (30) inches by nine (9) inches (6" x 30" x 9"). 
c.  Construction Methods: 
1.  Line and grade shall be set by developer's engineer or surveyor. 
2.  One-half (0.5) inch expansion joints of pre-molded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed fifty (50) feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
6.  Base and Pavement for Residential/Industrial/Commercial Streets. 
a.  Graded aggregate base material is subject to approval by the Public Works Director. Gradation and compaction test reports shall be provided to the Public Works Department. 
b.  After aggregate base has been placed, spread, shaped, and compacted; it shall be inspected by the Public Works Department. After conditional acceptance, paving can begin. 
c.  After the prime has cured for twenty-four (24) hours, it shall be inspected and by the Public Works Department. After conditional acceptance, paving can begin. 
d.  Hot-mix asphaltic concrete is subject to approval by the Public Works Director. Gradation, asphalt cement content and compaction test reports shall be provided to the Public Works Department. 
7.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets in residential developments and along both sides of the main connector road of commercial/industrial developments, or where deemed necessary by recommendation of the Public Works Director. 
Where a new development or parcel to be developed abuts an existing city or county roadway, curb and sidewalk shall be installed along the entire roadway frontage of the property. 
Sidewalks shall be located and designed as follows: 
a.  Sidewalks shall not be less than one (1) foot from the right-of-way line to prevent interference with fencing, walls, hedges, landscaping, or structures placed on the property line at a later date. 
b.  Sidewalks shall run parallel to the street. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete with twenty-five hundred (2,500) PSI strength at twenty-eight (28) days. 
e.  All driveway aprons over sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete. 
f.  Sidewalks shall be properly back filled and landscaped. 
g.  On-site sidewalks or service walks are required for convenience and access to all dwelling units and other principal buildings from streets, driveways, parking areas or garages and for convenient pedestrian circulation and access to all site facilities. 
h.  Sidewalks and walks shall be laterally pitched at a slope of not less than one-quarter (0.25) inch per foot in order to provide adequate surface drainage. 
i.  Sidewalks and walks shall not exceed a seven (7) percent grade. Where sidewalks exceed five (5) percent grade, a non-slip surface texture shall be used. 
j.  Sidewalks and walks adjacent to parking areas shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide in order to prevent car overhang from restricting pedestrian movement along the sidewalk. 
k.  Width, alignment and grade of sidewalks and service walkways shall provide safety, convenience and good appearance for pedestrian traffic. Small jogs or changes in the alignment shall be avoided. 
l.  The alignment and grade of sidewalks and service walkways shall be coordinated with the site grading plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water on or across the sidewalk and to prevent the ponding of surface water by the sidewalk. 
m.  All sidewalks shall meet Americans with Disabilities Act requirements for handicapped accessibility. 
8.  Utility Cuts in Existing Streets. All utility construction plans within City right-of-way shall be revised and approved by the Public Works Director. All storm drainage construction shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director. 
a.  No existing city road or street shall be open cut unless warranted by unusual circumstances. Any open cut shall be authorized in advance by the Public Works Director. Storm drains fifty-six (56) inches and smaller shall be bored. 
b.  If open cutting is authorized by the appropriate city department, the trenches shall be: 
1.  Compacted to one hundred (100) percent if under pavement and to ninety-five (95) percent if not under pavement. 
2.  Cut, back filled and compacted in accordance with Georgia DOT Standard Number 1401 with a surface course consisting of two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete Georgia DOT type "E" mix. 
9.  Signs. The developer shall install street name signs, traffic regulatory signs, and any other signs deemed necessary by the Public Works Director. 
a.  Street signs shall be green "Scotchlite" with white legends mounted on ten-foot round posts. 
b.  Traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices", and shall be approved by the Public Works Director as to design, material and method of installation. 
10.  Pavement Marking. Pavement marking as prescribed by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be required on: 
a.  All residential streets (whether local, minor collector or major collector) where the speed design is thirty-five (35) mph or greater. 
b.  All industrial/commercial road and streets. 
c.  All roads and street with more than one (1) lane in each direction. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.203—15.299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS 

15.300. - Required Access. 
1.  Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with an asphalt, concrete or other approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least seventy-five thousand (75,000) pounds (34,050 kg). 
2.  Accessibility for fire fighting equipment shall be provided and maintained throughout all stages of construction and occupancy. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.301. - Minimum Specifications. 
1.  Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed ten (10) percent in grade. Grades steeper than ten (10) percent may be approved by fire chief. 
2.  Turning Radius. The customary turning radius of a fire apparatus access road is twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.  Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with the following table. 

 
4.  Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria: 
a.  The minimum gate width shall be twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type. 
c.  Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by one (1) person. 
d.  Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective. 
e.  Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire department personnel or emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall be approved by the fire code official. 
f.  Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain and padlock unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools or when a key box containing the key(s) to the lock is installed at the gate location. 
g.  Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the fire code official. 
h.  Electric gate operators where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. 
i.  Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200. 
j.  A Knox key shall be provided where access control gates limit fire department access. 
k.  Where structures protected by automatic alarm systems have access control gates, the gates shall automatically open upon transmission of an alarm. 
5.  Signs. Where required by the fire code official, fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING—FIRE LANE signs complying with Illustration 2. Signs shall have a minimum dimension of twelve (12) inches wide by eighteen (18) inches high and have red letters on a white reflective background. Signs shall be posted on one (1) or both sides of the fire apparatus road as required by this chapter. 
a.  Fire lane signs as specified in this chapter shall be posted on both sides of fire apparatus access roads that are twenty (20) to twenty-six (26) feet wide. 
b.  Fire lane signs as specified in this chapter shall be posted on one (1) side of fire apparatus access roads that are more than twenty-six (26) feet wide and less than thirty-two (32) feet wide. 
6.  Provide reasonable accessibility to and around all buildings for fire fighting equipment, including fire department ground ladders on multiple-story projects. A minimum of ten (10) feet on all sides of the building shall be provided to provide such access. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
Note— The illustrations referenced in this section are not set out at length in this Code, but may be found in the offices of the City. 
15.302. - Commercial and Industrial Developments. 
1.  Buildings or facilities exceeding three (3) stories or thirty (30) feet in height shall have at least two (2) means of fire apparatus access for each structure. 
2.  Buildings or facilities having gross building area of more than sixty-two thousand (62,000) square feet shall be provided with two (2) separate and approved fire apparatus access roads. However, projects having a gross building area of up to one hundred twenty-four thousand (124,000) square feet that have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems are exempt from this requirement. 
3.  Where two (2) fire apparatus access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half (0.5) of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the lot or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses, except as approved by the Development Process Committee. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.303. - Aerial Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
1.  Where the vertical distance between the grade plane and the highest roof surface exceeds thirty (30) feet, approved aerial fire apparatus roads shall be provided. For purposes of this section, the highest roof surface shall be determined by measurement to the eave of a pitched roof, the intersection of the roof to the exterior wall, or the top of parapet walls, whichever is greater. 
2.  Aerial fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width of twenty-six (26) feet, exclusive of shoulders, in the immediate vicinity of the building or portion thereof. However, where two (2) separate fire apparatus access roads are provided in accordance with all the other provisions contained in this section the width of the aerial fire apparatus access roads may be reduced to twenty (20) feet. 
3.  At least one (1) of the required access routes meeting this condition shall be located within a minimum of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum of thirty (30) feet from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the building. The side of the building on which the aerial fire apparatus access road is positioned shall be approved by the fire code official. 
4.  Overhead utility and power lines shall not be located over the aerial fire apparatus road or between the aerial fire apparatus access road and the building. Other obstructions shall be permitted to be placed with approval of the fire code official. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.304. - Multiple-Family Residential Developments. 
Multiple-family residential projects having more than one hundred (100) dwelling units shall be equipped throughout with two (2) separate and approved fire apparatus access roads. Projects having up to two hundred (200) dwelling units may have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings, including nonresidential occupancies, are equipped with approved automatic sprinkler systems. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.305. - One- or Two-Family Residential Developments. 
Development of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceeds thirty (30) shall be provided with two (2) separate and approved fire apparatus access roads and shall meet the requirements of Section 15.302(3). 
1.  Where there are more than thirty (30) dwelling units on a single public or private fire apparatus access road and all dwelling units are equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system, access from two (2) directions shall not be required. 
2.  The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access road shall not be increased unless fire apparatus access roads will connect with future development, as determined by the fire code official. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.306—15.399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ASPHALT TRAIL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

15.400. - Asphalt Trails. 
15.401. - Scope. 
1.  Asphalt trails shall be laid out and constructed so as to be woven through the woods, between the trees and over the root systems. This is a careful, interactive process between the Woodstock Parks and Recreation Department, Woodstock Public Works Department (City), contractor, and surveyor. 
2.  Asphalt trails shall be constructed to the desired width of ten (10) feet. If site conditions prohibit the construction of a ten (10) foot wide trail, a minimum width of eight (8) feet may be constructed with City approval. 
3.  Asphalt trails shall be constructed in a manner that does not disrupt the tree root systems or require unnecessary removal of trees or cutting of roots. All ground disturbances should be outside of the tree's drip line where practical. Where this is impractical, encroachments into the drip line may be approved by the City. Drip line is defined as the area of ground perpendicularly below the outer reaches of the tree's branches. This specification does not prevent any matters allowed under the Tree Preservation Standards. 
4.  Asphalt trails shall be constructed at the locations and to the dimensions, lines, grades and cross section indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City and in conformity with the provisions and requirements set out in these specifications. 
5.  Asphalt trails shall include all the necessary excavation, unless otherwise indicated, sub-grade and sub-base preparation, backfilling, final clearing up and completing all incidentals thereto, as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1(Exh. A), 7-11-2016) 
15.402. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Use only materials that are furnished by a bulk asphalt concrete producer regularly engaged in production of hot-mix, hot-laid asphalt concrete. 
2.  Comply with applicable requirements of the current approved edition of Georgia Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications—Construction of Transportation Systems. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1(Exh, A), 7-11-2016) 
15.403. - Protection. 
1.  Contractor shall not encroach upon any areas outside the proposed asphalt trail surface and shoulder. Equipment shall not twist, turn or backup into woodland spaces outside of the area of the graded trail unless approved by the City. 
2.  Contractor shall not park vehicles, store or stage any materials or equipment under the overhanging branches or the drip line of trees to be saved. 
3.  Contractor shall review all construction adjustment considerations with the City prior to implementation. 
4.  Contractor shall keep detailed field notes of all adjustments and changes and make them available at any time. 
5.  Contractor shall utilize gravel fill base material when paved surfaces or trails are placed over any tree root system or under any tree canopy. Reference details on construction documents. 
6.  Trees and roots shall be protected from damage both above grade and below ground by using the development process outlined in Part 3—Execution. 
7.  After final rolling, do not permit vehicular traffic on asphalt concrete pavement until it has cooled and hardened, and in no case, no sooner than six (6) hours. 
8.  Do not permit construction traffic on finished asphalt trail surfaces. 
9.  Provide barricades and warning devices as required to protect pavement and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1(Exh. A), 7-11-2016) 
15.404. - Submittals. 
1.  Provide certificates stating that the materials supplied comply with specifications. Certificates shall be signed by the asphalt producer and the contractor. 
2.  Application instructions and a description as well as other data relative to the contractor's application equipment and methods shall be submitted to the City for approval. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.405. - Conditions. 
1.  Weather Limitations: 
a.  Apply bituminous prime and tack coats only when the ambient temperature in the shade has been at least forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Do not conduct paving operations when surface is wet, frozen, or contains excess moisture that would prevent uniform distribution and required penetration. 
c.  Construct asphaltic courses only when atmospheric temperature in the shade is above thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit, when the underlying base is dry and when the weather is not rainy. 
d.  Place base course when air temperature is above thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit and rising. No base course shall be placed on a frozen, saturated, or otherwise unsuitable sub-grade material. 
2.  Grade control: establish and maintain the required lines and grades for each course during construction operations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.406. - Inspection and Testing. 
1.  Pavement and base testing will be performed by an independent testing laboratory selected by the owner. 
2.  Trail alignment shall be hand-probed immediately after staking by a geotechnical consultant to determine subsurface structural conditions. 
3.  The testing agency shall test in-place graded aggregate base courses for compliance with specified compaction, thickness and surface smoothness requirements. 
4.  The testing agency shall take one (1) four (4) inch diameter core per fifty (50) linear feet of asphalt paved areas at locations selected by the City for density and thickness tests. Repair holes resulting from coring to match existing paving. 
5.  Compaction: 
a.  Graded Aggregate Base: Minimum acceptable density shall be ninety-eight (98) percent of maximum dry density in accordance with ASTM D 698. Conduct one (1) test for each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square yards of in-place material, but in no case less than one (1) daily for each layer. Test density of graded aggregate base according to ASTM D 2167. 
b.  Asphaltic Concrete: Compare density of in-place material against laboratory specimen of same mixture. Minimum acceptable density of in-place material shall be ninety-four (94) percent of the calculated voidless density based upon the effective specific gravity of the aggregate used. It is intended that acceptance density testing will be accomplished while the bituminous mixture is hot enough to permit further densification if such is shown to be necessary. If the density does not conform to the requirements stated herein above, the contractor shall continue compactive effort until the required density is obtained. 
6.  Pavement Thickness: Inspect the cores of the base and surface courses to determine the average thickness of the course. If the average thickness exceeds the allowable values listed below, additional cores shall be made at the contractor's expense to determine the area of deficient thickness. The deficient area shall be corrected by overlay with the same type of mix to the limits as determined by the City. 
a.  Base Course: Six (6) inch. 
b.  Binder Course: Two (2) inch. 
c.  Surface Course: One (1) inch. 
7.  Surface Smoothness: Test finished surface of each asphalt course for smoothness using a ten (10) foot straightedge. Intervals of tests shall be as directed by the owner. Surfaces will not be acceptable if exceeding the following: 
a.  Base Course: One-quarter (0.25) inch in ten (10) feet. 
b.  Binder Course: One-quarter (0.25) inch in ten (10) feet. 
c.  Surface Course: One-eighth (0.125) inch in ten (10) feet. 
8.  Contractor's Duties Relative to Testing: 
a.  Notifying laboratory of conditions requiring testing. 
b.  Coordinating with laboratory for field testing. 
c.  Paying cost for additional testing performed beyond the scope of that required and for retesting where initial tests reveal non-conformance with specified requirements. 
d.  Paying the cost of overlays or pavement removal and replacement, which does not comply with the specified testing limits. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.407. - Products and Materials. 
1.  Staking Materials. Staking materials shall be placed in field according to the plans and shall consist of the following: 
a.  One (1) inch by two (2) inch by three (3) foot (1" x 2" x 3') tall stakes for center line stakeout. 
b.  One (1) inch by two (2) inch by eighteen (18) inch (1" x 2" x 18") short stakes for corners. 
c.  Plastic flagging tape: 
Red—Indicates trees to remove. 
Yellow—Indicates trees to save. 
White—Indicates centerline. 
Pink—Control points. 
d.  Wire flags (pink). 
e.  Two (2) inch by two (2) inch by twelve (12) inch (2" x 2" x 12") hub stakes. 
f.  Mallet—short handle for driving stakes. 
2.  Graded Aggregate Base Course. Graded aggregate base course shall be of uniform quality throughout and shall meet the requirements of Section 815 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
3.  Binder Course. Binder course shall be a uniform quality throughout and conform to the requirements of Section 828 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
4.  Surface Course. Surface course shall be of uniform quality throughout and shall conform to the requirements of Section 828, Type "F" of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
5.  Prime Coat. Prime coat shall conform to the requirements of Section 412 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
6.  Tack Coat. Tack coat shall conform to the requirements of Section 413 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
7.  Gravel. Number 57 stone for root area fill not under trail: gravel shall be of uniform quality throughout and shall meet the requirements of Section 800 for Number 57 Stone, Group II and shall have the following gradation: 

 
8.  Plastic Pipe. Four (4) inch perforated Schedule 40 ultra violet light resistant PVC. 
9.  Geosynthetic Materials. 
a.  Filter Fabric. Filter fabric utilized for separation of aggregate base or controlled fill materials from existing subgrades or sediment deposition shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Section 881.06 for non-woven, needle-punched filter fabrics. The requirements outlined under Item 2.01.I.2 of this specification section will typically be sufficient for most applications. Filter fabric samples, as well as specific manufacturer's property characteristics and installation guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with specific identification of each proposed application. 
b.  Geogrid Reinforcement Materials. Geogrid reinforcement materials utilized for subgrade stabilization applications shall be a regular grid structure formed by biaxially drawing a continuous sheet of select polypropylene material and shall have aperture geometry and rib and junction cross-sections sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the material being reinforced. The geogrid shall have high flexural rigidity and high tensile strength at ribs and junctions of the grid structure. The geogrid shall maintain its reinforcement and interlock capabilities under repeated dynamic loads while in service and shall also be resistant to ultraviolet degradation normally encountered in the material being reinforced. Geogrid reinforcing material samples, as well as specific manufacturer's property characteristics and installation guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.408. - Execution. 
15.409. - Equipment. 
1.  No track type equipment shall be used in the construction of this work. Rubber tire vehicles shall be used exclusively and shall be limited to small back hoes, bobcats, pickup trucks, dump trucks and narrow paving machines of the type used for golf course cart paths equipment shall be a lightweight, small-scale vehicle capable of negotiating eight (8) foot to ten (10) foot wide pathways. 
2.  Asphalt spreader machines shall have a spreader opening width not to exceed eight (8) feet and a total width not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.410. - Layout. 
1.  Contractor shall stake trail coordinate control points as per the plans with hub stakes and tall stakes shall flag stakes with pink tape. 
2.  Contractor shall stake the centerline of the proposed trail layout as per the plans with wire/flag stakes to indicate routes. 
3.  Contractor and a representative from the City shall walk the stakeout to make adjustments to the layout and flag trees to be removed with red tape. 
4.  The owner's surveyor shall make field notes and transfer field adjustments to the construction documents. 
5.  Contractor shall prepare a construction stakeout of the trail based on the revised layout and grading plans. Stakeout shall include horizontal and vertical (i.e., spot elevations) information. 
6.  Contractor and a representative from the City shall walk the stakeout again to make minor horizontal adjustments and to adjust the vertical grading. 
7.  The owner's surveyor shall transfer revised data to the construction documents for contractor's reference. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.411. - Clearing and Grubbing. 
1.  Clearing and grubbing shall be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
2.  Contractor shall remove trees and underbrush from the trail corridor. This shall be accomplished with a rubber tire tractor and bush hog. Small trees shall be cut off flush with the ground. Large trees shall be cut down by hand saws or uprooted and removed by knocking the tree down so that it falls within the trail corridor. All stumps shall be ground down eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches below finished subgrade. Trees shall be cut into pieces and removed by small truck. No dragging of cut trees, tree trunks or limbs shall be permitted. No root rakes shall be permitted. 
3.  Limbs, brush and treetops shall be removed or chipped and stock-piled for later use in areas approved by the City. 
4.  Contractor shall hand rake surface leaf mulch and humus away from trail bed. Contractor shall scatter this material in designated areas that will not be disturbed by construction. Soil mixed with ground up stump litter shall be removed from the trail corridor and not be left under the trail surface. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.412. - Removal of Structures and Obstructions. 
Unless otherwise indicated or stipulated, the removal of structures, obstructions, etc., will be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.413. - Trail and Drainage Excavation. 
Trail and drainage excavation, as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City, shall be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.414. - Embankment Construction. 
Embankment construction, as indicated on the drawings or as indicated by the City, shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the City LDO, Chapter XV, Section 15.202.2. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.415. - Subgrade Preparation. 
1.  As determined necessary by the City, cut roots on the uphill slope prior to grading. Fine grading shall proceed to remove bumps, dips and holes from the trail bed. Stump holes must be filled and compacted. 
2.  The subgrade shall be shaped so that the finished asphalt surface will slope to direct water into the natural drainage swales and conform to natural drainage patterns to the greatest extent possible, within the limits imposed by the drawings and specifications. Cross slope shall be downhill at two (2) percent. 
3.  The subgrade for the trails shall be formed by excavation to a depth equal to the thickness of the asphalt and base course, except where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees. Contractor shall not excavate where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees unless the soils are determined by the geotechnical engineer to be unstable. 
4.  Rough grade of native soil shall be roller compacted to achieve maximum density stated on the details. 
5.  Yielding or unsuitable material shall be removed and backfilled with satisfactory material except where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees. 
6.  Where yielding or unsuitable materials are found and where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees, the geotechnical consultant shall be utilized to determine the subgrade conditions and to verify subgrade preparation specifications. Geotechnical test results for subgrade preparation shall be submitted to the City for any specification revisions prior to the contractor's commencement of work. 
7.  Final subgrade shall conform to the lay of the trail less the depth of the asphalt and specified base. 
8.  For thin-based, light-duty trail, a geotextile fabric shall be placed along the trail prior to placing base material. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.416. - Base Course. 
1.  Contractor shall work from within the proposed edges of the sub base. Compacted base shall extend twelve (12) to eighteen (18) inches outside of the edges of the asphalt paving. 
2.  Contractor shall place a minimum of four (4) inches of graded aggregate base along trail grading, compacted thoroughly and finished to a smooth, unyielding surface and proper line, grade and cross section of the proposed construction. Compaction density shall be shown on the plans or details. 
3.  Except as indicated elsewhere, placement of graded aggregate sub base shall be in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
4.  Where yielding or unsuitable materials are found and where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees, the contractor shall place a special fill material system consisting of, as determined by the geotechnical consultant, varying depths of graded gavel fill placed over geotextile fabrics or geogrid subgrade reinforcements, which are placed on or above the subgrade. The geotechnical consultant shall be utilized to take the soil borings as necessary to determine the subsurface conditions, and to verify that base material specifications and details are sufficient to support the trails and specified uses. Geotechnical test results for base material shall be submitted to the City for any base specification revisions prior to beginning work. 
5.  Drainage pipes, walls, bridge abutments, etc. may be constructed using the trail as an access route only after base cover is placed and compacted. Light duty pipes may be placed prior to rough grading. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.417. - Surface Preparation. 
Contractor shall place asphalt paving over the approved base. 
1.  Loose and Foreign Material: 
a.  Remove loose and foreign material from surface immediately before application of paving. 
b.  Use power brooms or blowers, and hand sweeping as required. 
c.  Do not displace surface material. 
2.  Prime Coat: 
a.  Uniformly apply at a rate of two-tenths (0.20) to five-tenths (0.50) gallons per square yard over compacted and cleaned sub base surface. 
b.  Apply enough material to penetrate and seal, but not flood the surface. 
c.  Allow to cure and dry as long as required to attain proper penetration, and in no case less than twenty-four (24) hours unless otherwise acceptable to the City. 
d.  Blot excess asphalt with just enough sand to prevent pick-up under traffic. 
e.  Remove loose sand before paving. 
3.  Tack Coat: 
a.  Dilute material with equal parts of water and apply to contact surfaces of previously constructed asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete and similar surfaces. 
b.  Apply at a rate of five one-hundredths (0.05) to fifteen one-hundredths (0.15) gallons per square yard of surface. 
c.  Apply tack coat by brush to contact surfaces of curbs, gutters, manholes, and other structures projecting into or abutting asphalt concrete pavement. 
d.  Allow surfaces to dry until material is at condition of tackiness to receive pavement. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.418. - Asphalt Concrete Placement. 
1.  Place asphalt concrete mix on prepared surface, spread and strike-off using paving machine. 
2.  Spread mixture at a minimum temperature of two hundred twenty-five (225) degrees Fahrenheit. 
3.  Inaccessible and small areas may be placed by hand. 
4.  Place each course at a thickness such that when compacted it will conform to the indicated grade, cross-section, finish thickness, and density indicated. 
5.  Pavement Placing: 
a.  Unless otherwise directed, begin placing along centerline of area to be paved on crowned section, and at high side of sections on one-way slope, and in direction of traffic flow. 
b.  After first strip has been placed and rolled, place succeeding strips and extend rolling to overlap previous strips. 
c.  Complete base courses for a section before placing surface courses. 
d.  Place mixture in as continuous an operation as practical. 
6.  Hand Placing: 
a.  Spread, tamp, and finish mixture using hand tools in areas where machine spreading is not possible, as acceptable to the City. 
b.  Place mixture at a rate that will ensure handling and compaction, before mixture becomes cooler than acceptable working temperature. 
7.  Joints: 
a.  Carefully make joints between old and new pavements, or between successive days' work, to ensure a continuous bond between adjoining work. 
b.  Construct joints to have some texture, density and smoothness as adjacent sections of asphalt concrete course. 
c.  Clean contact surfaces free of sand, dirt, or other objectionable material and apply tack coat. 
d.  Offset transverse joints in succeeding courses not less than twenty-four (24) inches. 
e.  Cut back edge of previously placed course to expose an even, vertical surface for full course thickness. 
f.  Offset longitudinal joints in succeeding courses not less than six (6) inches. 
g.  When the edges of longitudinal joints are irregular, honeycombed, or inadequately compacted, cut back unsatisfactory sections to expose an even, vertical surface for full course thickness. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.419. - Asphalt Concrete Compaction. 
1.  Provide sufficient rollers to obtain the required pavement density. 
2.  Begin rolling operations after placing, as soon as the mixture will bear weight of roller without excessive displacement. 
3.  Do not permit heavy equipment, including rollers, to stand on finished surface, before it has thoroughly cooled or set. 
4.  Compact mixture with hot hand tampers or vibrating plate compactors in areas in accessible to rollers. 
5.  Start rolling longitudinally at extreme lower side of sections and proceed toward center of pavement. Roll to slightly different lengths on alternate roller runs. 
6.  Do not roll centers of sections first, under any circumstances. 
7.  Breakdown Rolling: 
a.  Accomplish breakdown or initial rolling immediately following rolling of transverse and longitudinal joints and outside edge. 
b.  Operate rollers as close as possible to edge without causing pavement displacement. 
c.  Check crown, grade, and smoothness after breakdown rolling. 
d.  Repair displaced areas by loosening at once with lutes or rakes and filling, if required, with hot loose material before continuing rolling. 
8.  Second Rolling: 
a.  Follow breakdown rolling as soon as possible, while mixture is hot and in condition for compaction. 
b.  Continue second rolling until mixture has been thoroughly compacted. 
9.  Finish Rolling: 
a.  Perform finish rolling while mixture is still warm enough for removal of roller marks. 
b.  Continue rolling until roller marks are eliminated and course has attained specified density. 
10.  Patching: 
a.  Remove and replace damaged or defective areas. Remove a minimum of ten (10) feet of trail length, five (5) foot minimum length up the trail and five (5) foot minimum length down the trail, from the edges of the damaged area. Small patches within the boundaries of the finished trail are not permitted. 
b.  Cut out and fill with fresh, hot asphalt concrete. 
c.  Compact by rolling to specified density and smoothness. 
d.  Remove deficient areas for full-depth course. 
e.  Cut sides perpendicular and parallel to direction of traffic with edges vertical. 
f.  Apply tack coat to exposed surfaces before placing new asphalt concrete mixture. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.420. - Backfilling. 
Contractor shall fine grade the outside edges of the trail to transition down to base grade by spreading native soil and covering with leaf and stockpiled wood chip mulch. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.421. - Cleaning and Protection. 
1.  Cleaning. After completion of paving operations, clean surfaces of excess or spilled asphalt materials to the satisfaction of the City. 
2.  Protection. 
a.  After final rolling, do not permit vehicular traffic on asphalt concrete pavement until it has cooled and hardened, and in no case no sooner than six (6) hours. 
b.  Provide barricades and warning devices as required to protect pavement and the general public. 
3.  Maintenance. The contractor shall maintain the surfaces of pavements until the acceptance of the project. Maintenance shall include replacement, overlay, milling and reshaping as necessary to prevent raveling of the road material, the preservation of smooth surfaces and the repair of damaged or unsatisfactory surfaces, to the satisfaction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.422. - Supervision and Approval. 
Pavement shall meet the requirements of the regulatory agency responsible for the maintenance of pavement. Obtain agency approval of pavement before requesting final payment. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.423—15.499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONCRETE TRAIL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

15.500. - Concrete Trails. 
15.501. - Scope. 
1.  Concrete trail shall be laid out and constructed so as to be woven through the woods, between the trees and over the root systems. This is a careful, interactive process between the Parks and Recreation Department, Public Works Department, contractor, and surveyor. 
2.  Concrete trail shall be constructed to the desired width of ten (10) feet. If site conditions prohibit the construction of a ten (10) foot wide trail, a minimum width of eight (8) feet may be constructed with City approval. 
3.  Concrete trail shall be constructed in a manner that does not disrupt the tree root systems or require unnecessary removal of trees or cutting of roots. All ground disturbances should be outside of the tree's drip line where practical. Where this is impractical, encroachments into the drip line may be approved by the City. Drip line is defined as the area of ground perpendicularly below the outer reaches of the tree's branches. This specification does not prevent any matters allowed under the tree preservation standards. 
4.  Concrete trail shall be constructed at the locations and to the dimensions, lines, grades and cross section indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City and in conformity with the provisions and requirements set out in these specifications. 
5.  Concrete trail shall include all the necessary excavation, unless otherwise indicated, sub-grade and sub-base preparation, backfilling, final clearing up and completing all incidentals thereto, as indicated on the Drawings or as directed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.502. - Quality Assurance. 
Comply with applicable requirements of the current approved edition of Georgia Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications—Construction of Transportation Systems. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.503. - Protection. 
1.  Contractor shall not encroach upon any areas outside the proposed concrete trail surface and shoulder. Equipment shall not twist, turn or backup into woodland spaces outside of the area of the graded trail unless approved by the City. 
2.  Contractor shall not park vehicles, store or stage any materials or equipment under the overhanging branches or the drip line of trees to be saved. 
3.  Contractor shall review all construction adjustment considerations with the City prior to implementation. 
4.  Contractor shall keep detailed field notes of all adjustments and changes and make them available at any time. 
5.  Contractor shall utilize gravel fill base material when paved surfaces or trails are placed over any tree root system or under any tree canopy. Reference details on construction documents. 
6.  Trees and roots shall be protected from damage both above grade and below ground by using the development process outlined in Part 3—Execution. The tree preservation standards set forth in the City LDO, Chapter IX shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.504. - Submittals. 
1.  Provide certificates stating that the materials supplied comply with specifications. Certificates shall be signed by the concrete producer and the contractor. 
2.  Application instructions and a description as well as other data relative to the contractor's application equipment and methods shall be submitted to the City for approval. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.505. - Conditions. 
1.  Weather Limitations: 
a.  Do not conduct concrete paving operations when surface is saturated, or contains excess of moisture that would prevent uniform distribution and required penetration. 
b.  Construct concrete trail sections only when atmospheric temperature in the shade is above forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit, when the underlying base is dry and when weather is not rainy. 
c.  Place base course when air temperature is above thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit and rising. No base course shall be placed on a frozen, saturated, or otherwise unsuitable sub-grade material. 
2.  Grade Control: Establish and maintain the required lines and grades for each course during construction operations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.506. - Inspection and Testing. 
1.  Geotechnical consultant shall hand probe the route of the trail prior to grading to determine structural conditions. 
2.  Pavement and base testing will be performed by an independent testing laboratory selected by the owner. 
3.  The testing agency shall test in-place courses for compliance with specified density, thickness and surface smoothness requirements. 
4.  Earthwork and compaction operations shall conform to the requirements set forth in the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
5.  Concrete Strength. One (1) set of acceptance and field cylinders (a total of four (4)) from the same batch of concrete will be made for each fifty (50) cubic yards or fraction thereof, not less than once for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of pavement in each day's placing for each class and mix design. 
a.  Each batch of concrete shall be tested for slump prior to placement. Slump shall be between one-half (0.5) and one and one-half (1.5) inches as determined by AASHTO Test Method T119. 
b.  Acceptance cylinders are compression test cylinders molded in the field, stored and cured in the field for the first twenty-four (24) hours after molding and thereafter in the laboratory of the testing agency until time of testing. Average breaking strength at twenty-eight (28) days of a set of two (2) acceptance cylinders will comprise test. 
c.  Field cylinders are compression test cylinders molded in the field, stored and cured on the work site in the same location and subject to the same exposure as job concrete of which it is a representative. Each set of two acceptance cylinders will have two (2) matching field cylinders. 
d.  One (1) field cylinder will be broken at seven (7) days and the remaining will be held in reserve. 
6.  Pavement Thickness. The surface course of the concrete trail shall be six (6) inches thick. The allowable variation in thickness of each course is as follows: 
a.  Aggregate Base Course: ± one-half (0.5) inch. 
b.  Surface Course: ± one-quarter (0.25) inch. 
7.  Surface Smoothness. Test finished surface of each course for smoothness using a ten (10) foot straightedge. Intervals of tests shall be as directed by the owner. Surfaces will not be acceptable if exceeding the following: 
a.  Base Course: one-quarter (0.25) inch in sixteen (16) feet. 
b.  Surface Course: one-eighth (0.125) inch in ten (10) feet. 
8.  Contractor's Duties Relative to Testing. 
a.  Notifying laboratory of conditions requiring testing. 
b.  Coordinating with laboratory for field testing. 
c.  Paying costs for additional testing performed beyond the scope of that required and for retesting, where initial tests reveal non-conformance with specified requirements. 
d.  Paying the cost of overlays or pavement removal and replacement, which does not comply with the specified testing limits. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.507. - Materials. 
1.  Materials used in the construction of concrete trails shall conform, unless otherwise stipulated, to the following: 
a.  Portland cement shall conform to ASTM C 150, Type 1. 
b.  Graded aggregate base shall be uniform throughout and conform to requirements of Section 815.01 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Specifications. 
c.  Sand: Dune sand, bank-run sand and manufactured sand are not acceptable. Only builder's sand shall be used. 
d.  Fiber Reinforcement. Engineered polypropylene fibers designed for secondary reinforcement of concrete slabs. 
e.  Premolded joint filler for expansion joints shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D 1751 or ASTM D 1752. The joint sealer for the joints in the concrete pavement shall meet the requirements of Federal Specification SS-S-164 and shall be hot-poured type. 
f.  Concrete Color. Concrete shall be grey concrete mix and shall be from same supplier and same batch mixture. Finished concrete shall have a medium broom finish parallel to traffic flow on all trail sections. 
g.  All concrete, except where shown or specified otherwise, shall have the following minimum compressive strengths at twenty-eight (28) days, and slump at time of placement: 

 
2.  Staking materials shall be placed in field according to the plans and shall consist of the following: 
a.  One (1) inch by two (2) inch by three (3) foot tall stakes for center line stakeout. 
b.  One (1) inch by two (2) inch by eighteen (18) inch short stakes for corners. 
c.  Plastic flagging tape: 
Red—Indicates trees to remove. 
Yellow—Indicates trees to save. 
White—Indicates centerline. 
Pink—Control points. 
d.  Wire flags (pink). 
e.  Two (2) inch by two (2) inch by twelve (12) inch hub stakes. 
f.  Mallet—short handle for driving stakes. 
3.  Plastic Pipe. Four (4) inch perforated Schedule 40 ultra violet light resistant PVC. 
4.  Geosynthetic Materials. 
a.  Filter Fabric. Filter fabric utilized for separation of aggregate base or controlled fill materials from existing subgrades or sediment deposition shall conform to the requirements of the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Section 881.06 for non-woven, needle-punched filter fabrics. The requirements outlined under Item 2.01.D.2 of this specification section will typically be sufficient for most applications. Filter fabric samples, as well as specific manufacturer's property characteristics and installation guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with specific identification of each proposed application. 
b.  Geogrid Reinforcement Materials. Geogrid reinforcement materials utilized for subgrade stabilization applications shall be a regular grid structure formed by biaxially drawing a continuous sheet of select polypropylene material and shall have aperture geometry and rib and junction cross-sections sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the material being reinforced. The geogrid shall have high flexural rigidity and high tensile strength at ribs and junctions of the grid structure. The geogrid shall maintain its reinforcement and interlock capabilities under repeated dynamic loads while in service and shall also be resistant to ultraviolet degradation normally encountered in the material being reinforced. Geogrid reinforcing material samples, as well as specific manufacturer's property characteristics and installation guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.508. - Equipment. 
1.  No track type equipment shall be used in the construction of this work. Rubber tire vehicles shall be used exclusively and shall be limited to small back hoes, bobcats, pickup trucks, dump trucks and small concrete mixers. 
2.  Concrete placing machinery shall have a total width not to exceed width of trail plus two (2) feet. No large heavy-duty track vehicles are allowed. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.509. - Layout. 
1.  Contractor shall stake trail coordinate control points as per the plans with hub stakes and tall stakes shall flag stakes with pink tape. 
2.  Contractor shall stake the centerline of the proposed trail layout as per the plans with wire/flag stakes to indicate routes. 
3.  Contractor and a representative from the City shall walk the stakeout to make adjustments to the layout and flag trees to be removed with red tape. 
4.  The owner's surveyor shall make field notes and transfer field adjustments to the construction documents. 
5.  Contractor shall prepare a construction stakeout of the trail based on the revised layout and grading plans. Stakeout shall include horizontal and vertical (i.e., spot elevations) information. 
6.  Contractor and a representative from the City shall walk the stakeout again to make minor horizontal adjustments and to adjust the vertical grading. 
7.  The owner's surveyor shall transfer revised data to the construction documents for contractor's reference. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.510. - Clearing and Grubbing. 
1.  Clearing and grubbing shall be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
2.  Contractor shall remove trees and underbrush from the trail corridor. This shall be accomplished with a rubber tire tractor and bush hog. Small trees shall be cut off flush with the ground. Large trees shall be cut down by hand saws or uprooted and removed by knocking the tree down so that it falls within the trail corridor. All stumps shall be ground down eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches below finished subgrade. Trees shall be cut into pieces and removed by small truck. No dragging of cut trees, tree trunks or limbs shall be permitted. No root rakes shall be permitted. 
3.  Limbs, brush and treetops shall be removed or chipped and stock-piled for later use in areas approved by the City. 
4.  Contractor shall hand rake surface leaf mulch and humus away from trail bed. Contractor shall scatter this material in designated areas that will not be disturbed by construction. Soil mixed with ground up stump litter shall be removed from the trail corridor and not be left under the trail surface. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.511. - Removal of Structures and Obstructions. 
Unless otherwise indicated or stipulated, the removal of structures, obstructions, etc., will be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.512. - Trail and Drainage Excavation. 
Trail and drainage excavation, as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City, shall be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.513. - Embankment Construction. 
Embankment construction, as indicated on the drawings or as indicated by the City, shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the City LDO, Chapter XV, Section 15.202.2. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.514. - Subgrade Preparation. 
1.  Fine grading shall proceed to remove bumps, dips and holes from the trail bed. Stump holes must be filled and compacted. Drainage pipes, walls, bridge abutment etc. may be constructed using the trail as an access route. 
2.  The subgrade shall be shaped so that the finished concrete surface will slope to direct water into the natural drainage swales and conform to natural drainage patterns to the greatest extent possible, within the limits imposed by the drawings and specifications. Cross slope shall be downhill at two (2) percent. 
3.  The subgrade for the trails shall be formed by excavation to a depth equal to the thickness of the concrete plus the base course, except where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees. Contractor shall not excavate where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees unless the soils are determined by the geotechnical engineer to be unstable. 
4.  Yielding or unsuitable material shall be removed and backfilled with satisfactory material except where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.515. - Base Course. 
1.  Contractor shall work from within the proposed paving edges. 
2.  Contractor shall place a minimum of six (6) inches of graded aggregate under trails, as determined by the geotechnical consultant, compacted thoroughly and finished to a smooth, unyielding surface and proper line, grade and cross-section of the proposed construction. 
3.  All subgrade shall be of such width as to permit the proper installation and bracing of the forms. 
4.  Additional stabilization of poor subgrade areas may be necessary to achieve compaction criteria for aggregate base. These additional subgrade stabilization measures shall be performed under the direct supervision of the geotechnical consultant. These measures may include, but are not limited to, placement of geogrid reinforcement materials, aggregate bridge lifts, undercutting of unsuitable soils, and soil cement admixtures. 
5.  Where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees, the contractor shall place a special fill material system consisting of, as determined by the geotechnical consultant, varying depths of graded gravel fill placed over geotextile fabrics or geogrid subgrade reinforcements which are placed on or above the subgrade. The geotechnical consultant shall be utilized to take soil borings as necessary to determine the subsurface conditions, to verify that base material specifications and details are sufficient to support the trails and specified uses. Geotechnical test results for base material shall be submitted to the City for any base specification revisions prior to beginning work. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.516. - Forms. 
1.  All forms shall be set upon the prepared subgrade, true to lines and grade, and held rigidly in place so as not to be disturbed or displaced during the placing of the concrete. The top of the form shall be set to exact grade and the height shall be equal to, not less than, the thickness of the proposed concrete. 
2.  Design framework to be readily removable without impact, shock, or damage to cast-in-place concrete surfaces and adjacent materials. 
3.  Construct forms complying with ACI 347, to sizes, shapes, lines and dimensions shown, and to obtain accurate alignment, location, grades, level and plumb work in finished structures. Provide for opening, offsets, sinkages, keyways, recesses, moldings, rustifications, reglets, chamfers, blocking, screeds, bulkheads, anchorages, inserts, and other features required in work. Use selected materials to obtain finishes. Solidly butt joints and provide back-up at joints to prevent leakage of cement paste. 
4.  Fabricate forms for easy removal without hammering or prying against concrete surfaces. Provide crush plates or wrecking plates where stripping may damage cast concrete surfaces. Provide top forms for inclined surfaces where slope is too steep to place concrete with bottom forms only. Kerf wood inserts for forming keyways, reglets, recesses, and the like to prevent swelling and for easy removal. 
5.  Immediately before placing the concrete, the forms shall be given a coat of light oil and where being removed and used again, the forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled each time. 
6.  Forms shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after placing concrete, and no pressure shall be exerted upon the concrete in removing the forms. 
7.  Where the concrete trail is to be joined to an existing trail or sidewalk, the existing sidewalk, if not in proper condition for the junction, shall be cut to a neat line perpendicular to both the centerline and the surface of the trail, or as indicated by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.517. - Expansion Joints. 
1.  Trail designed to accommodate bike, skateboards, and blades shall not have trowel joints. Only saw joints are permitted. 
2.  Unless otherwise indicated on the drawings or as directed by the owner, premoulded expansion joint filler, one-half (0.5) inch in thickness, shall be placed at the locations and in line with expansion joints in the adjoining pavement, gutter or curb. Transverse expansion joints for concrete trails shall be one-half (0.5) inch thick. When expansion joints are not required in the adjoining pavement or gutter, and not otherwise indicated on the drawings, a one-half (0.5) inch premoulded expansion joint filler shall be placed at intervals of not over thirty (30) feet apart. All premoulded expansion joint filler must be cut to full width or length of the proposed construction and shall protrude within one-half (0.5) inch of the top or finished surface. All longitudinal expansion joints shall be placed as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City. 
3.  All expansion joints shall be true, even and present a satisfactory appearance. 
4.  All expansion joint material protruding after the concrete has been finished shall be trimmed as directed by the City. 
5.  Control Joints. Locate and install construction joints not shown on the drawings, so as not to impair strength and appearance of the structure, as acceptable to the City. Review need for additional joints or scores with the City prior to construction. 
6.  Control Joints in Slabs-on-Ground. Construct control joints in slabs-on-ground to form panels of patterns as shown. Locate expansion type joint at spacing recommended by Portland Cement Association and review with the City prior to construction. 
7.  Control Joints in Trailway. Provide joints in pattern as indicated. Locate expansion type joints at spacing as indicated. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.518. - Manufacturing and Placing Concrete. 
1.  Immediately before placing concrete, the depth of the proposed concrete shall be checked by means of a template cut true to the cross section of the proposed construction and any irregularities shall be corrected. 
2.  Immediately before placing concrete, all subgrade shall be thoroughly sprinkled or wetted. 
3.  Concrete shall not be placed upon a frozen subgrade or subbase. 
4.  Construction joints will be permitted only at grooves or at expansion joints, unless otherwise approved by the owner. 
5.  The concrete shall be manufactured and placed in accordance with the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
6.  The concrete shall be placed immediately after mixing; the edges, sides, etc., shall be thoroughly spaded and the surfaces tamped sufficiently to thoroughly compact the concrete and bring the mortar to the surface. The concrete shall be deposited and compacted in a single layer. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.519. - Finishing. 
1.  The concrete shall be stuck-off with a transverse template resting upon the side forms and then shall be floated with a ten (10) foot longitudinal float, working the float transversely across the concrete with a sawing motion, always maintaining it parallel to the edges of the trail where practical, and in such a manner that all surplus water, laitance and inert material shall be removed from the surface. This operation shall be continued until the surface of the concrete shows no variation from a ten (10) foot straightedge. If necessary, additional concrete shall be added to fill depressions, and longitudinal float used again. The longitudinal float shall not be moved ahead more than one-half (0.5) its length at any time. 
2.  When the surface of the concrete is free from water and just before the concrete obtains its initial set, it shall be gone over and finished with a wooden float so as to produce a sandy texture. The longitudinal surface variations shall be not more than one-quarter (0.25) inch under a ten (10) foot straightedge, nor more than one-eighth (0.125) inch on a five (5) foot transverse section. The surface of the concrete must be finished so as to drain completely at all times. 
3.  The edges of the trail shall be carefully finished and rounded with an edging tool having a radius of one-half (0.5) inch. 
4.  The surface of the trail shall be divided into blocks by use of a saw cut joint. The joints shall be spaced equal to the trail width, but not to exceed ten (10) feet spacing between joints. The joints shall be cut to a depth of one (1) inch deep by one-quarter (0.25) inch wide. The joints shall be perpendicular, and any marks caused by edging or otherwise shall be removed with a wetted brush or wooden float, so as to give the surface a uniform texture and finish. 
5.  All expansion joints shall be caulked flush with trail elevation. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.520. - Protection and Curing. 
1.  Immediately after finishing the concrete, it shall be covered and cured in accordance with the requirements of the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. Curing materials shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 309 (liquid membrane compound) or ASTM C 171. If the temperature falls below freezing, satisfactory heating devices shall be placed under suitable covers to keep the temperature around the concrete at above forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit. 
2.  Pedestrians will not be allowed upon concrete sidewalks or trails until twelve (12) hours after finishing concrete, and no vehicles or loads shall be permitted upon any sidewalk or driveway until the concrete has attained sufficient strength for such traffic. 
3.  The contractor shall construct such barricades and protection devices as are necessary to keep pedestrians and traffic off the sidewalks or trails. 
4.  If any portion of the trail is damaged at any time prior to final acceptance of the project, it shall be repaired by removing all concrete within the limits of the grooves, and be replaced, at the contractor's expense, with concrete of the type, kind and finish in the original construction. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.521. - Backfilling. 
Contractor shall fine grade the outside edges of the trail to transition to base grade by spreading native soil. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.522. - Cleaning. 
1.  All excess or unsuitable material shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
2.  Final clean-up shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of these specifications. 
3.  All material becoming the property of the owner shall be stored in a manner and at locations near or on the project as directed by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.523. - Supervision and Approval. 
Pavement shall meet the requirements of the regulatory agency responsible for maintenance of pavement. Obtain agency approval of pavement before requesting final payment. 
15.524—15.599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADDITIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARDS 

15.600. - Requirements for Retaining Wall and Stormwater Management Facility Barriers. 
1.  Barrier Required. Any retaining wall or stormwater management facility walls proposed for construction at a height of four (4) feet or greater from the base of the footing, shall comply with the following provisions as determined by the building official: 
a.  Installation of a fence or physical barrier as approved by the building official or designee. Approval of fence or barrier materials may be required by the Director of Community Development or designee for zoning standards; or 
b.  Installation of a guardrail compliant with the International Building Code Edition adopted at the time of permit review. 
c.  Plants, trees, shrubs, or similar landscaping features shall not be considered wall, fence, or barrier materials. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2, 7-11-2016) 
Appendix A. - Standard Street Design Details 




(Ord. of 11-14-2016(2); §§ 2(Exh. A), 3(Exh. B)) 
Chapter XVI - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: Alternative Tower Structure: Shall mean man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. Antenna: Shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communication through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. FAA: Shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. FCC: Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. Governing Authority: Shall mean the Woodstock City Council. Pre-Existing Towers and Antennas: Shall have the meaning set forth in Article II of this Ordinance. Height: Shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the ground level at the base of the tower or other structure to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. Public Officer: As used in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-17 shall mean the Mayor of the City of Woodstock. Tower: Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICABILITY 

16.210. - District Height Limitations. 
The requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet. 
16.220. - Public Property. 
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority and that said license or lease sets forth the maximum height allowed. 
16.230. - Amateur Radio: Receive-Only Antennas. 
This Ordinance shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
16.240. - Pre-existing Towers and Antennas. 
Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, other than the requirements of sections 16.350, 16.360, 16.380.2 and 16.380. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this Ordinance as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antennas". No changes may be made to any pre-existing towers or pre-existing antennas without bringing the pre-existing towers or pre-existing antennas into conformity with the terms of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS 

16.310. - Purpose and Goals. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this Ordinance are to: 
1.  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
2.  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
3.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
4.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and 
5.  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
16.320. - Principal or Accessory Use. 
Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot as an accessory use. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulation, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of an nonconforming use or structure. 
16.330. - Inventory of Existing Sites. 
Each applicant for an antenna and or tower shall provide the Planning and Zoning Department an inventory of its existing towers, which are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within one-quarter-mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower. The Planning and Zoning Department may share such information with other applicants applying for special use permits under this Ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority, provided, however that the Planning and Zoning Department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
16.340. - Aesthetics; Lighting. 
The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas governing by this Ordinance; 
1.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce the visual obtrusiveness. 
2.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
3.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
4.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
16.350. - Federal Requirements. 
All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the Federal Government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlled Federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
16.360. - Building Codes: Safety Standards. 
To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronics Industries Association, as amended from time to time. 
1.  If, upon inspection, the governing authority concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the governing authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
2.  At the time of application for building permit, the plans for tower or antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered Structural Engineer as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable codes. 
16.370. - Setbacks and Separation: Security Fencing. 
1.  The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers or antennas; 
a.  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
b.  Towers, guys and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
2.  Security Fencing - Towers shall be enclosed by a security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
16.380. - Liability Insurance. 
Owners and operators of antennas or towers shall provide satisfactory evidence of liability insurance coverage with a reputable company in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect during the existence of and until after the removal of the tower or antenna. 
16.390. - Landscaping. 
The following requirement shall govern landscaping surrounding towers: 
1.  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compounded from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
2.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirements may be reduced or waived altogether. 
3.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITTED USES 

16.410. - General. 
The uses listed in this article are deemed to be specific permitted uses and shall not require a special use permit. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with the provisions of Article III of this Ordinance and all other applicable Ordinances. 
1.  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in any industrial (LI or HI) zoning district; 
2.  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free-standing non-residential structure), so long as said additional antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing structure; 
3.  Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a pre-existing tower. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL USE PERMIT 

16.510. - General. 
The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits: 
1.  If the tower or antenna is not permitted use under Article IV of this Ordinance, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
2.  The Woodstock Zoning Board of Appeals, hereafter "the Board" shall consider all applications for special use permits at an advertised public hearing according to the procedures contained in Chapter VII and XI of this Ordinance. 
3.  In granting a special use permit, the Board may impose conditions to the extent the Board concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
4.  Each applicant for special use permit shall apply to the Planning and Zoning Department, providing the information set forth in sections 16.520 and 16.540 of this Ordinance. The applicant shall submit an application fee in accordance with Chapter X, section 10.103 of this Ordinance. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional Engineer. 
5.  The Planning and Zoning Department shall review each such application within fifteen (15) days after receiving it and schedule the hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Planning and Zoning Department shall notify the applicant of the erroneous or missing information within fifteen (15) days after receipt. 
16.520. - Information Required. 
Each applicant requesting a special use permit under this Ordinance shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the governing authority to be necessary to assess compliance with this Ordinance. 
16.530. - Factors Considered in Granting Special Use Permits. 
The Board shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit: 
1.  Height of the proposed tower; 
2.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
3.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
4.  Surrounding topography; 
5.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
6.  Design of the tower, the particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
7.  Proposed ingress and egress; 
8.  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in section 16.540 of this Ordinance; and 
9.  Conformity with the goals set forth in section 16.310 of this Ordinance. 
16.540. - Availability of Suitable Towers or Other Structures. 
No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
5.  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
6.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
16.550. - Setbacks and Separation. 
The following requirement shall apply to all towers or antennas for which a special use permit is required in addition to the requirements of section 16.370; In zoning districts other than industrial zoning districts, towers over ninety (90) feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter-mile from any existing tower that is over ninety (90) feet in height. 
ARTICLE VI. - REMOVAL OR ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
Chapter XVII - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - FINDINGS AND PURPOSES 

17.110. - Findings. 
Whereas, the City of Woodstock, Georgia (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "City"), finds that Buffer Areas adjacent to Streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of Streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban Stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing Stream Banks; 
(5)  Providing for Infiltration of Stormwater Runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of Streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade Streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
17.120. - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create Stream Buffer Protection Areas along the Streams of the City for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize Land Development within such Stream Buffer Protection Areas by establishing Stream Buffer requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND APPLICABILITY 
All defined terms throughout this chapter are capitalized, and the definitions are contained in Chapter II of this Land Development Ordinance. 
This Ordinance shall apply to all Land Development Activity on property containing a Stream Buffer Protection Area. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 

17.210. - Grandfather Provisions. 
This Ordinance shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going Land-Disturbing Activity including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or Land-Disturbing Activity not otherwise approved by the City on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any Land Development Activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this chapter. 
(4)  Land Development Activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this chapter. 
17.220. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one (1) of the following: 
-  a Stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
-  public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
-  intrusions necessary to provide Access to a property; 
-  public Access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
-  unpaved foot trails and paths; 
-  activities to restore and enhance Stream Bank Stabilization, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line Easements paralleling a creek, except that all Easements (permanent and construction) and Land Disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the Top Of The Stream Bank. This includes such Impervious Cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of utilities, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such Easements, regardless of paving material, except for Access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  Land Development Activity within a Right-Of-Way existing at the time this Ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Within an Easement of any utility existing at the time this Ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this Ordinance, Land-Disturbing Activity and such Impervious Cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of such utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the City's Community Development Department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within 10 days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work (within such time period as may be determined by the City's Community Development Department) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the Stream Buffer Protection Area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other Land Development Activity. If such activity results in Land Disturbance in the Stream Buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other Land-Disturbing Activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three (3) years after the end of the activities that intruded on the Stream Buffer. 
Any Land Development Activity within a Stream Buffer established hereunder or any Impervious Cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to Chapter X of this Land Development Ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - BUFFER AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS 
All Land Development Activity subject to this Ordinance shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative Stream Buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of a stream as measured from the Top Of The Stream Bank. 
(2)  An additional Stream Setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative Stream Buffer, in which all Impervious Cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the Stream Setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the Stream Buffer or Stream Setback. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER BUFFER REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
This Ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this Ordinance should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT ON STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION AREA PROPERTIES 
Any permit applications for property requiring Stream Buffers and Stream Setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required Stream Buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Stream Buffer Protection Area topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the Stream Buffer Protection Area; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the Stream Buffer and of all proposed Impervious Cover within the Stream Setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the Stream Buffer and Stream Setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the City's Community Development Department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that this chapter is addressed in the approval process. 
All Stream Buffer and Stream Setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESPONSIBILITY 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this Ordinance shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City of Woodstock, Georgia, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
ARTICLE VII. - INSPECTION 
The City's Community Development Department may cause inspections of the work in the Stream Buffer or Stream Setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the City's Community Development Department in making such inspections. The City shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this Ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any Land Development Activity within the Stream Buffer Protection Area. 
No person shall refuse entry or Access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Ordinance or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 

17.810. - Notice of Violation. 
If the City's Community Development Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person and mail said notice via U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested) to the address found on the permit. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site by placing same in the U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested) addressed to the property owner or other responsible person. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days after the notice of violation is served. 
17.820. - Penalties and Enforcement. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City's Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing via U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested) of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, a time frame of not less than twenty-four (24) hours shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City's Community Development Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop Work Order. The City's Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The City's Community Development may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the Building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The City's Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the Land Development Activity. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City's Community Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (or such greater period as the City's Community Development Department shall deem appropriate) or within twenty-four (24) hours in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety and after the City's Community Development Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the City's Community Development Department may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Ordinance, the City's Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Woodstock Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each violation and each day upon which any violation remains uncured shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE IX. - APPEAL AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

17.910. - Appeals, 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order, as it relates to this chapter, may appeal in writing, as outlined in Chapter X, section 10.162, of this Land Development Ordinance. 
17.920. - Variance Procedures, 
Variances from the buffer and setback requirements contained herein may be granted in accordance with the provisions outlined in Chapter X, section 10.160 of this Land Development Ordinance. 
ARTICLE X. - SEVERABILITY 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
Chapter XVIII - FORM-BASED CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the City's Form-Based Code, as adopted on September 24, 2012. Amendments to the Form-Based Code are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 
1.  There is hereby adopted, ordained, and enacted into law this Ordinance to wit, the Woodstock Form-Based Ordinance, and the zoning classifications stated therein for the use of property in the incorporated area of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 

18.101. - Authority and Applicability. 
1.  Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article IX, Section IV of the Georgia Constitution. (O.C.G.A. § 32-6102) 
2.  Enactment. For the purposes cited above and for the general purposes of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, the city council hereby ordains, adopts and enacts this chapter in its entirety, including text, map, and all regulations, all of which shall be known as the Woodstock Land Development Code. This chapter shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the corporation, as shown on the official zoning map or described by ordinance. 
3.  Conflicting ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter or inconsistent with its provisions in the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances (including, without limitation, the City of Land Development Code incorporated by reference in the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances), are hereby superseded to the full extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. 
4.  Purpose. This chapter shall only apply to parcels zoned FBC-NC, T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, and shall not apply to any other parcels within the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
5.  Severability. Should any provision of this be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect this chapter as a whole or any part hereof except that specific provision which was the subject of the declaration. 
6.  Construction. The following general rules of construction shall apply to regulations governing this chapter: 
a.  Numerical metrics shall take precedence over graphic metrics. 
b.  The definition of a term in this section shall take precedence over the definition of the same term elsewhere in the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances. 
7.  Definitions. 18.106 Definitions contains regulatory language that is integral to this chapter. Those terms not defined in this chapter shall be accorded their commonly accepted meanings. In the event of conflicts between these definitions and other definitions in the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances, those of this chapter shall take precedence. 
8.  The metrics of the standards and tables are an integral part of this chapter. However, the diagrams and illustrations that accompany them should be considered guidelines, with the exception of those on Table 10. T3 Standards, Table 11. T4/T4O Standards, and Table 12. T5 Standards, which are legally binding. 
18.102. - Intent. 
1.  The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to enable, encourage and qualify the implementation of the city, the community, the block and the building, and the Transect. 
2.  The city. 
a.  That the city should retain its natural infrastructure and visual character derived from topography, woodlands, and riparian corridors. 
b.  That growth strategies should encourage Infill and redevelopment in parity with new communities. 
c.  That development contiguous to urban areas should be structured in the pattern of Town Center (TCT) or Village (VIL) and be integrated with the existing urban pattern. 
d.  That transportation corridors should be planned and reserved in coordination with land use. 
e.  That green corridors should be used to define and connect the urbanized areas. 
f.  That the city should include a framework of transit, pedestrian, and bicycle systems that provide alternatives to the automobile. 
3.  The community. 
a.  That neighborhoods and town centers should be compact, pedestrian-oriented and mixed use. 
b.  That neighborhoods and the town centers should be the preferred pattern of development and that districts specializing in a single use should be the exception. 
c.  That ordinary activities of daily living should occur within walking distance of most dwellings, allowing independence to those who do not drive. 
d.  That interconnected networks of thoroughfares should be designed to disperse traffic and reduce the length of automobile trips. 
e.  That within neighborhoods, a range of housing types and price levels should be provided to accommodate diverse ages and incomes. 
f.  That appropriate building densities and land uses should be provided within walking distance of transit stops. 
g.  That civic, institutional, and commercial activity should be embedded in the town center and neighborhoods, not isolated in remote single-use complexes. 
h.  That schools should be sized and located to enable children to walk or bicycle to them. 
i.  That a range of open space including parks, squares, and playgrounds should be distributed within neighborhoods and the town center. 
4.  The block and the building. 
a.  That buildings and landscaping should contribute to the physical definition of thoroughfares as civic places. 
b.  That development should adequately accommodate automobiles while respecting the pedestrian and the spatial form of public areas. 
c.  That architecture and landscape design should grow from local climate, topography, history, and building practice. 
d.  That buildings should provide their inhabitants with a clear sense of geography and climate through energy efficient methods. 
e.  That civic buildings and public gathering places should be provided as locations that reinforce community identity. 
f.  That civic buildings should be distinctive and appropriate to a role more important than the other buildings that constitute the fabric of the city. 
g.  That the preservation and renewal of historic buildings should be facilitated, to affirm the continuity and evolution of society. 
5.  The Transect. 
a.  That communities should provide meaningful choices in living arrangements as manifested by distinct physical environments. 
b.  That the Transect District descriptions in 18.104 Transect Districts shall constitute the intent of this Chapter with regard to the general character of each of these environments. 
18.103. - Rezoning. 
1.  General Procedures: This section shall be administered in accordance with the procedural requirements of Chapter III (Land Development Standards), Chapter X (Administration and Enforcement and Chapter XI (Zoning Policy and Procedures) of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance except when those requirements conflict with this section. 
2.  Re-zoning Procedures: The procedure for rezoning to Form Based Code New Community (FBCNC) or Transect Districts (T3, T4, T5) as part of an Infill Community Plan or as standalone Transect Districts (T3, T4, T5) shall be the same as required for any other zoning district change as described in Sec. 11.200 of the City of Woodstock Land Development Code: 
3.  Re-zoning Application Requirements: 
a.  Application for rezoning to a Form Based Code District shall include all of the following in addition to those required by Sec. 11.200: 
1.  adjoining streets and widths 
2.  existing structures 
3.  proposed points of connection for off-site thoroughfares 
4.  proposed maximum density 
5.  proposed community unit type(s) 
6.  proposed designation of Transect districts at perimeter (1 lot deep, or 80′ minimum) 
b.  Application for rezoning to Transect Districts and Special Districts (T3, T4, T5, SD1) as part of an Infill Community Plan shall include all of the following in addition to those required by Sec. 11.200: 
1.  adjoining streets and widths 
2.  existing structures 
3.  proposed points of connection for off-site thoroughfares 
4.  proposed maximum density 
5.  proposed community unit type(s) 
6.  proposed designation of Transect districts 
c.  Application for rezoning to a Transect Districts and Special Districts (T3, T4, T5, SD1) not as part of an Infill Community Plan shall include all of the following in addition to those required by Sec. 11.200: 
1.  proposed points of connection for off-site thoroughfares 
2.  proposed designation of Transect districts 
3.  statement describing how the requested change enhances the surrounding neighbor-hood structure per Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
4.  The following acreage requirements are necessary for any rezoning to the Form Based Code New Community District (FBC-NC): 
a.  Village (VIL): No fewer than 40 acres and no more than 200 acres per VIL 
b.  Town Center (TCT): No fewer than 20 acres and no more than 200 acres per TCT 
5.  Once the City Council approves a rezoning under this Chapter, the parcel(s) shall be designated FBC-NC (Form Based Code — New Community) on the City of Woodstock zoning map. Once the City Council approves Transect districts as part of an Infill Community Plan or as standalone Transect districts, the parcel(s) shall be designated T3 (Sub-Urban), T4 (General Urban), T5 (Urban Center), or SD (Special District) on the City of Woodstock zoning map. 
18.104. - Transect Districts. 
1.  Zoning districts under this Chapter are limited to the following Transect District designations: 
a.  T5 Urban Center (T5): This district consists of higher density mixed-use buildings that accommodate retail, offices, townhouses and apartments. It has a tight network of thoroughfares, with wide sidewalks, regularly spaced street tree planting and buildings set close to the sidewalks. 
b.  T4 General Urban (T4): This district includes a mix of uses but is primarily mixed density residential. It may have a wide range of building types: houses, townhouses, duplexes, small apartment buildings, and live-work units. Setbacks and landscaping are variable. Streets and sidewalks define medium-sized blocks. 
c.  T3 Sub-Urban (T3): This district consists of low density residential areas, with some mix of use, home occupations and outbuildings, in accordance with Sections 7.507. Street and yard planting are naturalistic and building setbacks are relatively deep. Blocks may be large and thoroughfare networks irregular. 
d.  T2 Rural (T2): This district consists of sparsely settled lands in open or cultivated states. These include woodland, agricultural land, and pasture. Typical buildings are farmhouses and agricultural buildings. Roads are rural in character had have no pedestrian facilities. Landscaping is naturally occurring. 
e.  T1 Natural (T1): This district consists of lands approximating or reverting to a wilderness condition, including lands unsuitable for settlement due to topography, hydrology or vegetation. Public parks may occur, but general development is prohibited. 
2.  All or a portion of the property within a designated Transect District may be further subject to the following sub-district: 
a.  T4 Open (T4O): a transition zone modifying T4 by permitting more commercial uses. 
3.  The following special district is designated for uses and configurations that are incompatible with Transect districts, but that are consistent with Sec. 18.102 Intent: 
a.  Business Special District (SD1): a primarily single-use district for business, manufacturing, warehousing and light industrial uses. 
18.105. - Deviations. 
1.  There shall be three types of deviation from the requirements of this Chapter: administrative waivers, waivers, and variances. Whether a deviation requires an administrative waiver, a waiver, or variance shall be determined by the Community Development Director or his designee. 
2.  Administrative Waivers. 
a.  An administrative waiver is a ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with a specific provision of this Chapter but is justified by the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. The Development Process Committee (DPC) shall have the authority to approve or disapprove administratively a request for an administrative waiver if listed as eligible for an administrative waiver within this Chapter. 
b.  General Standards. No administrative waiver shall be approved unless the Community Development Director or his designee shall find: 
1.  The administrative waiver is consistent with Sec. 18.102 Intent of this Chapter. 
2.  The administrative waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The administrative waiver will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
4.  The administrative waiver will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
5.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
6.  The administrative waiver will advance the presence of the intended form of the development. 
7.  The administrative waiver will advance pedestrian friendly activity. 
8.  The administrative waiver will provide for the enhancement, coordination or demarcation between the public and private realm. 
c.  Specific Standards. Items eligible for administrative waivers have specific standards in the sections of the Chapter related to those items. 
d.  Any decision regarding a grant or denial of an administrative waiver shall in writing state the reasons for the grant or denial and shall be delivered to the applicant by either first class mail or electronically. 
3.  Waivers. 
a.  For Waivers, the standards and procedures in Chapter III, Article XII, Sec. 3.121 shall apply. 
4.  Variances. 
a.  For variances, the standards and procedures in Chapter X, Article II, Sec. 10.160 and Chapter X, Article II, Sec. 10.160 shall apply. 
5.  The request for an administrative waiver, waiver, or variance shall not subject the entire application to public hearing, but only that portion necessary to rule on the specific issue requiring the relief. 
18.106. - Definitions. 
This Section provides definitions for terms in this Chapter that are technical in nature or that otherwise may not reflect a common usage of the term. 
A-Grid: cumulatively, those thoroughfares that by virtue of their pre-existing pedestrian-supportive qualities, or their future importance to pedestrian connectivity, are held to the highest standards prescribed by this Chapter. See B-Grid. (Syn: primary grid) 
Access lane: an outer vehicular lane or lanes of a thoroughfare, designed for slow speeds and separated from inner lanes that carry higher speed traffic by a planted median. (Syn: service lane) 
Accessory dwelling unit: A dwelling unit not greater than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or forty (40) percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is greater, located in an outbuilding and located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. 
Address sign: The official street address of a building or part thereof. 
Adjusted pedestrian shed: a pedestrian shed that has been adjusted according to Sec. 18.202, creating the regulatory boundary of a community unit. 
Arcade: a private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the facade is a colonnade supporting habitable space that abuts the sidewalk, while the facade at sidewalk level is setback, providing a private frontage sidewalk. 
Avenue (AV): a thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between urban centers, and usually equipped with a landscaped median. 
B-grid: cumulatively, those thoroughfares that by virtue of their use, location, or absence of pre-existing pedestrian-supportive qualities, may meet a standard lower than that of the A-Grid. See A-Grid. (Syn: secondary grid) 
Band Sign: A band of text and/or graphics across the width of a building. Band signs may have external illumination, and occur just above the top of the first-level glazing, often on an exposed beam face, if present. 
Bed & breakfast: an owner-occupied lodging type offering 1 to 6 bedrooms, permitted to serve break-fast in the mornings to guests. 
Blade Sign: A small sign, which is suspended from an overhang, canopy, marquee, or awning, or is suspended from a mounting attached directly to the building wall, and hangs perpendicular to the building wall. An 8-foot clearance is required between a blade sign and finished grade. 
Block face: the aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a block. 
Boulevard (BV): a thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate speed, traversing an urbanized area. Boulevards are usually equipped with access lanes buffering sidewalks and buildings. 
Building intensity: use intensities within each Transect District may be modified by Restricted, Limited and Open designations pursuant to Table 6. These intensities shall be modified by parking requirements on site as well as permissive or limited use parameters. 
Limited: the normative building intensity for the T4 District permits medium density residential, with small-scale lodging, office, and retail. Commercial building use is limited by location and area within the building. 
Open: the normative building intensity for the T5 District permits high density residential, with open lodging, office, and retail. Commercial building uses are not limited by size or location within the building. 
Restricted: the normative building intensity for the T3 District permits low density residential, with home occupations and very small-scale lodging, office, and retail. Commercial building use is restricted by location, area within the building, and parking. 
Build-to line: the build-to line is the line along which the building facade is permitted to be located. 
Caliper: diameter of a tree trunk. The term "caliper" is used for trees less than twelve (12) inches in diameter. For trees less than four (4) inches in diameter, it its measured six (6) inches from the ground. For trees between four (4) inches and twelve (12) inches in diameter, it is measured twelve (12) inches from the ground. 
Civic: the term defining not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking. 
Civic building: a building operated by not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, worship, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking, or for use approved by the legislative body. 
Civic parking reserve: parking structure or parking lot within a quarter-mile of the site that it serves. 
Civic space: an outdoor area permanently dedicated for public use. Civic space types are defined by the combination of certain physical constants including the relationships among their intended use, their size, their landscaping and their facing buildings. 
Commercial: the term collectively defining workplace, office, retail, and lodging uses. 
Common destination: an area of focused community activity, usually defining the approximate center of a pedestrian shed. It may include without limitation one or more of the following: a civic space, a civic building, a commercial center, or a transit station, and may act as the social center of a neighborhood. 
Common entry: a private frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade, allowing shared entry into a multi-unit residential, office, or mixed use building. An optional shallow planter may line the facade. 
Common lawn: a planted private frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line. It is visually continuous with adjacent yards. 
Community unit: a regulatory category defining the physical form, density, and extent of a settlement. The two community unit types addressed in this Chapter are VIL and TCT. The context for these community units may be infill or greenfield. 
Configuration: the form of a building, based on its massing, private frontage, and height. 
Developable areas: lands other than those legally protected such as wetlands, stream buffers and steep slopes. 
DPC: Development Process Committee 
Drive: a thoroughfare along the boundary between an urbanized and a natural condition, usually along a waterfront, park, or promontory. One side has the urban character of a thoroughfare, with sidewalk and building, while the other has the qualities of a road or parkway, with naturalistic planting and rural details. 
Effective parking: the amount of parking required for mixed use after adjustment by the parking occupancy rate. 
Effective turning radius: the measurement of the inside turning radius taking parked cars into account. 
Elevation: an exterior wall of a building not along a frontage line. See: facade. 
Encroach: to break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a setback, into the public frontage, or above a height limit. 
Encroachment: any structural element that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a setback, into the public frontage, or above a height limit. 
Expression line: a line prescribed at a certain level of a building for the major part of the width of a facade, expressed by a variation in material or by a limited projection such as a molding or continuous balcony. (Syn: transition line) 
Facade: the exterior wall of a building that is set along a frontage line. See elevation. 
Fenced lawn: a planted private frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line. A fence at the frontage line maintains street spatial definition. 
Forecourt: a private frontage wherein a portion of the facade is close to the frontage line and the central portion is set back. 
Frontage: the area between a building facade and the vehicular lanes, inclusive of its built and planted components. Frontage is divided into private frontage and public frontage. 
Frontage buildout: the percentage of the lot width that is occupied by the building facade at the front setback or build-to line. 
Frontage line: a lot line bordering a public frontage. Facades facing frontage lines define the public realm and are therefore more regulated than the elevations facing other lot lines. 
Gallery: a private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. 
Greenway trail: a multi-purpose trail with a minimum width of twelve (12) feet with greenspace on either side for use by pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. Boardwalks, bridges, and pervious concrete are permitted within floodplain and stream buffers. 
Green: a civic space type for unstructured recreation, spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. 
Greenfield: an area that consists of open or wooded land or farmland that has not been previously developed. 
Habitable space: covered and conditioned building floor area utilized for any principal permitted use except parking, storage, digital industry switchboards, power generators, and other relay equipment. 
Highway: a rural and suburban thoroughfare of high vehicular speed and capacity. This type is allocated to the more rural Transect Districts (T1, T2, and T3). 
Infill: noun - new development on land that had been previously developed, including most greyfield and brownfield sites and cleared land within urbanized areas. verb - to develop such areas. 
Infill VIL: a community unit type within an urbanized, greyfield, or brownfield area based on a standard pedestrian shed and consisting of T3, T4, and/or T5 Districts. (Var: neighborhood) 
Infill Town Center (TCT): a community unit type structured by a long or linear pedestrian shed that may be adjoined without buffers by one or several standard pedestrian sheds, each with the individual Transect District requirements of a TCT. A TCT takes the forms of a high-density mixed use center. (Syn: downtown, regional center) 
Inn: a lodging type, offering 7 to 12 bedrooms, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests. 
Landscape area: the area of a lot or parcel exclusive of building footprints, driveway and walkway pavements, and other impervious hardscape areas, and inclusive of ponds, pools and water features. 
Layer: a range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are permitted. 
Lightwell: A private frontage type that is a below-grade entrance or recess designed to allow light into basements. (Syn: light court) 
Liner building: a building specifically designed to mask a parking lot or a parking structure from a frontage. 
Live-work: a mixed use unit consisting of a commercial and residential use. The commercial use may be anywhere in the unit, but is required at the frontage line of the unit. (Syn: flexhouse) 
Lodging: premises available for daily and weekly renting of bedrooms. 
Lot coverage: the percentage of a lot that is covered by buildings and other roofed structures. 
Main civic space: the primary outdoor gathering place for a community, such as a green, a square, or a plaza. The main civic space is often, but not always, associated with an important civic building. 
Manufacturing: premises available for the creation, assemblage and/or repair of artifacts, using table-mounted electrical machinery or artisan equipment, and including their retail sale. 
Meeting hall: a building available for gatherings, including conferences. 
Mixed use: multiple uses within the same building through superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency, or at a proximity determined by warrant. 
Neighborhood multipurpose field: a civic space type for structured recreation and stormwater management. It may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. 
Net site area: all developable land within a site including thoroughfares. 
Office: premises available for the transaction of general business but excluding retail, artisan and manufacturing uses. 
Open space: land intended to remain undeveloped; it may be for civic space. 
Outbuilding: an ancillary building, usually located toward the rear of the same lot as a principal building. 
Outdoor display case sign: A display case located on the facade of a building which displays menus, handbills or posters advertising a scheduled event, performance or film, and merchandise associated with the event, performance or film. 
Park: a civic space type that is a natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. 
Parking occupancy rate: an accounting for parking spaces that are available to more than one use. 
Passage (PS): a pedestrian connector, open or roofed, that passes between buildings to provide shortcuts through long blocks and connect rear parking areas to frontages. 
Path (PT): a pedestrian way traversing a park or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous open space, ideally connecting directly with the urban sidewalk network. 
Pedestrian shed: An area that is centered on a common destination. Its size is an average ¼ mile radius or 1,320 feet, about the distance of a five-minute walk at a leisurely pace. Pedestrian sheds are applied to structure communities. See standard, long, or linear pedestrian shed. (Syn: walkshed, walkable catchment) 
Planter: the element of the public frontage which accommodates street trees, whether continuous or individual. 
Playground: an open space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. 
Plaza: a civic space type designed for civic purposes and commercial activities in the more urban Transect Districts, generally paved and spatially defined by building frontages. 
Principal entrance: the main point of access for pedestrians into a building. 
Principal frontage: On corner lots, the private frontage designated to bear the address and principal entrance to the building, and the measure of minimum lot width. Prescriptions for the parking layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages of a corner lot. See frontage. 
Private frontage: the privately held layer between the frontage line and the principal building facade. 
Public frontage: the area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the frontage line. This definition supersedes Chapter II, Article II: Definitions. See Table 23. Public Frontage Types. 
Rear alley (RA): a vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear alleys should be paved from building face to building face, with drainage by inverted crown at the center or with roll curbs at the edges. 
Rear lane (RL): a vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear lanes may be paved lightly to driveway standards. The streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped edges, has no raised curb, and is drained by percolation. 
Regulating plan: a zoning map or set of maps that shows the Transect Districts, civic zones, special districts if any, and special requirements if any, of areas subject to, or potentially subject to, regulation by this Chapter. 
Residential: characterizing premises available for long-term human dwelling. 
Retail: characterizing premises available for the sale of merchandise and food service. 
Retail frontage: Frontage designated on a regulating plan that requires or recommends the provision of a storefront, encouraging the ground level to be available for retail use. See special requirements. 
Road (RD): a local, rural and suburban thoroughfare of low-to-moderate vehicular speed and capacity. This type is allocated to the more rural Transect Districts (T3). 
Secondary frontage: on corner lots, the private frontage that is not the principal frontage. As it affects the public realm, its first layer is regulated. 
Setback: The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building, with the exception of encroachments listed in 18.406 Building Configuration. (Var: build-to line) Note: This definition supersedes the LDC Chapter II: Definitions. 
Shingle sign: A small sign, which is either suspended from an overhang, canopy, marquee or awning, or is suspended from a mounting attached directly to the building wall. Can be placed parallel or perpendicular to the face of a building. 
Sidewalk sign: A freestanding, double-sided temporary sign placed at the entrance to a private front-age in a primarily pedestrian environment. 
Special district (SD): an area that, by its intrinsic use, placement, or configuration, cannot or should not conform to one or more of the normative community unit types or Transect Districts specified by this Chapter. Special districts may be mapped and regulated at the regional scale and/or the community scale. 
Special district 1 (SD1): Business: A special-use area comprised of primarily light industrial, office and warehouse buildings with some corner stores. This area allows large parking lots generally buffered from main streets. Pedestrian walkability and automobile access are balanced on a per-street basis. Open space is generally absent from this area. 
Special requirements: provisions for A-Grid, B-Grid, required retail frontage, required gallery frontage, required arcade frontage, build-to lines, coordinated frontages, terminated vistas, or cross block passages on a regulating plan or other map for those provisions. 
Square: a civic space type designed for unstructured recreation and civic purposes, spatially defined by building frontages and consisting of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. 
Stoop: a private frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the first story elevated from the sidewalk for privacy, with an exterior stair and landing at the entrance. 
Storefront: a private frontage conventional for retail use, with substantial glazing, wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. 
Story: a habitable level within a building, excluding an attic or raised basement. See Table 19. 
Street (ST): a local urban thoroughfare of low speed and capacity. See Table 5 and Table 7. 
Street wall: a freestanding wall built along the frontage line, or coplanar with the facade. It may mask a parking lot from the thoroughfare, provide privacy to a side yard, and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm. (Syn: streetwall) This definition supersedes Chapter II, Article II: Definitions. 
Substantial modification: alteration to a building that is valued at more than 50% of the replacement cost of the entire building, if new. 
Swale: a low or slightly depressed natural area for drainage. 
Target speed: is the velocity at which a thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of signage or enforcement. There are four ranges of speed: very low: (below 20 MPH); low: (20—25 MPH); moderate: (25—35 MPH); high: (above 35 MPH). Lane width is determined by desired target speed. 
Terminated vista: a location at the axial conclusion of a thoroughfare. A building located at a terminated vista designated on a regulating plan is required or recommended to be designed in response to the axis, and is frequently a vertical element. 
Terrace: a private frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line by an elevated terrace. This type buffers residential uses from urban sidewalks and is also suitable for outdoor cafes. 
Third place: a term used in the concept of community building to refer to social surroundings separate from the two usual social environments of home and workplace. Criteria for a third place include the following: highly accessible, proximate for many within walking distance, involve regulars, and inexpensive food and drink. Coffee shops and cafes are often used as a neighborhood's third place. 
Thoroughfare: a way for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to lots and open spaces, consisting of vehicular lanes and the public frontage. 
TOD: transit oriented development. A TOD is created by an overlay on all or part of a VIL or TCT, or by designation on a regional plan, permitting increased density to support transit or bus rapid transit. 
Town Center (TCT): a community unit type structured by a long or linear pedestrian shed that may be adjoined without buffers by one or several standard pedestrian sheds, each with the individual Transect District requirements of a TCT. A TCT takes the forms of a high-density mixed use center. (Syn: downtown, regional center.) (Regional example: Downtown Woodstock) 
Townhouse: a single-family dwelling that shares a party wall with another of the same type and occupies the full frontage line. See rearyard building. (Syn: rowhouse) 
Transect: a cross-section of the environment showing a range of different habitats. The rural-urban Transect of the human environment used in this Chapter is divided into six Transect Districts. These districts describe the physical form and character of a place, according to the density and intensity of its land use and urbanism. 
Transect District: One of several areas on a zoning map regulated by this Chapter. 
Tree: a woody plant with an expected mature height of thirty feet or more and possessing either a single trunk or multiple trunks. Trees are often described in subcategories by common attributes and the uses they serve, such as: 
i.  Shade tree: typically a deciduous tree - rarely an evergreen - planted primarily for its overhead canopy and the quality of the shade it provides. 
ii.  Small/medium/large (tree or shrub): a means of categorizing trees or shrubs based upon their canopy or spread at maturity assuming proper maintenance and normal growing conditions and which serves the purpose of allowing for their proper spacing in landscape plans. 
iii.  Street tree: a tree planted that is an element of a thoroughfare assembly. 
iv.  Specimen tree: a particularly impressive or unusual example of a species due to its size, shade, age, or any other trait that epitomizes the character of the species. 
v.  Understory tree: a small to medium sized tree with an expected mature height less than thirty feet and a canopy which may or may not offer a sufficient clearance height for pedestrians beneath. 
Turning radius: the curved edge of a thoroughfare at an intersection, measured at the inside edge of the vehicular tracking. The smaller the turning radius, the smaller the pedestrian crossing distance and the more slowly the vehicle is forced to make the turn. 
Urbanized area: all developable land within a site within Transect Districts T3, T4 and T5. Transect Districts T1 and T2 are not considered urbanized area. 
Village (VIL): a community unit type structured by a standard pedestrian shed oriented toward a common destination consisting of a mixed use center or corridor, and in the form of a medium-sized settlement near a transportation route. (Syn: traditional neighborhood development; neighborhood) 
Yield: characterizing a thoroughfare that has two-way traffic but only one effective travel lane because of parked cars, necessitating slow movement and driver negotiation. Also, characterizing parking on such a thoroughfare. 
ARTICLE 2. - NEW COMMUNITY PLANS 

18.201. - Instructions. 
1.  The provisions of this Chapter shall be utilized upon re-zoning to the Form-Based Code New Community (FBC-NC) District. 
2.  New community plans may contain more than one community unit and/or more than one community unit type. 
3.  Once the City Council approves rezoning to the FBC-NC District, the parcel shall be marked as such on the zoning map of the City of Woodstock. Within the FBC-NC District, this Chapter shall be the exclusive and mandatory zoning regulation, and its provisions shall be applied in their entirety. 
4.  After rezoning is complete, the following approvals will be required: 
a.  Pre-application conference on the subdivision with Community Development Staff, including a Sketch Plat and discussion of the proposed area(s) to be subdivided; 
b.  New Community Sketch Plat. New Community Sketch Plats shall comply with Chapter III, Article III. In addition, the New Community Sketch Plat shall include: 
1.  Designation of community unit type. 
2.  Boundaries of community units based on adjusted pedestrian sheds. 
3.  Total site acreage. 
4.  Transect district locations with acreages and %. 
5.  Block sizes. 
6.  Thoroughfares: location and designation of thoroughfare types. 
7.  Civic space types, acreages, percentage and location. 
8.  Special requirements, if applicable (See Sec. 18.211). 
9.  Special district locations with acreages and percentage of community unit, if applicable. 
10.  Any requested administrative waivers, waivers, or variances. 
c.  New Community Preliminary Plat. New Community Preliminary Plats shall be approved by the DPC per the standards in Chapter III, Sec. 3.402 and Chapter XVIII, Article 4; 
d.  Securing the approval of the required public improvements or an acceptable bond; 
e.  Final Plat. Final Plat standards and procedures shall be per Chapter III, Sec. 3.500, Sec. 3.502, Sec. 10.140 § 2, and Chapter XVIII, Article 4. Final Plat shall receive ministerial approval by the Planning Commission and shall be signed by the Development Process Committee Chairman. 
18.202. - Sequence of Community Design. 
1.  The new community regulating plan shall be structured using one or several pedestrian sheds applicable to its community unit type as required in Sec. 18.203. The pedestrian shed(s) should be located according to existing conditions, such as traffic intersections, adjacent developments, and natural features. The site or any community unit within it may be smaller or larger than its pedestrian shed. The pedestrian shed is a planning guide, not a regulatory unit. 
2.  The pedestrian sheds shall be adjusted to include land falling between or outside them. Community unit boundaries are determined by the boundaries of these adjusted pedestrian sheds and/or partial pedestrian sheds, herein after known as the community unit. 
3.  Areas of Transect District subdistricts (Sec. 18.204) shall be allocated within the boundaries of each community unit as appropriate to its type. See Sec. 18.203 and Table 2. 
4.  Civic districts shall be assigned according to Sec. 18.208. 
5.  Special districts, if any, shall be assigned according to Sec. 18.209 and Article 5. Special Districts. 
6.  The thoroughfare network shall be laid out according to Sec. 18.602. 
7.  Density shall be calculated according to Sec. 18.210 and Sec. 18.407. 
8.  Upon submittal, the DPC shall review and may administratively approve only if the submittal is consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. Any amendment(s) or alteration(s) to the approved new community regulating plan shall require a new submittal, but only of the portions altered. 
18.203. - Community Unit Types. 
1.  Village (VIL). 
a.  A VIL shall be structured by one pedestrian shed and shall be no fewer than 40 acres and no more than 200 acres, as allocated on Table 1. See Article 3 for infill VIL acreage requirements. 
b.  A VIL shall include Transect Districts as allocated on Table 2. 
c.  Larger sites shall be designed and developed as multiple communities, each subject to the individual Transect District requirements for its type as allocated on Table 2. The simultaneous planning of adjacent parcels is encouraged. 
2.  Town Center (TCT). 
a.  A TCT shall be structured by one pedestrian shed that may be adjoined without buffers by one or several pedestrian sheds, and shall be no fewer than 20 acres and no more than 200 acres, as allocated on Table 1. See Article 3 for infill TCT acreage requirements. 
b.  A TCT shall include Transect Districts as allocated on Table 2. 
c.  Larger sites shall be designed and developed as multiple communities, each subject to the individual Transect District requirements for its type as allocated on Table 2. The simultaneous planning of adjacent parcels is encouraged. 
18.204. - Transect Districts. 
1.  Transect District subdistricts shall be assigned and mapped on each new community regulating plan according to the percentages allocated on Table 2. 
2.  A Transect District subdistrict may include any of the elements indicated for its Transect District number throughout this Chapter, in accordance with 18.104 Transect Districts and the metric standards summarized in Table 9, Table 11, and Table 11. 
3.  Where practical, existing single-family residential dwellings shall be abutted by the T3 or T4 Transect Districts. 
18.205. - Thoroughfares and Block Standards. 
1.  The thoroughfare network shall be structured to define blocks with the following maximum block face lengths and block perimeters: 
a.  T3   2,640 ft. perimeter. 
b.  T4   2,400 ft. perimeter. 
c.  T5   2,000 ft. perimeter. 
d.  SD1  2,800 ft. perimeter. 
2.  Block faces exceeding 400 feet shall be equipped with a pedestrian passage that is a minimum of 8 ft. wide. 
3.  Blocks adjacent to undeveloped land, areas unsuitable for development, or pre-existing incomplete blocks may be exempt from block face length and block perimeter requirements by administrative waiver. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
a.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
b.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  The reduced thoroughfare network will not materially endanger the public health or safety. 
d.  The lack of connectivity will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
e.  The location and character of the block structure, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
f.  The block size will not adversely affect the district by impeding walkability. 
4.  Rear access for all lots within T4 shall be provided by a rear lane or rear alley. 
5.  Rear access for all lots within T5 shall be provided by a rear alley. 
6.  Blocks with more than one Transect District designation shall use the highest designation to determine the block face length, block perimeter, and rear alley or rear lane requirements. 
18.206. - Lot Structure. 
1.  Within each Transect District, lots shall be platted to have the following minimum and maximum lot widths, measured at the frontage line: 
a.  T3   50 ft. min.—150 ft. max. 
b.  T4   20 ft. min.—96 ft. max. 
c.  T5   20 ft. min.—200 ft. max. 
d.  SD1  60 ft. min.—300 ft. max. 
2.  Each lot shall have a primary frontage abutting a vehicular thoroughfare, except that 20% of the lots within the FBC-NC District may have their primary frontage along a publicly accessible passage, or sidewalk. 
3.  Lots may have multiple frontages as illustrated on Table 14. One frontage line is designated the principal frontage line and all remaining frontage lines are designated as secondary. 
4.  Lots shall be divided into regulatory layers to control development as illustrated on Table 13. Prescriptions for the second, third and fourth layers pertain only to the primary frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages. 
18.207. - Thoroughfare Network Standards. 
1.  Community plans must map a thoroughfare network plan including the following: 
a.  The major thoroughfare network. 
b.  Modifications to existing thoroughfares, if any. 
2.  Community plans must include a major thoroughfare network in accordance with Sec. 18.602. 
3.  The thoroughfare network plan must map thoroughfares and intersections according to Sec. 18.602. 
a.  Thoroughfare assemblies must be included for each mapped thoroughfare in accordance with Article 6. 
b.  All thoroughfares must connect to other thoroughfares, forming a network. 
c.  New thoroughfares must connect wherever possible to thoroughfares outside of the community unit. 
d.  The thoroughfares must be configured as a network creating blocks sized according to Sec. 18.205. 
e.  The thoroughfares may deviate from the network outside of the pedestrian shed, to accommodate natural conditions, and to intersect major thoroughfares. 
18.208. - Civic Standards. 
1.  Civic Space (CS) Specific to T3—T5 Districts 
a.  Each pedestrian shed shall assign 5—20% of its urbanized area to civic space. 
b.  Civic spaces shall be designed as described in Table 27 and distributed throughout Transect Districts as described in Table 27. 
c.  Each pedestrian shed shall contain at least one main civic space. The main civic space shall be within 800 feet of the geographic center of each pedestrian shed, unless topographic conditions, pre-existing thoroughfare alignments or other circumstances prevent such location. A main civic space shall conform to one of the types specified in Table 27.b, Table 27.c, or Table 27.d. 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of every lot in residential use, a civic space designed and equipped as a playground shall be provided. A playground shall conform to Table 27.e. 
e.  Each civic space of type Table 27.c or Table 27.d shall have a minimum of 50% of its perimeter facing a Thoroughfare. 
f.  Parks may be permitted in T5 by Administrative Waiver. 
g.  The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
1.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
2.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
4.  The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
5.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
6.  The location and character of the park design is such that it will not impede walkability and will provide adequate connections to nearby thoroughfares. 
2.  Civic Buildings (CB) Specific to T3—T5 Districts 
a.  The owner shall covenant to construct a meeting hall or a third place in proximity to the main civic space of each pedestrian shed. Its corresponding public frontage shall be equipped with a shelter and bench for a transit stop, if on an existing or planned transit route. 
b.  Civic building sites shall not occupy more than 20% of the area of each pedestrian shed. 
c.  The particulars of Civic Building design may be determined by Waiver if they do not meet the standards of Article 4. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
1.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
2.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
4.  The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
5.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
6.  The items regulated in Article 4 vary by no more than 25% from the standards for the Transect Districts of adjacent properties. 
18.209. - Special Districts. 
1.  Special district designations shall be assigned to areas that, by their intrinsic size, use, or configuration, cannot conform to the requirements of any Transect District or combination of districts. Conditions of development for special districts not included in Article 5 shall be recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council and recorded in Article 5. Special districts may be mapped within or outside of community units. If mapped within a community unit, a special district shall not exceed 20% of the net site area. See Article 5. 
2.  Business Special District (SD1) 
a.  SD1 is available for industrial and manufacturing areas and areas with a high concentration of office and light industrial uses. 
b.  SD1 is limited to a maximum size of 120 acres. 
c.  SD1 may be mapped within or adjacent to village and town center community units. 
18.210. - Density Calculations. 
1.  All developable areas of the community unit shall be considered cumulatively the net site area. The net site area shall be allocated to the various Transect Districts according to the parameters specified in Table 2. 
2.  Density shall be expressed in terms of housing units per acre. The housing and other uses for each Transect District shall be determined at the building scale as limited by Table 7, Table 8 and Sec. 18.407. 
18.211. - Special Requirements. 
1.  A new community regulating plan may designate any of the following special requirements: 
a.  A differentiation of the thoroughfares as A-Grid and B-Grid. Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this Chapter in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered for administrative waivers allowing automobile-oriented standards. The frontages assigned to the B-Grid shall not exceed 30% of the total length of frontages within a pedestrian shed. B-grid signage may utilize the Chapter VI, Sign Standards. 
b.  Mandatory and/or recommended retail frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a storefront at sidewalk level along the entire length of its private frontage. The storefront shall be no less than 50% glazed in clear glass as generally described in Table 4 and specified in Sec. 18.406.4.c. 
c.  Mandatory and/or recommended gallery frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a permanent cover over the sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. The gallery frontage designation may be combined with a retail frontage designation. 
d.  Mandatory and/or recommended porch front, requiring or advising that a porch be included in the private frontage. 
e.  Build-to line, requiring the placement of the building facade along the line. 
f.  Coordinated frontage, requiring that the public frontage (Table 29) and private frontage (Table 5) be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
g.  Mandatory and/or recommended terminated vista locations, requiring or advising that the building be provided with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds visually to the location. 
h.  Cross block passages, requiring that a minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian access be reserved between buildings. 
TABLE 1. COMMUNITY UNIT CONFIGURATION 

 
TABLE 2. FBC-NC PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

 
ARTICLE 3. - INFILL COMMUNITY PLANS 

18.301. - Instructions. 
1.  For Infill Community Plans, Infill Plans shall be submitted and approved as part of a rezoning application to Transect Districts. 
2.  Infill Community Plans shall plan, at minimum, an area the size of the pedestrian shed commensurate with its community unit type as listed in Sec. 18.302, and may regulate an area as small as 5 acres. The Planning Commission shall recommend and City Council shall approve the community unit type based on existing conditions and intended evolution in the plan area. 
3.  After rezoning to Transect Districts is complete, the following approvals will be required when subdivision is necessary: 
a.  Infill Community Sketch Plat. Infill Community Sketch Plats shall comply with Chapter III, Article III. In addition, the Infill Community Sketch Plat shall include: 
1.  Designation of community unit type. 
2.  Boundaries of community unit based on adjusted pedestrian shed. 
3.  Total site acreage. 
4.  Transect district locations with acreages and %. 
5.  Block sizes. 
6.  Thoroughfares: location and designation of thoroughfare types. 
7.  Civic space types, acreages, percentage and location. 
8.  Special requirements, if applicable (See Sec. 18.211). 
9.  Special district locations with acreages and percentage of community unit, if applicable. 
10.  Any requested administrative waivers, waivers, or variances. 
b.  Infill Community Preliminary Plat. Infill Community Preliminary Plats shall be approved by the DPC per the standards in Chapter III, Sec. 3.402 and Chapter XVIII, Article 4. 
c.  Final Plat. Final Plat standards and procedures shall be per Chapter III, Sec 3.500, Sec. 3.502, Sec. 10.140 § 2, and Chapter XVIII, Article 4. Final Plat shall receive ministerial approval by the Planning Commission and shall be signed by the Development Process Committee Chairman. 
4.  After rezoning to Transect Districts is complete, the following approvals will be required when subdivision is not necessary: 
a.  Site Plan. Site Plans for development in Transect Districts shall be approved by the Community Development Staff per the standards and procedures in Article 4. 
18.302. - Community Unit Types. 
1.  Infill regulating plans shall encompass one or more of the following community unit types. The allocation percentages of Article 4 and Table 3 shall be used as guidelines. 
2.  Infill VIL (Village). 
a.  An infill VIL should be assigned to neighborhood areas that are predominantly residential with one or more mixed use corridors or centers. An infill VIL shall be planned as at least one complete pedestrian shed, oriented around one or more existing or planned common destinations. 
b.  The edges of an infill VIL should blend into adjacent neighborhoods and/or downtown without buffers. 
3.  Infill TCT (Town Center). 
a.  An infill TCT should be assigned to neighborhood areas that are predominantly mixed use centers. An infill TCT shall be planned one complete standard pedestrian shed, oriented around one or more existing or planned mixed use corridors or centers. 
b.  The edges of an infill TCT should blend into adjacent neighborhoods and/or downtown without buffers. 
18.303. - Transect Districts. 
1.  A Transect District shall include elements indicated by Article 1, Article 2, Article 4, and Article 6. 
18.304. - Thoroughfares and Block Standards. 
1.  If the Infill Community Plan exceeds ten (10) acres, maximum block size requirements shall apply. The owner is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of The City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance. 
2.  The thoroughfare network shall be structured to define blocks with the following maximum block face lengths and block perimeters: 
a.  T3 - 600 ft./2,000 ft. perimeter. 
b.  T4 - 600 ft./1,800 ft. perimeter. 
c.  T5 - 600 ft./1,800 ft. perimeter. 
3.  Block faces exceeding 400 feet shall be equipped with a pedestrian passage that is a minimum of 8 ft. in width. 
4.  Blocks adjacent to undeveloped land, areas unsuitable for development, or pre-existing incomplete blocks may be exempt from block face length and block perimeter requirements by administrative waiver. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
a.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Section 18.102 Intent. 
b.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  The reduced thoroughfare network will not materially endanger the public health or safety. 
d.  The lack of connectivity will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
e.  The location and character of the block structure, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
f.  The block size will not adversely affect the district by impeding walkability. 
5.  Rear access for all lots within T4 shall be provided by a rear lane or rear alley. 
6.  Rear access for all lots within T5 shall be provided by a rear alley. 
7.  Blocks with more than one Transect District designation shall use the highest designation to determine the block face length, block perimeter, and rear alley or rear lane requirements. 
8.  Lots within the IN-VIL and IN-TCT Districts may have their primary frontage along a publicly accessible passage, sidewalk, or Civic Space as defined in Table 27 instead of a thoroughfare, if granted by administrative waiver. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
a.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
b.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  The waiver will not materially endanger the public health or safety. 
d.  The waiver will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property. 
e.  The waiver will be in harmony with proximate land uses, useful to and useable by the public during daylight hours, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
f.  The waiver will not adversely affect the district by impeding walkability. 
g.  The park is usable for recreation and/or viewing for the homes fronting the park, is substantial enough to warrant the waiver and access to the homes is not impeded by the lack of a public thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 5-18-2015(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
18.305. - Special Districts. 
1.  Areas that, by their intrinsic size, use, or configuration, cannot conform to the requirements of any Transect District or combination of districts shall be designated as special districts as indicated by Article 5. 
18.306. - Special Requirements. 
1.  An infill community regulating plan may designate any of the following special requirements: 
a.  A differentiation of the thoroughfares as A-Grid and B-Grid. Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this Chapter in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered for administrative waivers allowing automobile-oriented standards. The frontages assigned to the B-Grid shall not exceed 30% of the total length of frontages within a pedestrian shed. B-grid signage may utilize the Chapter VI, Sign Standards. 
b.  Mandatory and/or recommended retail frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a storefront at sidewalk level along the entire length of its private frontage. The storefront shall be no less than 50% glazed in clear glass as generally described in Table 5 and specified in 18.406.4.c. 
c.  Mandatory and/or recommended gallery frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a permanent cover over the sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. The gallery frontage designation may be combined with a retail frontage designation. 
d.  Mandatory and/or recommended porch front, requiring or advising that a porch be included in the private frontage. 
e.  Build-to line, requiring the placement of the building facade along the line. 
f.  Coordinated frontage, requiring that the public frontage (Table 23) and private frontage (Table 5) be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
g.  Mandatory and/or recommended terminated vista locations, requiring or advising that the building be provided with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds visually to the location. 
h.  Cross block passages, requiring that a minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian access be reserved between buildings. 
TABLE 3. INFILL COMMUNITY GUIDELINES 

 
ARTICLE 4. - SUBDIVISION & ZONING 

18.401. - Instructions. 
1.  Lot and building plan approval for areas subject to a regulating plan approved under either Article 2 or Article 3 shall be subject to the following requirements of this Chapter. 
2.  Site and buildings plans submitted under this Chapter require administrative approval by the Community Development Department. 
3.  Building and site plans submitted under this Chapter shall show the following, in compliance with the standards described in this Chapter: 
a.  Preliminary plat approval shall comply with the standards in Chapter III, Sec. 3.402: The subdivider shall also file: 
1.  Civic space acreages, percentage and location. 
2.  Total number of lots in each Transect District with acreages and %. 
a.  Number of units per lot and total units. 
b.  The layout of all proposed and existing lots with lot widths for each lot and building setback lines. 
c.  The locations, width, and names of proposed streets and alleys (street names shall not be duplicated, and they shall be reviewed and approved by the DPC). 
d.  Site Improvements. 
1.  Street tree and Public Landscaping Plan. 
2.  Public Lighting Plan. 
b.  Final Plat - Final Plat standards and procedures shall be per Chapter III, Sec. 3.500, Sec. 3.502, Sec. 10.140 § 2. The subdivider shall also file: 
1.  Lot coverage. 
2.  Building placement. 
3.  Use. 
4.  Architectural standards. 
5.  Signage. 
6.  Private frontage type. 
7.  Building Height. 
8.  Parking — location and number of spaces. 
9.  Driveways. 
4.  The City Planner shall review and may approve only if the submittal is consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and past required approvals (Article 2 or Article 3). Any amendment(s) or alternation(s) to the approved building and site plan shall require a new submittal, but only of the portions altered. 
18.402. - Pre-existing Conditions. 
1.  Existing buildings and appurtenances that do not conform to the provisions of this Chapter may continue in use as they are until a substantial modification is requested. 
2.  The modification of existing buildings is permitted by right if such changes result in greater conformance with the specifications of this Chapter. 
3.  The restoration or rehabilitation of an existing building shall not require the provision of (a) parking in addition to that existing nor (b) on-site stormwater retention/detention in addition to that existing, unless otherwise required by County or State Code. Existing parking requirements that exceed those for this Chapter may be reduced as provided by Table 8 and Table 9. 
18.403. - Special requirements. 
1.  To the extent that any regulating plan designates any of the following special requirements, standards shall be applied as follows: 
a.  A differentiation of the thoroughfares as A-Grid and B-Grid. Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this Chapter in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered for administrative waivers allowing automobile-oriented standards. The frontages assigned to the B-Grid shall not exceed 30% of the total length of frontages within a pedestrian shed. B-Grid signage may utilize the Chapter VI, Sign Standards. 
b.  Mandatory and/or recommended retail frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a storefront at sidewalk level along the entire length of its private frontage. The storefront shall be no less than 50% glazed in clear glass as generally described in Table 5 and specified in 18.406.4.a. 
c.  Mandatory and/or recommended gallery frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a permanent cover over the sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. The gallery frontage designation may be combined with a retail frontage designation. 
d.  Mandatory and/or recommended porch front, requiring or advising that a porch be included in the private frontage. 
e.  Build-to line, requiring the placement of the building facade along the line. 
f.  Coordinated frontage, requiring that the public frontage (Table 23) and private frontage (Table 5) be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
g.  Mandatory and/or recommended terminated vista locations, requiring or advising that the building be provided with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds visually to the location. 
h.  Cross block passages, requiring that a minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian access be reserved between buildings. 
18.404. - Civic Areas. 
1.  General. 
a.  Civic areas are designated on regulating plans as civic space (CS) or civic building (CB). 
b.  Parking requirements for civic districts shall be determined by Table 8. For parking location standards, see Sec. 18.409. 
2.  Civic Spaces (CS). 
a.  Civic spaces shall be generally designed as described in Table 27 and shall be dedicated, designed and constructed pursuant to the following regulations: 
1.  Detention ponds and required stream buffers shall not be used in civic space calculations. 
2.  The owner shall submit a maintenance agreement establishing a mechanism for maintaining CS dedication located within subject development. 
3.  Civic space requirements shall be constructed or dedicated as part of the first phase of construction, in an amount equivalent to the first phase proportion of the total development. 
4.  Civic Space dedication shall be guaranteed through bonds, conservation easements, land donation to the City or permanent deed restriction. For developments smaller than a pedestrian shed, in lieu of civic space dedication, a cash value contribution shall be provided to the City's open space bank, which contribution shall be equivalent to the square footage value of subject land multiplied times the square footage of such Civic Space requirement. 
5.  Non-residential development shall provide public Civic Space, which shall be open to the public during daylight hours and other hours as determined by the City. 
6.  Where greenway trails are required along streams, there shall be public access along such greenway trails and there shall be a minimum seventy-five (75) feet natural buffer along such streams measured from top of bank, which may include such greenway. Trail and such natural buffer shall be calculated towards Civic Space requirements. 
3.  Civic Buildings (CB). 
a.  The particulars of Civic Building design may be determined by Waiver if they do not meet the standards of this Chapter. Signage requirements, however, shall be in accord with Sec. 18.411. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
1.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
2.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
4.  The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
5.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
6.  The items regulated in Article 4 vary by no more than 25% from the standards for the Transect Districts of adjacent properties. 
18.405. - Building Placement. 
1.  Specific to districts T3, T4, T5. 
a.  Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Table 10—Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
b.  Buildings shall be placed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to Table 10—Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
c.  One principal building at the frontage, and one outbuilding to the rear of the principal building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 13. 
d.  Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that recorded in Table 10—Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
e.  Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear principal frontage line or to the tangent of a curved principal frontage line, and along a minimum percentage of the frontage width at the setback, as specified as frontage buildout on Table 10—Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
f.  Setbacks for principal buildings shall be as shown in Table 10—Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
g.  Rear setbacks for outbuildings shall be a minimum of 15 feet measured from the centerline of the rear alley or rear lane easement. In the absence of rear alley or rear lane, the rear setback shall be as shown in Table 10—Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
18.406. - Building Configuration. 
1.  General to districts T3, T4, T5. 
a.  The private frontage of buildings shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with Table 5. Private Frontages. 
b.  Buildings on corner lots shall have two private frontages as shown in Table 14. Prescriptions for the second and third layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages. 
c.  All facades shall be glazed with clear glass no less than 15% of the total facade area with each story calculated independently. 
d.  Building heights and expression lines shall conform to Table 4. 
e.  Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for a first floor commercial use, which shall be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor level exceeding 14 feet, or 25 feet at ground level, shall be counted as two (2) stories. Mezzanines extending beyond 33% of the floor area shall be counted as an additional story. 
f.  In a parking structure or garage, each above-ground level counts as a single story regardless of its relationship to habitable stories. 
g.  Height limits do not apply to attics or raised basements, masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads. 
h.  Except for solar panels and geothermal wells, all outdoor electrical, plumbing and mechanical equipment shall be located in the second or third layer and concealed from the frontage view. These facilities are not allowed to encroach into the first layer. 
i.  The habitable area of an accessory unit within a principal building or an outbuilding shall not exceed 850 square feet, excluding the parking area. 
2.  Specific to district T3. 
a.  No portion of the private frontage may encroach the sidewalk. 
b.  Open porches may encroach the first layer 50% of its depth. (Table 13) 
c.  Balconies and bay windows may encroach the first layer 25% of its depth except that balconies on porch roofs may encroach as does the porch. 
3.  Specific to districts T4. 
a.  Balconies, open porches, bay windows and stoops may encroach the first layer 80% of its depth. (Table 13) 
b.  Awnings may encroach the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb but must clear the sidewalk vertically by at least 8 feet. 
4.  Specific to districts T4O, T5. 
a.  Awnings and galleries may encroach the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb but must clear the sidewalk vertically by at least 8 feet. 
b.  Stoops, lightwells, balconies, bay windows, and terraces may encroach the first layer 100% of its depth. (Table 13) 
c.  The Storefront Private Frontage shall be no less than 60% glazed in clear glass as generally illustrated in Table 5 and specified in this Chapter. 
d.  The minimum building height at the facade shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
e.  Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on B-Grid frontages and shall not be permitted on or within 100 feet of an A-Grid frontage. 
f.  In the absence of a building facade along any part of a frontage line, a street wall shall be built coplanar with the facade. 
g.  Street walls shall be between 3.5 and 6 feet in height. The street wall may be replaced by a hedge or fence by administrative waiver. Street walls shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
1.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
2.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The waiver does not require a Special Exception Permit. 
4.  The fence will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
5.  The fence will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
6.  The location and character of the fence, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
7.  The location and character of the fence will not adversely affect the district by impeding walkability. 
h.  A first level residential or lodging use shall be raised a minimum of 1.5 feet from average sidewalk grade. 
18.407. - Building Use. 
1.  Table 7. Building Use lists the land uses that are permitted in the specified zoning districts. If a particular use is not listed but the Zoning Administrator can equate the proposed use to a similar use that is listed, then the use that is not listed may be allowed to locate in the zone district where the equated use is permitted. The uses allowed are those that will benefit from close proximity of uses and foster a pedestrian-oriented environment. 
2.  Residential, retail, office, lodging, and civic are defined broadly and shall be permitted in all urbanized area pursuant to the limitations of Table 6. Building Intensity. See Building Intensity definitions. 
3.  General to districts T3, T4, T4O, T5. 
a.  Buildings in each Transect district shall conform to the intensities and uses on Table 6 and Table 7. 
4.  Specific to district T3. 
a.  Accessory uses of restricted lodging or restricted office shall be permitted. See Table 6. 
b.  First story commercial uses shall be permitted. See Table 6. 
5.  Specific to districts T4. 
a.  Accessory uses of limited lodging or limited office shall be permitted. See Table 6. 
6.  Specific to districts T4O and T5. 
a.  Commercial uses shall be permitted. See Table 6 
b.  Manufacturing uses within the first story may be permitted by waiver. 
7.  The maximum density of each lot is calculated in terms of dwelling units per net acre. 
a.  Maximum density is limited to the following rations: 

 
18.408. - Parking Standards. 
1.  Specific to district T3, SD1. 
a.  Buildable density on a lot shall be limited by the actual parking provided within the lot as applied to the uses permitted in Table 8. 
2.  Specific to districts T4, T4O, T5. 
a.  Buildable density on a lot shall be limited by the sum of the actual parking calculated as that provided (1) within the lot (2) along the parking lane corresponding to the lot frontage, and (3) by purchase or lease from a civic parking reserve within the community unit, if available. 
b.  The actual parking may be adjusted upward according to the occupancy rate of Table 9 to determine the effective parking. The occupancy rate is available for any uses within any pair of adjacent blocks. 
c.  Based on the effective parking available, the density of the projected use may be limited according to Table 8. 
d.  Accessory units shall be exempt from parking requirements. 
e.  Liner buildings less than 30 feet deep and no more than two stories shall be exempt from parking requirements. 
f.  Shared parking shall require written consent of property owners agreeing to the shared parking arrangement (when provided off-site). 
g.  Copies of parking lease agreement, easements for parking, or notarized letter or sworn affidavit as to the intent of lease agreement, including renewed leases, shall be filed with the Community Development Director. Lapse of a required lease agreement shall terminate approval for shared parking. 
h.  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: 
1.  All new non-residential uses shall provide one (1) such space for every twenty (20) automobile spaces and new multifamily uses shall provide one (1) such space for every five (5) units provided that no such uses shall have fewer than two (2) such spaces or be required to exceed thirty (30) spaces. 
2.  Such spaces shall be located within the public frontage a maximum distance of one hundred (100) feet from the primary entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. Bicycle parking spaces shall include a bike rack with a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. 
18.409. - Parking Location Standards. 
1.  General to districts T3, T4, T4O, T5, SD1. 
a.  Parking shall be accessed by rear alleys or rear lanes, when such are available on the regulating plan. 
b.  Open parking areas shall be masked from the frontage by a building or street wall. 
c.  For buildings on B-Grids, open parking areas may be allowed unmasked on the frontage, but shall not be permitted on or within 100 feet of an A-Grid frontage. 
2.  Specific to districts T3. 
a.  Open parking areas shall be located at the second and third lot layers, except that driveways, drop-offs and unpaved parking areas may be located at the first lot layer. (Table 13) 
b.  Garages shall be located at the third layer except that side- or rear-entry types may be allowed in the second layer. 
c.  Driveways at frontages shall be no wider than 10 feet in the first layer. 
3.  Specific to districts T4. 
a.  Garages shall be located at the third layer. 
b.  Driveways at frontages shall be no wider than 10 feet in the first layer. 
4.  Specific to districts T4O, T5. 
a.  All parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be located at the third layer. (Table 13) 
b.  Vehicular entrances to parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be no wider than 24 feet at the frontage. 
c.  Parking structures on the A-Grid shall have liner buildings lining the first story. 
d.  No curb cuts, driveways or circular drives shall be permitted on Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, or Arnold Mill Road when access can be provided from a side or rear street. Circular drives are prohibited, with the exception of hotel and hospital uses. 
18.410. - Landscape Standards. 
1.  Intent. A Transect-based Landscape Plan provides many aesthetic, ecological, and health/safety benefits. The standards of this section promote public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards for the design, construction and maintenance of landscape improvements for public frontages and private frontages, lots, buildings, civic spaces, thoroughfares and special requirements. 
a.  Aesthetics/Walkability. These standards should enhance the overall aesthetic condition of communities, neighborhoods and the public realm with landscaping by: 
1.  coordinating public frontages and private frontages. 
2.  providing spatial definition to the public realm. 
3.  providing screening of unsightly places and/or mitigation of conditions that are incongruent with Sec. 18.102 Intent of this Chapter, including but not limited to the edges of special districts. 
b.  Health/Safety. These standards should enhance comfort, safety and utilization of the public realm by moderating the local micro-climate through the application of trees and landscaping to: 
1.  improve air quality. 
2.  mitigate noise pollution. 
3.  provide seasonal shade, sun and temperature regulation. 
4.  reduce reflected light. 
5.  mitigate wind gusts. 
6.  provide a partial barrier between sidewalks and vehicular lanes. 
7.  provide areas for the convenient removal and storage of snow. 
c.  Ecology/Energy. These standards should provide ecological benefits including but not limited to: 
1.  conservation of energy used in buildings though strategic shading and wind breaks. 
2.  interception of precipitation by vegetative canopies. 
3.  percolation of precipitation through pervious landscape areas. 
4.  reduction in the insolation of pavements and other hard surfaces associated with urban heat islands through vegetative canopy cover. 
5.  conservation of soil and prevention of soil erosion through vegetative cover, root growth and wind breaks. 
d.  Harmony. The intent for canopy coverage of street trees and civic spaces is to be functional, ecological, and in harmony with the City of Woodstock Chapter IX Tree Preservation Standards. 
2.  General to districts T3, T4, T4O, T5. 
a.  Preservation of on-site existing trees and vegetation is encouraged and may be used to fulfill the landscape requirements. 
1.  The root zones of existing trees and vegetation to be preserved shall be protected from clearing or construction activities. 
2.  The size and limits of existing vegetation shall be indicated on the landscape plan. 
3.  Priority shall be given to preserving and protecting specimen trees that provide screening, buffering, wildlife habitat and/or linkages to wildlife habitat. 
a.  The applicant shall replace specimen trees that are removed on the site with tees of the same or similar species whose combined caliper dimensions equal that of the tree removed. 
b.  During construction, the root zone of existing vegetation to be preserved shall be enclosed by a temporary protective fence. 
b.  Landscape Design Standards. 
1.  The spacing and placement of plants shall be adequate and appropriate for the typical size, shape and habit of the plant species at maturity. 
2.  Proposed trees and understory trees shall be centered horizontally and minimally: 
a.  Two (2) feet from walkways, curbing, and other impervious pavements when planted in a tree well or continuous planter; 
b.  Three (3) feet from walkways, curbing and other impervious pavements when planted in a continuous swale. Root barriers should be used to redirect root growth away from sidewalks, curbs and driveways; 
c.  Five (5) feet from street lights, underground utilities, utility meters and service lines, fences, walls and other ground level obstructions; 
d.  Six (6) feet from porch eaves, and awnings and similar overhead obstructions associated with the ground level of buildings; 
e.  Eight (8) feet from balconies, verandas, building eaves and cornices, and similar overhead obstructions associated with the upper stories of buildings. 
3.  Proposed trees shall be a minimum height of ten (10) feet and/or three (3) inches in caliper. 
4.  Proposed understory trees shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and/or two-and-one-half (2½) inches in caliper. 
5.  Proposed shrubs shall be of a five (5) gallon container minimum. Shrubs shall be 18″—24″ minimum clear from any sidewalk or pavement edge at the lot line. 
6.  Ground vegetation or shrub planting with spines, thorns or needles that may present hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists or vehicles are prohibited in the first two (2) feet of the first layer. 
7.  Bare and exposed ground on the site and/or in landscaped areas shall be covered with live plant materials and/or mulch, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Agricultural fields seasonally tilled for cultivation. 
b.  Hiking trails and/or traces. 
c.  Clay or sand surfaces associated with recreation fields and facilities. 
8.  Artificial plants or artificial turf are prohibited, excluding active recreation sports fields that are typically subject to intense use and soil compaction which prohibits the establishment of turfgrass, and where paving or grass paving systems will not suffice given the area's purpose and level of use. 
9.  Buffers and screening elements shall be used to screen parking areas from public view, to screen service yards and other places that are unsightly. 
10.  Maintaining healthy urban soils reduces tree stress and improves tree survival, growth, longevity; this improves root structure and reduces the potential for tree failure. 
a.  Adequate soil volume shall be maintained throughout the lifetime of the tree. Planting environment shall provide an average soil depth greater than or equal to 3 feet. Each street tree shall have a minimum area suitable for root growth of 160 square feet provided, however if this minimum square footage is not provided, subsurface soil cells shall be incorporated into the Landscape Plan (includes trees in grates). All applicable details to show an industry standard subsurface soil cell design shall be attached as part of the plan provided. 
b.  Soil organic matter content should be maintained at about 5%. 
c.  Landscape Construction Standards. 
1.  All plant materials shall meet with the minimum container size, class and other requirements outlined in American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1-2004) published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA) or other local Nursery Association Standards. 
2.  Plants shall have normal, well-developed branches and vigorous root systems. 
d.  Landscape Maintenance. 
1.  No disturbed ground shall be left exposed. Turfgrass and other approved and appropriate groundcovers or mulch shall cover all non-paved and non-built developed areas. 
2.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s) or his assigned agent(s) to: 
a.  Maintain and keep all screening and fencing in good condition at all times; and 
b.  Maintain landscaping by keeping turfgrass lawns properly mowed and edged, plants properly pruned and disease-free, and planting beds mulched, groomed and weeded, and areas of naturally occurring vegetation and undergrowth; and 
c.  Replace any required planting(s) which are significantly damaged, removed, infested, disease ridden, or dead within one year or the next planting season, whichever occurs first, and other areas of naturally occurring vegetation and undergrowth. 
e.  Preservation, Replacement and Removal of Specimen Trees. 
1.  A Specimen Tree is any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type and condition. The following criteria are used by the City to identify Specimen Trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify. 
a.  Size Criteria: 
1.  Hardwoods: 24-inch Cal at DBH or larger. 
2.  Softwoods: 30-inch Cal at DBH or larger. 
3.  Understory/Flowering trees: 12-inch Cal at DBH or larger. 
b.  Condition Criteria: 
1.  Life expectancy greater than 15 years; 
2.  Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay; 
3.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only); 
4.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
2.  Small trees can be classified as specimen if of a rare or unusual species, of exceptional quality, or socio-historical significance. Small trees may also qualify as specimen if used in a landscape as a focal point of the design. In order to claim this credit, the applicant must submit a letter from a certified arborist stating that the tree(s) meet these qualifications. 
3.  A report for each Specimen Tree that is shown to be impacted by a proposed development requiring an LDP must be submitted to the City to determine whether that tree meets the condition criteria for specimen status. The report must be prepared and signed by a certified arborist or a registered forester. The report must contain the following information: 
a.  Site plan showing an accurate surveyed location of the tree, 
b.  Identification/verification of the tree's size and species, 
c.  Description of the surrounding site conditions, 
d.  Detailed description of the tree's condition, 
e.  Digital photographs to illustrate any defects which would disqualify the tree from specimen status. 
4.  The final determination of Specimen Tree status will be made by City staff after reviewing the report. If a Specimen Tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for removal must be submitted to the City. 
3.  Specific to districts T3, T4. 
a.  The first layer may not be paved, with the exception of driveways and sidewalks. (Table 13) 
b.  The minimum required landscape area shall be thirty (30) percent of the first layer of the principal frontage and the secondary frontage. 
c.  Open spaces and civic space shall remain fenced and protected during all adjacent site work and construction activities unless alterations to them are otherwise specified by the plans. 
4.  Specific to district T3. 
a.  One (1) tree shall be planted within the first layer for every 800 square feet of landscape area, or any portion thereof. (Table 13) 
1.  Substitutions: 
a.  One (1) tree may be substituted for two (2) understory trees; 
b.  One (1) understory tree may be substituted for ten (10) Shrubs. 
2.  Tree Preservation Credit: 
a.  One (1) tree may be substituted for an existing tree to be preserved provided that: 
1.  It is four (4) Inches DBH or greater; 
2.  Possesses a healthy and full canopy; 
3.  Has an unmolested CRZ; 
4.  Has incurred no damage that would undermine its long-term vitality and quality. 
b.  Trees shall be naturalistically clustered in conjunction with adjacent street trees. 
5.  Specific to district T4. 
a.  A minimum of one (1) understory tree or ten (10) shrubs shall be planted within the first layer for every 500 square feet of first layer landscape area. (Table 13) 
b.  Parking spaces shall be broken with one (1) landscape islands for every twenty (20) spaces. 
c.  The landscape islands shall be distributed throughout the lot and may be combined as a component of a stormwater management plan to facilitate water harvesting. 
1.  Landscape islands may be omitted for solar panel installations or other shading structures of equal or greater coverage. 
d.  Parking areas that exceed one hundred and twenty (120) spaces shall include a minimum of eight (8) foot wide pedestrian walkway. The pavements of such walkways shall be differentiated from parking area pavement through a change in surface texture, material, style, and/or color. 
e.  Porous paving materials are encouraged in order to increase storm water infiltration on site. 
6.  Specific to districts T4O, T5. 
a.  Trees shall not be required in the first layer. 
b.  The first layer may be paved to match the pavement of the public frontage. 
c.  Landscape islands in interior parking lots shall only occur at the end of drive aisles. Islands should be the minimum size for healthy growth for the specific species of tree. 
d.  Porous paving materials should be used in order to increase storm water infiltration on site. 
18.411. - Signage Standards. 
1.  Except with respect to the additional provisions in Paragraphs 2.—12. below, Chapter VI (Sign Standards) of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance shall be applicable and govern pursuant to the administration, processes and provisions for all signage within the City Limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. However, only the signage types permitted in this subsection and Table 15 hereof (Sign Types) shall be permitted in Transect Districts and FBC-NC. Special Districts may utilize Chapter VI (Sign Standards) instead of this subsection. Unless specifically defined in Section 18.106 hereof, all definitions used in this Section 18.411 shall be as defined in Article VI (Sign Standards) of the Land Development Ordinance of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
2.  Specific to Awning Signs. 
a.  The following variations of awnings, with or without sign bands, are permitted: 
1.  Fixed or retractable awnings. 
2.  Shed awnings. 
3.  Dome awnings. 
b.  Other awning types may be permitted by administrative waiver. 
c.  No portion of an awning shall be lower than eight (8) feet clearance. 
d.  Awnings shall be a minimum of 4 feet in depth. 
e.  Awnings shall not extend beyond the width of the building or tenant space, nor encroach above the roof line or the story above. 
f.  The height of the valance shall not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
g.  Letters, numbers, and graphics shall cover no more than seventy percent (70%) of the awning panel or valance area. 
h.  Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated or backlit. 
3.  Specific to Band Signs. 
a.  All owners or lessees are permitted one (1) band sign on each first story facade. 
b.  The following band sign construction types are permitted: 
1.  Cut-out letters. Letters shall be individually attached to the wall or on a separate background panel, and shall be externally illuminated. 
2.  Flat panel. Letters shall be printed or etched on same surface as the background, which is then affixed to the wall and externally illuminated. 
3.  Channel letters by administrative waiver. Each letter shall have its own internal lighting element, individually attached to the wall or onto a separate background panel. The letter shall be translucent, or solid to create a backlit halo effect. 
c.  Height and width shall be measured using smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire extent of letters, logo and background. 
d.  Band signs shall not be wider than 90% of the width of the building facade or tenant space. 
e.  Band signs shall not project vertically above the roof line. 
f.  Band signs may be illuminated from dusk to dawn or during hours permitted by the lighting ordinance. External lights shall be shielded from direct view to reduce glare. 
g.  Neon may be permitted on band signs. No other internal lighting shall be permitted. 
h.  Electrical raceways, conduits and wiring shall not be exposed. Internal lighting elements shall be contained completely within the sign assembly or inside the wall. 
i.  Band signs should be placed where the architectural features suggest the best placement for signage. They should be vertically aligned with the center of an architectural feature such as a storefront window, entry portal, or width of a bay or overall retail space. They shall not interrupt or obscure these features or cause visual disharmony. 
j.  Where multiple band signs are present on a single building, signage shall be coordinated in terms of scale, placement, colors and materials. 
4.  Specific to Blade Signs. 
a.  Blade signs may be double-sided. 
b.  Blade signs shall be permitted only for owners or lessees that have a principal entrance on the first story. 
c.  Owners or lessees shall be permitted one (1) blade sign where its principal frontage line is no more than five (5) feet from the facade. Owners or lessees that have a secondary frontage line that is no more than two (2) feet from the facade shall be permitted one (1) additional blade sign on that facade. 
d.  Blade signs may encroach into the public frontage up to four (4) feet and shall clear the sidewalk by at least eight (8) feet. 
e.  Blade signs shall not encroach above the roof line nor above the bottom of the second story window. 
f.  Mounting hardware, such as supports and brackets, may be simple and unobtrusive or highly decorative, but shall complement the design of the sign, the building, or both. 
g.  For buildings with multiple signs, mounting hardware or sign shapes, sizes and colors shall be coordinated. 
5.  Specific to Marquees. 
a.  Marquees shall be located only above the principal entrance of a building. 
b.  No marquee shall be wider than the entrance it serves, plus two (2) feet on each side thereof. 
c.  No portion of a marquee shall be lower than ten (10) feet clearance. 
d.  No marquee shall extend closer to the curb than three (3) feet. 
e.  All marquees, including anchors, bolts, supporting rods and braces, shall be constructed of non-combustible materials and shall be designed by a structural engineer and approved by the Building Inspector. 
f.  Marquee components and materials may vary. Anchors, bolts, and supporting rods should be limited to the interior of the marquee. 
g.  Message boards shall be permitted as part of marquees. 
h.  A band sign shall be permitted above a marquee. 
6.  Specific to Monument Signs. 
a.  Monument signs shall be located entirely on private property and a minimum of six (6) feet from the frontage. 
b.  Multi-tenant buildings and multi-family buildings shall be permitted one monument sign per frontage. 
c.  Monument signs may be double-sided. 
d.  No monument signs shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
e.  No monument sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per face in area or five (5) feet in height. 
f.  All monument signs shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be approved by the Building Inspector. 
g.  Message boards shall be not be permitted as part of a monument sign. 
7.  Specific to Nameplates. 
a.  Nameplates shall consist of either a panel or individual letters applied to a building wall within ten (10) feet of an entrance to the building. 
b.  One nameplate shall be permitted per address. 
c.  Nameplates shall not exceed three (3) square feet. 
d.  Nameplates shall be constructed of durable materials. 
8.  Specific to Outdoor Display Cases. 
a.  Each outdoor display case shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
b.  Outdoor display cases may be externally or internally illuminated. 
c.  Theaters may be permitted larger outdoor display cases by administrative waiver. Percent- age of area increase shall be limited to 100%. 
d.  Outdoor display cases shall not be attached to storefront windows. 
9.  Shingle Signs. 
a.  Shingle signs shall comport with the standards for blade signs except 4.d and 4.f. 
b.  A building may have both the prescribed number of blade signs and the same number of shingle signs. 
c.  Shingle signs may encroach into the public frontage up to two (2) feet and shall clear the sidewalk by at least seven (7) feet. 
10.  Specific to Sidewalk Signs. 
a.  Sidewalk signs shall be removed at the close of business each day. 
b.  One (1) sidewalk sign shall be permitted for each owner or lessee. 
c.  Sidewalk signs shall not exceed 42 inches in height or 26 inches in width. 
d.  Sidewalk signs shall be moved inside during high winds or other weather conditions that might pose a hazard to public safety. 
11.  Specific to Window Signs. 
a.  Only the following window sign types shall be permitted: 
1.  Vinyl applique letters applied to the window. Appliques shall consist of individual letters or graphics with no visible background. 
2.  Letters painted directly on the window. 
3.  Hanging signs that hang from the ceiling behind the window. 
4.  Neon signs. 
5.  Door signs applied to or hanging inside the glass portion of an entrance doorway. 
b.  Window signs shall not interfere with the primary use of windows, which is to enable passersby and public safety personnel to see through windows into premises and view product displays. 
c.  Window signs shall be no larger than 25% of the total area of the window onto which they are applied. Sign area shall be measured using smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire extent of letters, logo and background. 
d.  Letters on window signs shall be no taller than eight (8) inches. 
12.  Specific to Yard Signs. 
a.  One single- or double-post yard sign for each owner or lessee may be permitted by administrative waiver, provided it is set back at least six (6) feet from the frontage line, does not exceed six (6) square feet excluding posts, and does not exceed six (6) feet high including posts, measured from the yard at the post location. 
18.412. - Architectural Standards. 
1.  Architectural intent for non-civic building facades specific to Districts T4, T4O, and T5 facades: 
a.  Provide front entrance(s) that are distinct and visible from the street, but should not exaggerate or double the height of the entrance. 
b.  Simple massing is preferred and should be used with stoops, porches, galleries, arcades, roof eaves, and balconies to provide expressive character, over excessive use of building articulation. 
2.  Architectural intent for non-civic building facades specific to District T4O, and T5 facades: 
a.  Provide a discernable base, middle and cap that are clearly defined by horizontal elements along the bottom and top of the building. Expression of the elements should be handled through changes in material selection, color, or plane. Use of horizontal bands, cornices, and or varied window patterns can assist in expression. 
3.  General to Districts T3, T4, T4O, and T5 facades: 
a.  Building wall materials may be combined on each facade only horizontally, with the lighter above more substantial materials. 
b.  Glazing above the first story facade shall not exceed 30% of the total building facade wall area, with each facade being calculated independently, except by administrative waiver. 
c.  The storefront private frontage shall be no less than 50% glazing. 
d.  All glass shall be clear and free of color. 
e.  Pitched roofs, if provided, shall be simple and symmetrical, in the configuration of gables, hips, half-hips, gambrel and true mansards. 
f.  Pitched roofs shall be symmetrically sloped no less than 6:12, except that roofs for porches and attached sheds may be no less than 2:12. 
g.  Low pitch or flat roofs shall be enclosed by a parapet that is a minimum of 42″ in height, or a greater height as necessary to conceal mechanical equipment. 
h.  The exterior finish material on all facades shall be limited to brick, wood siding, cementitious siding, stucco and/or stone. No more than two material shall be combined on any facade. 
i.  Hardwood used for rafters, fascia boards and all visible portions of roof decking shall be varnished, oiled, stained or painted. Pressure treated wood shall be painted. 
j.  Dormers shall be roofed with a symmetrical gable or a shed configuration. They shall be no more than 2 windows wide and placed no less than 2 feet from an end gable or party wall. 
k.  Street walls should be constructed of a material matching the adjacent building facade. Evergreen hedges may be used as street walls. 
l.  Hardwood fences at the first lot layer may be varnished, oiled, stained or painted. Pressure treated wood, iron and steel shall be painted. 
4.  Specific to Districts T3, T4 facades: 
a.  Balconies and porches shall be made of painted wood, stained wood or cementitious wood substitute boards the same size and thickness as commonly available wood boards, or wood plastic composite. 
5.  Specific to Districts T4O, T5 facades: 
a.  Balconies and porches shall be made of painted wood, stained wood, cementitious wood substitute boards the same size and thickness as commonly available wood boards, wood plastic composite, or wrought iron. 
b.  Doors and windows that operate as sliders are prohibited along frontages. 
18.413. - Fencing Standards. 
1.  General to Districts T3, T4, T4O, and T5. 
a.  Hedges in frontage line fencing shall be evergreen. 
b.  Wood frontage fences shall be painted or stained. 
c.  No single frontage fence horizontal panel shall exceed 42″ in height along a frontage lot line. See Table 16. Fence Locations and Table 17. Fence Panels. 
d.  Private lot line fences shall be between 60″ and 72″ in height. See Table 16. Fence Locations 
e.  Frontage fences may occur at the lot line, or up to 18″ behind the lot line to permit landscaping. 
f.  When erected on a lot line, all of the fence and any of its supporting structures shall be contained within the lot. 
g.  Fences along private lot lines, or alley lot lines may be chain link, but in no case shall exceed 72″ in height. 
h.  The supporting members and posts shall be on the inside, and the smooth or flat faces on the outside. If two faces are used, each face shall be of the same type and finish. Board on board fences is considered equal treatment. 
i.  Barbed wire, razor wire and electrically charged fences are not permitted. 
2.  Specific to District T3. 
a.  Frontage fences in T3 shall be picket, post and hedge, ranch, or hedgerows. See Table 15. Fence Types. 
b.  Frontage fences shall be 36″ to 42″ in height. Secondary frontage fences may be 60″ high beginning at the primary setback. 
3.  Specific to district T4. 
a.  Frontage fences shall be picket, post and hedge, iron, stone, brick, or hedgerows. See Table 15. Fence Types. 
b.  Frontage fences shall be 36″ to 48″ in height. Secondary frontage fences may be 60″ high beginning at the primary setback. 
4.  Specific to Districts T4O, T5. 
a.  Frontage fences in T4O and T5 shall be iron, iron and stone, iron and brick, brick, stucco or stone. See Table 15. Fence Types. 
b.  Frontage fences shall be 48″ to 60″ in height. 
TABLE 4. BUILDING HEIGHT 

Expression lines shall occur on buildings taller than three stories as shown. 
TABLE 5. PRIVATE FRONTAGES 

 
TABLE 6. BUILDING INTENSITY 

 
TABLE 7. RESERVED 
Editor's note— An Ordinance adopted January 23, 2017, repealed Table 7, which pertained to Building Use and derived from Ord. of 10-28-2013(3), § 1(Exh. A). 
TABLE 8. PARKING CALCULATIONS 
The gross minimum number of parking spaces listed below shall be multiplied by the "occupancy rate" as found in Table 9, for each use for the weekday night, daytime and evening periods respectively, and weekend night, daytime and evening periods respectively. The gross minimum numbers of parking spaces for each of the uses referred to for each time period shall be added to produce the aggregate gross minimum numbers of parking spaces for each time period. 

 
* Senior housing or co-housing requirements may be reduced by 50%. 
TABLE 9. PARKING OCCUPANCY RATE 

 
Planning Staff shall provide a spreadsheet that will perform calculations for specific applications based on the above occupancy rates. 
TABLE 10. T3 STANDARDS 

 
*Storage includes boats and recreational vehicles. 
TABLE 11. T4/T4O STANDARDS 

 
*Storage includes boats and recreational vehicles. 
TABLE 12. T5 STANDARDS 

 
*Storage includes boats and recreational vehicles. 
TABLE 13. LOT STRUCTURE 


 
TABLE 14. FRONTAGES & ELEVATIONS 

TABLE 15. SIGN TYPES 

 
TABLE 16. FENCE TYPES 

 
TABLE 17. FENCE LOCATIONS 

TABLE 18. FENCE PANELS 

ARTICLE 5. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

18.501. - Special District SD1. 
1.  Building Placement 
a.  Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Table 19. 
b.  Buildings shall be placed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to Table 19. 
c.  Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that recorded in Table 19. 
d.  Setbacks for buildings shall be as shown in Table 19. 
2.  Building Configuration 
a.  General to SD1 
1.  Buildings on corner lots shall have two private frontages as shown in Table 13. Prescriptions for the second and third layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages. 
2.  Encroachments shall be as follows: At the first layer, cantilevered awnings and entry canopies may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the setback, except as may be further allowed by Chapter XI of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance; cantilevered portions of balconies, bay windows, and roofs shall be a maximum three (3) feet deep and may encroach up to a three (3) feet depth of the setback. Other cantilevered portions of the building shall maintain the required setback. At the second layer no encroachments are permitted except that facade components promoting energy efficiency such as shading and screening devices that are non-accessible may encroach a maximum of three (3) feet. 
3.  Galleries shall be a minimum twelve (12) feet deep and may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the setback. 
4.  In a parking structure or garage, each above-ground level counts as a single story regardless of its relationship to habitable stories. 
5.  Height limits do not apply to attics or raised basements, masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads. 
6.  All storage, utility and infrastructure elements including service areas, loading space, transformers, telephone boxes, garbage cans, dumpsters, condensers, meters, backflow preventers, Siamese connections and the like shall be located within the second or third layer and concealed from view from any frontage or sidewalk by street walls, and opaque gates. Loading and service entries shall be accessed from alleys when available. 
7.  Building heights shall be measured in stories and shall conform to Table 4 and be allocated as required in Table 19. Industrial uses requiring additional Height in SD2 may be permitted by administrative waiver The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
a.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Section 18.102 Intent. 
b.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  The waiver does not require a Special Exception Permit. 
d.  The additional height will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
1.  The additional height will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
2.  The additional height, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
3.  The applicant has demonstrated that the use specifically requires the proposed Height. 
8.  A first floor commercial use, which shall be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor level exceeding 14 feet, or 25 feet at ground level, shall be counted as two (2) stories. Mezzanines extending beyond 33% of the floor area shall be counted as an additional story. 
9.  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets of a minimum height required to conceal mechanical equipment. 
10.  Street walls shall be between three and a half (3.5) and eight (8) feet in Height. The Street wall may be replaced by a hedge or fence. Street walls shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. 
b.  Specific to SD1 
1.  The private frontage of buildings shall conform to Table 5. 
2.  All facades shall be glazed with clear glass no less than 15% of the first story. 
c.  Specific to SD2 
1.  Vehicular entries, loading space and service areas shall be permitted on principal frontages. 
3.  Building Use 
a.  Buildings in Special Districts shall conform to the uses and intensities described in Table 6 and Table 7. 
4.  Parking Standards 
a.  Vehicular parking shall be required as shown in Chapter VII, Article VII. 
b.  All parking, including open parking areas, covered parking, garages, loading docks and service areas shall be masked from the frontage by a street wall. Underground parking may extend into the second layer only if it is fully underground and does not require raising the first-floor elevation of the second layer above that of the sidewalk. 
c.  Buildings mixing uses shall provide parking required for each use. 
5.  Landscape Standards 
a.  Buffers and screening elements shall be used to screen parking areas from public view, to screen service yards and other places that are unsightly, and to buffer between the special district and an adjacent Transect District. 
1.  A frontage landscape buffer, which may also include the sidewalk, shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in depth, measured from the frontage line and running its full width. 
a.  1. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted within the first layer for every 700 square feet of frontage landscape buffer. 
b.  2. Fifty (50) percent or more of the frontage landscape buffer must have shrubs and vegetative cover. 
2.  An interior landscape buffer located along common property lines shall be required between a SD and an adjacent Transect Districts. 
a.  1. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted within the side and rear setbacks for every 700 square feet of interior landscape buffer. 
b.  2. Fifty (50) percent of the interior landscape buffer shall be covered with vegetation. 
3.  Shrubs shall be five (5) gallon container and twenty-four (24) inches height minimum, and of a type that, at maturity, will provide a continuous opaque screen at least thirty-six (36) inches in height. 
4.  Trees shall be four (4) inches caliper minimum, or in the case of evergreen trees, twelve (12) feet minimum height 
TABLE 19. SD1 STANDARDS 

 
ARTICLE 6. - PUBLIC REALM 

18.601. - Instructions. 
1.  This Chapter establishes design standards for public spaces and thoroughfares for land regulated by this Chapter. 
2.  The design standards set forth in this Chapter may be used as criteria for the planning approval process and are sanctioned through their respective City departments including Engineering, Planning, Public Works and Parks & Recreation. 
3.  Provisions of this Chapter, when in conflict, take precedence over those of other codes, ordinances, regulations and standards for Fire Department, Community Development, Public Works and Parks & Recreation, except the Local Health and Safety Codes and Local, State, and National Building Codes. 
4.  Additional licenses, agreements, and permits may be required as maintained and administered in the office of the respective City department. 
5.  Preliminary design drawings and final construction drawings for civic spaces, civic buildings, thoroughfares, and utilities require approval from the DPC. 
6.  Thoroughfare and utility plans submitted for approval must demonstrate compliance with: 
a.  Thoroughfare standards (Section 18.602) 
b.  Easement standards (Section 18.603) 
c.  Landscape standards (Section 18.605) 
7.  Civic space plans submitted for approval must demonstrate compliance with: 
a.  Civic space standards (Section 18.604) 
18.602. - Thoroughfare Standards. 
1.  The primary use of thoroughfares is to provide access to lots and open spaces. In accordance with the intent of this Chapter, thoroughfares must be designed to support several modes of transportation: public transportation, motor vehicles, and non-motor vehicles such as bicycles, and pedestrians. 
2.  All thoroughfares shall terminate at other thoroughfares in intersections, forming a network. Where topographical conditions exist that restrict the ability to form thoroughfare networks a pedestrian connection shall be made. Right-of-way shall be dedicated that will allow the continuation of thoroughfare networks to adjacent properties. 
3.  All thoroughfares must be configured as thoroughfare assemblies, as generally illustrated in Table 26. Thoroughfare assemblies must be designed in accordance with 18.602.4. 
4.  Thoroughfare Assemblies. Thoroughfare assemblies shall consist of a transportation way and public frontage assemblies, as generally illustrated in Table 20. 
a.  Thoroughfare assemblies must be configured by Transect District and thoroughfare assembly type according to Table 21 and must be mapped on a thoroughfare network plan. Table 26 includes pre-approved thoroughfare assemblies for use under this Chapter. 
b.  Thoroughfare assemblies must include public frontages configured according to 18.602.5. 
c.  The transportation way may include vehicular lanes, parking lanes, medians, access lanes, and transportation provisions. 
1.  Elements of the transportation way must be configured and sized according to Table 22. 
2.  Medians may include civic special districts and should be designed to generally meet the level of public planting of adjacent public frontages. 
3.  Parking lanes must be 8 feet or less in width for parallel parking or 18 feet or less for angled parking. Tick marks, where required, identifying parking lanes must be within the parking lane width. 
d.  Existing thoroughfares may be painted temporarily to comply with new configurations required by the thoroughfare network plan, including the addition of any transportation provisions. 
e.  Alley easements include one vehicular lane, within a total width no more than 30 ft. The entire right-of-way should be paved. Alley assemblies do not include transportation ways or public frontages. Alleys may be located in T5, T4O, and T4 districts. 
f.  Rear lane easements include one vehicular lane, within a total width no more than 24 ft. Only the vehicular lane and driveways should be paved. Rear lanes do not include transportation ways or public frontages. Rear lanes may be located in T4 and T3 districts. 
5.  Public Frontages. Public frontage assemblies consisting of planters, walkways, curbs, verges, public planting and public lighting, as generally illustrated in Table 20. Elements of the public frontage assembly that pass from one Transect district to another must be blended to the character of the Transect district of adjacent lots. 
a.  Public frontage assemblies shall be assigned according to Table 22. 
b.  Public frontage assemblies shall be configured according to Table 23. Assemblies including a walkway or planter shall specify a minimum width. 
c.  Public frontage assemblies shall assign a verge, providing allowable locations for public infrastructure and public furniture outside of pedestrian and vehicular access ways. 
d.  Any paving within the public frontage shall continue across any intervening driveway or access lane. 
e.  Public frontage assemblies shall include public planting and public lighting, configured according to Table 23. Spacing may be adjusted to accommodate specific site conditions. 
1.  Public lighting must be located within the verge. 
2.  Public planting must be designed in accordance with Section 18.605. 
3.  Street trees shall be planted a maximum of fifty (50) feet on center. 
4.  Public frontages in T4O and T5 within thoroughfare assemblies 44 feet wide and commercial streets 60 feet wide or less may exclude public planting. 
5.  At retail frontages, the spacing of trees may be irregular to avoid visually obscuring storefronts. 
6.  At gallery frontages and arcade frontages, public planting is not required and public lighting may be provided within the gallery or arcade. 
18.603. - Easement Standards. 
1.  Utility easements must be located as generally illustrated in Table 24. 
2.  Wet utilities may only be located on private lots or civic spaces when topographical conditions require placement in these locations. 
3.  Wet utility laterals shall be coordinated with the landscaping and street light placement. 
4.  For properties with existing overhead utilities 
a.  Dry utility services shall be placed underground from the pole to any new structure. 
b.  Where possible transformers and utility pedestals will be set behind the principal building frontage. 
c.  The reservation of an easement for the future underground placement of these utilities shall be required. 
d.  Utility poles must be relocated where they prohibit the construction of an unobstructed 5' pedestrian sidewalk. 
e.  Additional building setbacks within the private frontage for the overhead utilities may be required. 
5.  For properties without rear alleys. 
a.  All dry utilities shall be placed underground. 
b.  Dry utilities shall be placed under the sidewalk, or within the public frontage and adjacent to the property line where no sidewalk is required. 
c.  Where possible transformers and utility pedestals will be set behind the principal building frontage. 
6.  For properties with rear alleys or lanes. 
a.  Dry utilities will be located within the transportation way. 
b.  Transformers and utility pedestals shall be located on private property within utility easements. 
7.  Transformers and utility pedestals shall not be located at terminated vistas. 
8.  Alley and rear lane easement configurations are specified in Section 18.602. Pre-approved alley and rear lane assemblies are included in Table 26. 
9.  Pedestrian access easements in the form of pedestrian trails, paths, and passages must be configured as follows: 
a.  A minimum 5 foot walkway must be provided. 
b.  Public planting and public lighting must be configured according to public frontage standards in Section 18.605. 
c.  Pre-approved pedestrian access easements are included in Table 26. 
18.604. - Civic Areas. 
1.  Civic space must be generally designed as described in Table 27. 
2.  Planting and landscaping in civic spaces, are regulated by Section 18.605. 
3.  Stormwater management areas may be used as civic space, if designed as an amenity and accessible to the public. 
18.605. - Landscape Standards. 
1.  All planting in the public frontage and civic spaces must consist of species specified in City of Woodstock Approved Plant List. 
2.  Trees in public frontages must be a minimum height of ten (10) feet and three and one-half (3.5) inches in caliper, measured twelve (12) inches from the ground when planted, and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven (7) feet. 
a.  Five (5) foot high trees with one (1) inch caliper shall be permitted if a two-year warranty is provided. 
3.  Civic spaces of types a, b, or c in Table 27 shall be planted with a minimum of 18 trees per acre. Street trees abutting the civic spaces shall be counted towards the minimum plantings. Community gardens and multipurpose fields will be excluded from the total area when calculating required trees. 
4.  Parking lots shall be landscaped as follows: 
a.  Trees must be spaced such that no parking space is more than fifty (50) feet from one (1) of the parking bay trees. (Show a fifty-foot radius circle for each Parking Lot Tree on Landscape Plan to verify graphically. 
b.  Paving should consist of pervious materials where subsurface conditions will support infiltration. 
c.  Where possible the parking surfaces will drain into landscape areas that have been design to accept and detain water. 
d.  Parking lots consisting of less than 25 spaces are exempt from landscaping requirements. 
TABLE 20. THOROUGHFARES AND FRONTAGES 

 
TABLE 21. THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLY TYPES 

 
TABLE 22. TRANSPORTATION WAY 

 
*Dimensions with parking on each leg of intersection. Both tangent sections adjacent to the curb return must be parked, or else curb radii must be evaluated using "design vehicle" and Auto Turn or turning templates. 
TABLE 23. PUBLIC FRONTAGE TYPES 

 
*Verge should begin within 2 feet of the curb or edge of pavement. 
TABLE 24. UTILITY EASEMENTS 

 
TABLE 25. EFFECTIVE TURNING RADIUS 

On-street parking creates wider turning radius, the "effective turning radius", than provided by the curb radius alone. 
TABLE 26. PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES CONT. 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - CONT. 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - CONT. 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES CONT. 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES CONT. 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES CONT. 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - VEHICULAR ACCESS 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - PEDESTRIAN ACCESS 

 
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - PEDESTRIAN ACCESS CONT. 

 
TABLE 27. Civic Space 

 
Chapter XIX - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

19.100. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose and intent of this ordinance is to provide a regulatory strategy for outdoor lighting that will permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce; curtail and reverse the degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky; preserve the dark night sky for astronomy; minimize glare, obtrusive light and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary; conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and help to protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting from man-made sources. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.200. - Conformance with applicable Codes. 
All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, the Building Code and the Electrical Code as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. Where there is conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and other regulations, the most restrictive provision shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.300. - Applicability. 
For all land uses, developments and buildings that require a permit, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the requirements of this ordinance. All building additions or modifications of twenty-five (25) percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, or parking spaces, either with a single addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this provision, shall invoke the requirements of this ordinance for the entire property, including previously installed and any new outdoor lighting. Cumulative modification or replacement of outdoor lighting constituting sixty (60) percent or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the actual amount of lighting already on a non-conforming site, shall constitute a major addition for purposes of this section. 
A.  Minor Additions. Additions or modifications of less than twenty-five (25) percent to existing uses, as defined in Section 19.300 above, and that require a permit, shall require the submission of a complete inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site shall meet the requirements of this ordinance with regard to shielding and lamp type. 
B.  Exempt Lighting. The following luminaries and lighting systems are exempt from these requirements: 
1.  Lighting for pools used at night. 
2.  Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains; 
3.  Temporary holiday lighting; 
4.  Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal, state or local agency; 
5.  Emergency lighting used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
6.  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene and gasoline; 
7.  Security lighting controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of 10 minutes or less. 
8.  Lighting approved for City Sanctioned Events or under a City of Woodstock permit process including but not limited to; Tent Permit, Special Event Permit, Film Permit. 
C.  Prohibited Lighting. The following lighting systems are prohibited: 
1.  Aerial lasers; 
2.  Searchlight style lights; 
3.  Other very intense lighting, defined as having a light source exceeding 200,000 lumens or intensity in any direction of 2 million candelas or more; 
4.  Mercury vapor lamps; 
5.  Neon lighting, except as permitted in Chapter 6 Signage. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.400. - Outdoor Lighting Standards. 
All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Shall be FULL CUTOFF placed so as to allow no light above the horizontal as measured at the luminaire, except as herein noted in this ordinance (as in the case of period fixtures, cutoff fixtures may be used). 
B.  Shall be located, aimed or shielded so as to minimize glare and stray light trespassing across property boundaries and into the public right of way in accordance with the following standards: 

 

 
C.  Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 
D.  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described herein for fully shielded fixtures. 
E.  Multi use development lighting must conform to the standards of its respective use. 
F.  Illumination levels are measured from any height and orientation of the measuring device at any location along the property line, except the lighting of parking lots shall be measured at grade with the meter sensor held horizontally on the surface. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.500. - Special Uses. 
All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas designated below shall conform to the lighting standards described in this ordinance. 
A.  Service Station Canopies and Parking Structures. 
1.  All luminaries mounted on or recessed into the lower surface of service station canopies and parking structures shall be fully shielded and utilize flat lenses. 
2.  The total light output of luminaries mounted on the lower surface, or recessed into the lower surface of the canopy, and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, shall not exceed 50 foot-candles. 
3.  The total light output of illuminated areas of a service station other than as detailed in subsection 2. above shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot-candles. 
4.  Illuminance levels for the interior of parking structures, where interior lighting is visible from outside the structure, shall conform to the IESNA recommendation (RP-20). 
5.  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy and the sides of a canopy shall not be illuminated. 
B.  Security Lighting. 
1.  Security lighting shall be directed toward the targeted area. 
2.  Sensor activated lighting must be located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and the light shall not be triggered by activity off the property. 
C.  Pedestrian Path Lighting. 
1.  Lighting post shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet from the finished grade. 
D.  Architectural Accent Lighting. 
1.  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping, or art shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures shall be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the dark night sky in conformance with the luminaire standards. 
2.  Lighting fixtures shall not generate glare, or direct light beyond the facade onto a neighboring property, streets or into the night sky. 
E.  Temporary Lighting Permits. 
1.  Permits for temporary lighting will be granted by the City of Woodstock GA Community Development Department if the total output from the luminaries does not exceed 50 foot-candles and the following conditions apply: 
a.  The purpose for which the lighting is proposed can be completed within thirty (30) days, except that the permit for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
b.  The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize LIGHT TRESSPASS and GLARE. 
c.  Permits issued for temporary recreational lighting shall be extinguished by 10:30 p.m. unless otherwise stipulated in the permit. 
2.  The application for the Temporary Lighting Permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
b.  Location of proposed luminaire(s); 
c.  Date and times for the lighting; 
d.  Type, wattage and lumen output of lamp(s); 
e.  Type and shielding of proposed luminairie(s); 
f.  Intended use of the lighting; 
g.  Duration of time for requested exemption; 
h.  The nature of the exemption; and 
i.  The means to minimize LIGHT TRESSPASS and GLARE. 
F.  Commercial Parking Areas. 
1.  All lighting fixtures servicing parking lots, except floodlights, shall be CUTOFF fixtures, directed downward and not toward buildings or other areas. 
2.  The minimum illumination level for a parking lot shall be 0.4 FOOT-CANDLES at grade level and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1. (see UNIFORMITY RATIO) 
3.  Floodlights should be aimed or shielded to minimize uplight. 
4.  Light poles used in parking lots shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
G.  Street lights. 
1.  Illumination levels shall comply with the City of Woodstock Chapter 15 Street Lighting Standards. 
2.  All luminaires except those within residential areas shall be the full cutoff type. 
3.  For period or historical type luminaires, only the cutoff and semi-cutoff types are allowed. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.600. - Variances. 
A.  Any person may submit an application for a variance from the provisions of this ordinance in accordance with the procedures set forth in Land Development Code Section 10.160. The application should include, but not be limited to, evidence about the following: 
1.  How the proposed design and appearance of the LUMINAIRE are superior; 
2.  How LIGHT TRESSPASS and GLARE will be limited; 
3.  How the proposed solution will provide a benefit without negative impact on the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
B.  The application may include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.700. - Submission of Plans and Evidence of Compliance. 
The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of The City of Woodstock, Georgia in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit, as part of the application for permit, evidence that the proposed work will comply with this ordinance. Even should no other such permit be required, the installation or modification, except for routine servicing and same-type lamp replacement of any exterior lighting, shall require submission of the information described below. The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the laws of Woodstock, GA upon application for the required permit: 
A.  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each illuminating device, both proposed and any already existing on the site. 
B.  Description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, both proposed and existing. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
C.  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut off of light emissions. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.701. - Additional Submission. 
The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Community Development Department to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this ordinance will be secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, the applicant shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable such determination such certified reports of tests as will do so provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.702. - Subdivision Plats. 
All new subdivided properties shall submit information as described herein for installed street lights in accordance with Chapter 15 and other common or public area outdoor lighting. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.703. - Certification. 
For all projects, certification that the lighting as installed, conforms to the approved plans shall be provided by an illumination engineer/professional before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Until this certification is submitted, approval for use by the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter XX - TEMPORARY SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

20.101. - Findings, Purpose and Intent. 
(a)  The City of Woodstock finds that Temporary Signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, Temporary Signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of Temporary Signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of Temporary Signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. 
(b)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of Temporary Signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of Temporary Signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the City, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the City's citizens. 
(c)  The purposes of this Chapter are to encourage the effective use of Temporary Signs as a means of communication within the City; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of Temporary Signs on nearby public and private property; to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.102. - Interpretation Generally. 
Words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this Chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this Chapter, but defined in other City ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinances. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Chapter, article and section headings or captions are for reference only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this Chapter. 
This ordinance is intended to be content neutral, therefore, any Temporary Sign permitted under this Chapter to contain commercial expression may also include noncommercial expression. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.103. - Authority for Provisions. 
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, the Charter of the City of Woodstock, the general police powers of Woodstock and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.104. - Applicability. 
Temporary Signs shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created and maintained in accordance with the physical standards outlined in this Article and other applicable provisions of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE II. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 

20.201. - Computation of Sign Area. 
The area of a Temporary Sign shall consist of the entire single side surface of a Sign measured in square feet, length by width. Signs under this section may be double-sided, with only one side of the Sign being calculated in the area of the Sign. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.202. - Mixed Use Districts. 
Those properties zoned as mixed use under the City zoning regulations shall follow residential district standards for residentially used portions of the development and commercial standards for commercial portions of the development. Where a mix of uses occurs within a single building, such as residential over office or storefront use, the commercial standards shall apply. 
20.203. - Temporary Signs Erected on Public Property. 
(a)  No person shall erect a Temporary Sign on public property other than the governmental entity responsible for such property or public utility companies or contractors occupying or working on public property pursuant to governmental contract or franchise. Such public utility companies and contractors occupying or working on public property shall be limited to temporary traffic control signage meeting state specifications for on-going work in street rights-of-way and necessary signage to identify fixtures for public safety response in the event of emergency. 
(b)  Any Temporary Sign erected or installed on public property in violation of this section shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation and removal by the City without notice. In addition to other remedies provided by this Chapter, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person posting such a Temporary Sign the full cost of removal and disposal of the Temporary Sign. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.204. - Prohibited Temporary Signs. 
(a)  Animated Sign. 
(b)  No Temporary Sign shall be erected or continued to be displayed at the intersection of any street or any public right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device; or which makes use of the words, "STOP," "LOOK," "DANGER" or other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(c)  No Temporary Sign shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock. 
(d)  No Temporary Sign shall be placed on any utility pole, light pole, telephone pole, street sign or similar utility fixtures except as permitted within this chapter. 
(e)  No person shall erect, operate or use any attraction device or Temporary Sign that contains a beacon of any type and/or contains a spotlight providing direct illumination to the public. 
(f)  Temporary Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road or adjoining property by a person of normal hearing. 
(g)  Temporary Signs displaying any obscene message as obscenity is defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(h)  Temporary Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part thereto; Temporary Signs attached in any manner to any fire escape. 
(i)  Bandit Signs or any other Temporary Signs with the exception of those permitted under the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance. 
(j)  No person shall erect, operate or use any pennants, streamers, inflatable devices as a Temporary Sign, except as provided within this article. For the purpose of this Chapter, a balloon twelve (12) inches in diameter or less shall not be considered an inflatable device. 
(k)  No person shall erect attraction devices or continue the operation of any such Temporary Signs that revolve, rotate, move or simulate movement or action. 
(l)  Human Billboards. 
(m)  LED Sign. 
(n)  All Temporary Signs not in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.205. - Owner's Permission Required for Erection of Temporary Signs. 
No Temporary Sign shall be placed on any property without first obtaining the written consent of the owner or owner's agent of the property. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.206. - Compliance with Technical Codes and Zoning. 
All Temporary Signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the City shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the City. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the zoning ordinance, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE III. - TEMPORARY SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT PERMIT 
The following Temporary Signs are allowed without permit: 

20.301. - Inflatable Device. 
Allowed without permit in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Location. Inflatable Devices are only allowed on all properties zoned DT-CI, DT-CBD, DT-GC, DT-CMU, DT-OS, DT-RO, NC, GC, LI, HI, OSI, and NC-TCT. 
(b)  Time Period. Shall only be allowed beginning November 1 and ending January 1. 
(c)  Dimensions. Top of Inflatable Devices shall not be any higher than twenty (20) feet from the roofline and thirty-five (35) feet from ground level. 
(d)  Placement. Shall be restrained, attached, or held in place by a cord, rope, cable or similar method, anchored to the ground or to a building and not floating. 
(e)  Operation. All Inflatable Devices shall be stationary and shall not revolve, rotate, move or simulate movement or action. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.302. - Miscellaneous Sign. 
One (1) sign per tax parcel not exceeding six (6) square feet and four (4) feet in height. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.303. - Public Interest Signs. 
All signs placed by the federal, state, or local government including the City of Woodstock or affiliate thereof, on public property, inclusive of structures and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.304. - Sandwich Sign or Portable Swinger Sign. 
A Sandwich Sign or Portable Swinger Sign shall be permitted within the Downtown District. Sandwich Signs or Portable Swinger Signs may be no larger than thirty (30) inches by forty-eight (48) inches (30" × 48") on each side and must be placed on the property where the business is located in the sidewalk landscape zone or the sidewalk supplemental zone as long as it does not impede pedestrian traffic and is located a minimum of thirty (30) inches from the face of the curb and fifteen (15) feet from point of intersection of street curb lines. Each business shall be permitted one (1) Sandwich Sign which shall be removed at the end of each business day. Where a sidewalk landscape zone does not exist per the requirements established in the downtown district standards, a Sandwich Sign may be placed within three (3) feet of the facade of the building but must meet all other requirements contained in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.305. - Temporary Signs on Single Family Residential Property. 
The provisions of this Section apply to all properties zoned single-family residential, properties used for single-family residential occupancy, and townhomes, as well as properties in mixed use or overlay districts designed for single-family residential occupancy. Institutional uses located in single-family residential zones and multi-family residential uses are governed by Article IV. 
(a)  Aggregate Sign Allowance. Parcels zoned, designed and intended for single-family residential occupancy are limited to an aggregate sign area of eighteen (18) square feet. 
(b)  Size and Height Limitations. No Sign shall be erected on a single-family parcel to a height greater than five (5) feet. No single Sign shall be erected on such a parcel having a Sign area greater than six (6) square feet. 
(c)  Sign Supports. All Signs erected on single-family parcels shall be supported by independent means by use of a wooden stake or metal frame inserted directly into the ground. No Sign may be attached to utility poles, street signs or mailboxes, nor shall any such Sign be attached to trees, shrubs, plants, or rocks. 
(d)  Window Signs. Window Signs are allowed on single-family residential zone lots subject to the limitation of one (1) per premises, covering no more than fifty (50) percent of the window. Window Signs shall be included in the aggregate sign area for any property designed for single-family occupancy. 
(e)  Banners. One (1) banner up to twelve (12) square feet is permitted as long as it is mounted by bracket and pole to the principal structure. Banners shall not be erected concurrently with other Signs. Banner may be allowed when attached to a common entrance sign in accordance with these regulations. 
(f)  Inflatable Devices. Shall only be allowed beginning November 1 and ending January 1. Exempt from this requirement are devices commonly known as "bounce houses," "jump houses" and similar equipment intended for the entertainment of children. 
(g)  In addition to those Signs prohibited throughout the City, no person on a parcel zoned or used for single-family residential use shall erect any of the following: 
(1)  Illuminated Signs. 
(2)  Changeable Copy Signs. 
(3)  Billboards. 
(4)  Wall Signs. 
(5)  Banners greater than twelve (12) square feet or attached by any means other than those prescribed herein. 
(h)  No provision herein is intended to supersede recorded restrictive covenants. In the event of a conflict, the stricter requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.306. - Temporary Window Signs. 
On Parcels zoned for commercial, institutional, industrial, multi-family or mixed use, Window Signs shall be permitted as Temporary Signs without first securing a permit, provided such Window Signs leave at least fifty (50) percent of the window glass obscured. Any such Temporary Window Sign shall be maintained in good condition, free from tears, tatters or discoloration. Torn, soiled or out of date Temporary Signs in windows shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY SIGNS REQUIRING PERMIT 
Permit Required. Unless included under Article III, all Temporary Signs in the City of Woodstock shall be required to apply for and receive a permit prior to installation in accordance with the following provisions: 

20.401. - Fifteen (15) Day Permit. 
A permit shall be required prior to the display of any Temporary Sign, as follows: 
(a)  Applicability. Temporary Signs are only allowed on all properties zoned DT-CI, DT-CBD, DT-GC, DT-CMU, DT-OS, DT-RO, NC, GC, LI, HI, OSI, and NC-TCT. 
(b)  Eligibility. Each property tax parcel and suite within a shopping center or multi-tenant building shall be eligible to apply for and receive one permit at a time. 
(c)  Permit Term. The permit is valid for a term of no more than fifteen (15) consecutive days and no more than four (4) times in a 12-month period. The permit shall specify the first and last day of the permit term, beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day and expiring at 11:59 p.m. on the last day specified on the permit. Permit terms may run consecutively. 
(d)  Temporary Signs. With the issuance of the permit, any of one (1) of the following may be selected: 
(1)  Banners — one (1) banner or two (2) banners not to exceed an aggregate of twenty-four (24) square feet in size. 
(2)  Temporary Sign — one (1) non-illuminated sign no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet, not exceeding a height of eight (8) feet. 
(e)  Special Events. Special events permitted under Chapter 11 of The Code of Woodstock, Georgia, are eligible for the Fifteen (15) Day Permit, issued concurrently with the special event permit. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.402. - Thirty-Two (32) Square Feet Sign Permit. 
A permit shall only be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all zoning districts. 
(b)  Dimensions. All Signs permitted under this section shall be non-illuminated signs no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet and not to exceed a height of eight (8) feet. 
(c)  LDP and Building Permits. With the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) or building permit by the City of Woodstock, the site or collection of tax parcels subject to the LDP or building permit shall be eligible for one (1) sign per three (3) acres up to a maximum of four (4) Signs. With the expiration of the LDP or building permit, or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy this Sign permit shall also expire. 
(d)  Occupancy. Property tax parcel or multiple property tax parcels adjacent to each other under common ownership exceeding two (2) acres, or with at least three thousand (3,000) square feet commercial space, are eligible for one (1) Sign subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Tax parcel(s) are current with property tax payments to the City of Woodstock. Delinquent property tax shall immediately invalidate the permit; 
ii.  Structures or suites on the property are not occupied, or the property is vacant; 
iii.  Structures, suites, or tax parcels anticipated to be vacant or unoccupied within the subsequent ninety (90) days may apply for and receive the permit with the completion of a sworn affidavit attesting to the imminent vacancy. Should the premises remain occupied after ninety (90) days, the permit will expire immediately; 
iv.  With the issuance of certificate of occupancy or occupation tax license and/or with the occupancy of all vacant structures or suites on the tax parcel(s), the permit will expire immediately; 
v.  Shall require annual renewal concurrent with the due date set on the property tax bill issued by the City of Woodstock. Failure to renew the permit shall immediately invalidate the permit. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.403. - Concurrent Permits. 
Permits shall not be combined or issued concurrently. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.404. - Other Temporary Signs. 
No other Temporary Signs not requiring permit shall be displayed simultaneously with the issuance of a permit under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.405. - Expiration. 
Upon expiration or invalidation of the permit, the permittee shall remove the sign in its entirety, including any temporary supporting structure. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.406. - Fees. 
The cost of permits within this section are set per the fee schedule adopted by the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
These provisions govern all zoning districts in the City of Woodstock, as follows: 

20.501. - Permits; Procedures. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a permit under provisions of this Chapter, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any Temporary Sign within the City without first obtaining a Sign Permit from the Department of Community Development. 
(b)  Applications for Permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Tax Parcel ID and address of building, structure, or parcel to which or upon which the Sign is to be attached or erected. In the absence of a street address, a method of location that is acceptable to the Community Development Director shall be used. 
(3)  One (1) accurate drawings showing the position of the Temporary Sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other Signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number and business license number (if applicable) of the person erecting the Temporary Sign. 
(5)  Written consent of the owner or lessor of the building or land to which or upon which the Temporary Sign is to be erected. 
(6)  Such other information as the city shall require to show full compliance with this and other ordinances of the city. 
(c)  No review of the specific content of any proposed Temporary Sign shall be made or required. 
(d)  Each application for permit shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fees. Fees for permits shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
(e)  The City shall deny permits to applicants who submit applications for Signs that do not comply with the provisions of this Chapter, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this Chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the City for the erection of a Sign. Should it be determined that a Sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this Chapter, the Community Development Director shall revoke the permit. Should the Community Development Director deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before thirty (30) business days after the City received the completed application. Alternatively, the City may personally serve the Sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the application. The failure of the City to act on any completed Sign application within thirty (30) days after the City's receipt of the application shall be deemed a denial of said application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
(f)  No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for Due Cause as hereinafter defined, and after the applicant is given ten (10) days written notice containing a statement of the reasons for the denial of the permit application or the revocation of a permit. "Due Cause" is the violation of any provision of this Chapter, or other applicable ordinances, state or federal law regulating Signs, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(g)  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision in accordance with Section 20.505. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.502. - Inspections. 
The Community Development Director or his designee shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and Non-Conforming Sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of Signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the Sign Owner. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.503. - Maintenance and Signs Requiring Removal. 
(a)  All Signs erected or posted in the City shall be maintained in good structural condition, and in conformance with this Chapter, at all times. Signs that are damaged, ripped, tattered or faded must be promptly removed and/or replaced and damaged hardware shall be promptly repaired and/or replaced with new hardware. 
(b)  All Signs and the premises surrounding them shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds and overgrown grass. 
(c)  Traffic hazards. Any Sign constituting a traffic hazard or a menace to the motoring public or pedestrians, as determined by the Community Development Director in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall be removed as provided in this Chapter. 
(d)  Abandoned Signs. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, any Sign that is located on property that becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three (3) months or longer shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be removed as provided in this Chapter. 
(e)  Dangerous, Dilapidated or Defective Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any Sign that is in a dangerous, dilapidated or defective condition. Any such Sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the Sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective Sign, the Community Development Director shall remove as described in this Chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.504. - Removal Procedure. 
(a)  The Community Development Director shall cause to be removed any Sign that is determined to endanger the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or structurally defective Sign or a Sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this Chapter. 
(b)  Any Sign removed by the Community Development Director pursuant to the provisions of this Section shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. The cost of removal of the Sign by the City shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as City property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the City in connection with the Sign removal. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.505. - Appeals. 
Any party aggrieved by a decision rendered under the authority of this Chapter may file an appeal in accordance with Section 10.162 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
Chapter XXI - BILLBOARD SIGNS STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

21.1.1. - Findings, Purpose and Intent. 
1.  The City finds that billboard signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, billboard signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of billboard signs tends to proliferate, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares and highways. In addition, the competition among competing Sign owners for visibility of their billboard signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the billboard sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
2.  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of billboard signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of billboard signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the City, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the City's citizens. 
3.  The City further finds that there is a substantial difference between signage erected by public authority and billboard signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signage identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. 
4.  The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the effective use of billboard signs as a means of communication within the City; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of billboard signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this article. 
5.  In considering the appropriate level of billboard sign regulation for the City, the Mayor and Council have considered planning studies, reports, news articles and related information from a variety of sources. The Mayor and Council have determined that billboard signs with electronic and LED display technology pose unique and substantial hazards to traffic caused by a higher level of distractibility than non-LED billboard signs. In addition, billboard signs with electronic and LED display technology are inconsistent with the aesthetic standards established for major thoroughfares running through the City. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.2. - Interpretation Generally. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter, but defined in other City ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinances. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Chapter, article and section headings or captions are for reference only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this chapter. Any sign permitted under this chapter to contain commercial expression may also include noncommercial expression. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.3. - Authority for Provisions. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, the Charter of the City of Woodstock, the general police powers of Woodstock and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.4. - Applicability. 
Billboard signs shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created and maintained in accordance with the physical standards outlined in this article and other applicable provisions of this Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.5. - Owner's Permission Required for Erection of Billboard Signs. 
No billboard sign shall be placed on any private property without first obtaining the consent of the owner or owner's agent of the private property. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.6. - Compliance with Technical Codes and Zoning. 
1.  All billboard signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, altered, relocated or modified within the City shall conform with the requirements of the building and electric codes adopted by the City. Where the provisions of the building or electrical code and this chapter conflict or overlap, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
2.  All billboard signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the City shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the City. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.7. - Maintenance. 
1.  All billboard signs erected or posted in the City shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes and in conformance with this article, at all times. All billboard signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
2.  All billboard signs and the premises surrounding them shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds and overgrown grass. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.8. - Billboard Sign Requirements. 
1.  No billboard sign face shall exceed fourteen (14) feet in height or forty-eight (48) feet in length. Billboards are limited to two (2) back-to-back faces. Two (2) or more sign faces installed so as to be read from different directions of travel shall only be placed back to back in a parallel manner. No triangular or other multi-sided configuration of billboard signs is allowed. 
2.  Billboard signs are restricted to commercial and industrially zoned parcels and are further limited to parcels sharing a common property line with the right-of-way of Interstate 575. 
3.  All billboard signs shall be oriented only toward 1-575 and shall be erected no further than one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way line of 1-575. 
4.  Billboard signs shall be allowed to utilize Trivision Technology. Any existing billboard sign meeting the standards of this article that is eligible for conversion to Trivision Technology shall require a permit for such conversion by the City. 
5.  No billboard sign shall utilize LED or electronic display technology. 
6.  No billboard sign shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another existing billboard sign. 
7.  No billboard sign shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of single-family residentially-zoned parcels and/or parcels designated for single-family residential use. 
8.  No billboard sign shall be located with five hundred (500) feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreational area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such billboard sign may be located within five hundred (500) feet of such a use where the billboard sign is separated by buildings or other permanent physical obstructions so as to not be visible from the public park, public playground, public recreational area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery. 
9.  Billboard signs are limited to a height of fifty (50) feet above grade, measured from the ground at the point of installation of the supporting structure, and provided that such grade shall not be altered in any manner as to increase the allowable height of the billboard sign. Where the supporting structure of the billboard sign is located below the grade of I-575, the fifty (50) foot height limitation shall be measured from the crown of the nearest adjacent travel lane of 1-575. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

21.2.1. - Permits; Procedures. 
1.  Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a permit under provisions of this chapter, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any billboard sign within the City without first obtaining a billboard sign permit from the Department of Community Development. No permit shall be required to repaint or change the lettering of an existing conforming billboard sign, provided that no change of ownership of the entity displaying the message thereon has been made. 
2.  Applications for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
b.  Tax parcel ID and address of building, structure, or parcel to which or upon which the billboard sign is to be attached or erected. In the absence of a street address, a method of location that is acceptable to the Community Development Director shall be used. 
c.  Two (2) accurate drawings showing the position of the billboard sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other billboard signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). 
d.  One (1) accurate drawing to scale of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment of the billboard sign to the building or ground. The drawing shall be an engineered structural drawing designed to the International Building Code and shall specifically include the size of the sign area, overall height of the billboard sign, location of the billboard sign installation and its relation to existing rights-of-way and all driveways, a site distance diagram. 
e.  Name, address, telephone number and business license number of the person erecting the billboard sign. 
f.  Written consent of the owner or lessor of the building or land to which or upon which the billboard sign is to be erected. 
g.  The location and size of all other billboard signs on the parcel upon which the billboard sign is to be erected. 
h.  The size of the parcel on which the billboard sign is to be erected. 
i.  If the billboard sign is to be lighted, an application for electrical permit meeting all standards of the City's electrical code. 
j.  The value of the billboard sign. 
k.  Such other information as the City shall require to show full compliance with this and other ordinances of the City. 
3.  No review of the specific content of any proposed billboard sign shall be made or required. 
4.  Each application for permit shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fees. Fees for permits shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
5.  Upon the filing of an application for a permit, the Community Development Director or his designee shall examine all plans and specifications submitted, including electrical wiring and connections, and the premises upon which the billboard sign is proposed to be erected. The plans shall be reviewed for zoning compliance by the Department of Community Development and review by other officers and employees of the City may be obtained on an as-needed basis. Such review shall be completed within thirty (30) business days of submission of a completed billboard sign application. If it appears from review of the permit application and inspection of the site that the proposed billboard sign is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances and laws of the City, the Community Development Director or his designee shall issue a permit upon payment of permit fees no later than thirty (30) business days from receipt of the completed application. 
6.  The City shall deny permits to applicants who submit applications for billboard signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the City for the erection of a billboard sign. Should it be determined that a billboard sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the Community Development Director or his designee shall revoke the permit. Should the Community Development Director or his designee deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before thirty (30) business days after the City received the application. Alternatively, the City may personally serve the billboard sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
7.  No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after the applicant is given ten (10) days' written notice containing a statement of the reasons for the denial of the permit application or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of any provision of this chapter, or other applicable ordinances, state or federal law regulating signs, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
8.  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision to the Mayor and City Council, provided such appellant files a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) business days of the Community Development Director's notice. Such appeal shall be considered by the Mayor and City Council for the City at the next meeting held after the City's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that such notice of appeal is received a minimum of seven (7) business days before the next meeting. Appeal notices received within seven (7) days of a scheduled City Council meeting shall be heard at the next available meeting more than seven (7) days following receipt of appeal. The Mayor and City Council shall issue a written decision to the applicant no later than thirty (30) days following the close of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the Mayor and City Council to affirm the decision of the Community Development Director or to overrule the decision of the Community Development Director and grant or continue the permit for which appeal is taken shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant in the same manner as the original notice to deny or notice of revocation. Such decision shall constitute a final determination by the City. 
9.  In the event an applicant whose permit has been denied or a permit holder whose permit has been revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the Mayor and Council, such applicant or permit holder may appeal same within the courts of the state of Georgia as provided by law. 
10.  Any person commencing work on a billboard sign before securing the necessary permit from the Community Development Department shall be subject to double permit fees under the permit fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.2. - Permit Expiration. 
A billboard sign permit shall become null and void if the billboard sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made of permit fees for permits that expire due to failure to erect a permitted billboard sign; provided that where an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted billboard sign but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one (1) six (6) month extension may be granted by the Community Development Director on the duration of the permit. Where a permit has expired for failure to erect the billboard sign, if an individual later desires to erect a billboard sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of resubmission. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.3. - Display of Permit. 
The owner of the billboard sign shall be responsible for maintaining the permit for every billboard sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this Ordinance. Such permit shall be kept on the premises served by the billboard sign and shall be exhibited promptly upon request of city officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.4. - Non-Conforming Signs. 
1.  Billboard signs that, on the effective date of this Ordinance, were approved and legally erected under previous billboard sign restrictions, and that became or have become non-conforming with respect to the requirements of this Ordinance, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
a.  No increase in size of the non-conforming sign shall be permitted. 
b.  Existing billboard signs which were legally erected and which have become non-conforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this Ordinance due to road widening may be moved to meet the setback requirement of this Ordinance but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. 
2.  Upon failure to comply with any requirement of this section, the building official or his authorized agent may cause the removal of such Billboard Sign at the expense of the owner. 
3.  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on non-conforming signs shall be permitted. 
4.  Minor repairs and maintenance of non-conforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the billboard sign shall be permitted except to make the billboard sign comply with the requirements of this Ordinance; provided that billboard signs damaged by fire or act of God may be restored by their original condition. 
5.  Each non-conforming sign shall be registered within ninety (90) days of the enactment of this Ordinance by the billboard sign owner, and if it is determined that such non-conforming sign was legally erected under the prior ordinance, then a billboard sign permit shall be issued to the billboard sign owner without charge and the billboard sign shall be marked with a permit decal. Should the owner of a non-conforming sign fail to register such billboard sign with ninety (90) days from the enactment of this Ordinance, such failure to register shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and such person shall be subject to citation in municipal court. 
6.  Existing billboard signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county ordinance which would become a non-conforming sign under this Ordinance upon annexation by the City shall be allowed to remain, provided such billboard sign shall be registered with the City within ninety (90) days of annexation. 
7.  The Community Development Director or his designee shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this section. Notices of violation shall be provided to the billboard sign owner in accordance with the requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.5. - Inspections. 
The Community Development Director or his designee shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and non-conforming billboard sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of billboard signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the billboard sign owner. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.6. - Signs Requiring Removal. 
1.  Traffic Hazards. Any billboard sign constituting a traffic hazard or a menace to the motoring public or pedestrians, as determined by the Community Development Director or his designee in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall be removed as provided herein. 
2.  Dangerous, Dilapidated or Defective Billboard Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any billboard sign that is in a dangerous, dilapidated or defective condition. Any such billboard sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the billboard sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective billboard sign, the Community Development Director or his designee shall proceed as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.7. - Removal Procedure. 
1.  The Community Development Director shall cause to be removed any billboard sign that he determines endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or electrically or structurally defective billboard sign or a billboard sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this chapter. The Community Development Director shall prepare a written notice that shall describe the billboard sign and specify the violation involved. The notice shall state that if the billboard sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within twenty (20) business days, the billboard sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
2.  All notices by the Community Development Director shall be personally served or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date received if hand delivered or otherwise on the date delivered as shown upon the return receipt of the U.S. Postal Service. 
3.  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the billboard sign is located, the owner of the billboard sign, and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the billboard sign or on the premises. 
4.  Any person having an interest in the billboard sign or the property may appeal the determination of the Community Development Director ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice. Appeals will be handled as provided in this Ordinance. 
5.  If the person to whom notice is directed fails to take corrective action within the time period prescribed, or if on appeal the City affirms the decision of the Community Development Director and the person fails to take corrective action or remove the offending billboard sign within the time period prescribed, then the Community Development Director shall proceed to have the billboard sign removed or corrected to bring such billboard sign into compliance with this chapter or to remove any unsafe condition. 
6.  When it is determined by the Community Development Director that the billboard sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety and contact cannot be made with the billboard sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served prior to removal. In such emergency situation, the Community Development Director shall document the unsafe condition and may correct the danger, with all costs being charged to the billboard sign owner or the property owner. 
7.  If it shall be necessary for the Community Development Director to remove the billboard sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, the Community Development Director may sell or salvage any material derived in the removal. He may sell the same at public or private sale at the best price obtainable and keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the cost of removal to be charged to the billboard sign owner or property owner. Any proceeds in excess of the cost of removal shall be returned to the sign owner, if known, or if unknown, shall be deposited in the City Treasury and maintained for benefit of the owner for a period of three (3) years. At the end of three (3) years, all unclaimed proceeds shall become the property the City. Where the proceeds derived from such sale are less than the costs of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the billboard sign is located. Such lien shall be collectable in the same manner as City property taxes. 
8.  Any billboard sign removed by the Community Development Director pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. The cost of removal of the billboard sign by the City shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as City property taxes. The cost of removable shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the City in connection with the billboard sign removal. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
APPENDIX A - SOIL SERIES 
a.  Soil series. 

 
b.  Footnotes. 
1.  Absorption field should be installed at depths of twenty-four (24) to thirty (30) inches from the original ground surface. Absorption rates are unfavorable below these depths. 
2.  Absorption fields should be installed at depths between forty-five (45) and sixty (60) inches from the original ground surface. At these depths the absorption is favorable and is expressed as part of the footnote. 
3.  Depth to bedrock is generally not sufficient to accommodate an absorption field. There are some small areas of these soils that have adequate depths, and test borings are needed to identify these. 
4.  Flooding and/or a seasonally high water table makes these soils unsuitable sites for absorption fields. 
5.  Flooding or standing water during brief periods of high rainfall makes many areas of these soils unsuitable even though the absorption rate is favorable. Areas protected from flooding, or otherwise not subject to flooding, may be suitable. 
6.  A seasonally high water table, due to position in landscape, makes most areas of these soils unsuitable. However, the physical make-up of many of these soils contain enough sandy material at sufficient depths (3 to 4 feet) that the seasonal water table can be lowered by this potential. The letter (S) indicates special study is needed to determine if these soils are drainable. Where drainage is not possible, mound systems may be feasible. 
7.  Install on-site sewage management systems 12" into the original soil and place sandy or loamy fill over the ground surface. Harrowing, subsoiling, ripping or other means are necessary to disturb the original soil surface to ensure compatibility between the natural soil and the fill material. The purpose of this is either to take advantage of the surface thickness of a favorable natural soil or to increase the thickness between the bottom of the trench and the water table or other restrictive layers. If the absorption rate changes, it is expressed as part of the footnote. 
8.  Install on-site sewage management systems 18" into the original soil and place sandy or loamy fill over the ground surface. The reason for this is to take advantage of the thickness of the natural soil or to increase the distance from the bottom of the trench and the water table or other restrictive layer. Where the absorption rate is changed at this depth, it is expressed as part of the footnote. 
9.  Install on-site sewage management systems at depths between 30 to 40 inches from the original surface. The purpose of this is to improve the absorption rate and this improved rate is expressed as part of the footnote. 
10.  Due to poor filtering action, nearby water supply may be contaminated. Grouting of wells or increasing the distance to 200 feet between wells and on-site sewage management systems is advised. Also, the distance between water impoundments or tributary streams and the on-site sewage management system should be increased to 100 feet. 
11.  Recommend percolation tests be performed. Percolation rates vary from 50 to 120 min./ inch, depending on the amount of mica in the soil. 
APPENDIX B - SOIL GROUPING FOR ESTABLISHING LOT SIZE IN SUBDIVISIONS 
GROUP 1 
Well-Drained to Excessively Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 5 to 10 Minutes / Inch. 
•  Ailey* 
•  Americus* 
•  Blaney* 
•  Cainhoy (Galeston, Palmbeach) 
•  Eustis 
•  Fripp* 
•  Fuguay (Norfolk & Tifton thick surface (Lakeland Shallow) 
•  Haywood 
•  Kershaw (Lakewood)* 
•  Kureb* 
•  Lakeland (Huckabee) 
•  Louisburg* 
•  Lucy 
•  Molena 
•  Paola* 
•  Troup 
•  Valdosta 
•  Wagram 
•  Wicksburg* 
•  * Refer to Appendix A 
GROUP 2 
Well-Drained to Moderately Well-Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 10 to 30 Minutes/ Inch. 
•  Allen 
•  Brevard 
•  Cahaba 
•  Chandler* 
•  Citico 
•  Clarendon* 
•  DeKalb* 
•  Edneyville* 
•  Eotwah nolichuncky)* 
•  Euharlee 
•  Evard* 
•  Faceville* 
•  Fullerton* 
•  Goldsboro* 
•  Haywood 
•  Irvington* 
•  Izagora* 
•  Johns* 
•  Kalmia* 
•  Linker* 
•  Lockhart* 
•  Louisa* 
•  Lowndes* 
•  Masada* 
•  Maxton 
•  Norfolk* 
•  Orangeburg* 
•  Porters* 
•  Red Bay* 
•  Sequatchie 
•  Stilson* 
•  Tifton* 
•  Tusquitee* 
•  Wedowee* 
•  Wickham 
•  * Refer to Appendix A under Soil Type and to Footnotes. 
GROUP 3 
Well-Drained to Moderately Well-Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 30 to 60 Minutes/ Inch. Also includes somewhat Poorly-Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 5 to 30 Minutes/Inch. 
Well-Drained: 
•  Braddock 
•  Bradson 
•  Capshaw* 
•  Carnegie 
•  Decatur 
•  Dillard* 
•  Dothan 
•  Fannin 
•  Greenville (Magnolia) 
•  Grove 
•  Holston 
•  Locust* 
•  Mainvale 
•  Mountview 
•  Rome 
•  Seneca* 
•  Shack (Clarksville) 
•  Shouns 
•  Tate 
•  Tellico 
•  Tidings 
•  Varina 
•  * Refer to Appendix A under Soil Type and to Footnotes. 
Poorly-Drained: 
•  Albany* 
•  Ardilla* 
•  Bartha* 
•  Centenary* 
•  Chipley* 
•  Lee Field (Klej shallow, Lynchburg thick surface)* 
•  Lynchburg Ocilla* 
•  Olustee (ona)* 
•  Pottsburg* 
•  Rigdon* 
•  Kanapaha* 
GROUP 4 
Well-Drained Soils to Moderately Well-Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 60 to 90 Minutes/ Inch. Also Poorly-Drained Soils with a Hardpan. 
•  Chestatee* 
•  Colbert 
•  Dowarts* 
•  Cunningham 
•  Cuthbert 
•  Davidson 
•  Dewey (Muse)* 
•  Duplin* 
•  Dyke* 
•  Enders 
•  Enon 
•  Faragut* 
•  Georgeville* 
•  Gilead 
•  Hayesville* 
•  Herndon* 
•  Hulett* 
•  Leon I* 
•  Litz 
•  Lynn Haven I* 
•  Mandarin I* 
•  Marlboro 
•  Mascotte I* 
•  Nankin* 
•  Rabun* 
•  Sapelo* 
•  Sawyer* 
•  Shubuta 
•  St. Johns* 
•  Steekee 
•  Waynesboro* 
•  * Refer to Table Appendix A 1 Soils with a hardpan. 
GROUP 5 
Poorly-Drained Soils that have a Water Table Very Near the Surface with Percolation Rates from 5 to 10 Minutes/ Inch. 
•  Alapaha* 
•  Pelham* 
•  Plummer* 
•  * Refer to Table Appendix A 
GROUP 6 
Soils Unsuitable Due to the Following Reasons: 
Excess Wetness: (Frequent Flooding or Ponding) 
•  Altavista 
•  Angie 
•  Augusta 
•  Bayboro 
•  Bibb 
•  Boehicket 
•  Brookman 
•  Capers 
•  Cartercay 
•  Chastain 
•  Chatuge 
•  Chewacla (Philo, Stendal) 
•  Coxville 
•  Dasher 
•  Dowellton (Purdy) 
•  Egam 
•  Ellabelle 
•  Grady 
•  Guthrie 
•  Iredell 
•  Iuka 
•  Johnston 
•  Kingsland 
•  Kinston 
•  Leaf 
•  Meggett 
•  Muckalee 
•  Myatt 
•  Ogeechee 
•  Pooler 
•  Portsmouth 
•  Rambert 
•  Roanoke (Robertville) 
•  Rollen 
•  Rutledge 
•  Satilla 
•  Surrency 
•  Wahaee 
•  Wax (Captina, Monoga hela, Landisburg) 
•  Wehadkee (Atkins, Melvin) 
•  Whitwell 
Percolation Rate More than 90: 
•  Albertville 
•  Angelina 
•  Angie Bayboro 
•  Binsnville 
•  Bladen 
•  Boehicket 
•  Boswell( Oktibbeha, Sumter) 
•  Brookman 
•  Capers 
•  Cape Fear 
•  Chastain 
•  Conasauga 
•  Coxville 
•  Dowellton (Purdy) 
•  Egam 
•  Esto 
•  Eutaw 
•  Grady 
•  Helena 
•  Henderson 
•  Hoffman 
•  Iredell 
•  Leaf 
•  Lumbee 
•  Lyerly 
•  Madison 
•  Meggett 
•  Orange 
•  Pooler 
•  Roanoke (Robertsville) 
•  Roellen 
•  Sunsweet 
•  Susquehanna 
•  Talbott 
•  Townley (Rarden) 
•  Tupelo 
•  Tyler 
•  Wahee 
Shallow Bedrock: (There are some small areas of these soils that have adequate depths) 
•  Apison 
•  Ashe 
•  Ashler (Edgemont) 
•  Cataska 
•  Fletcher 
•  Goldston 
•  Harsells (Lehew) 
•  Hector 
•  Lily 
•  Lyerly 
•  Montevallo (Klinesville) 
•  Mountainburg 
•  Musella (Clifton) 
•  Ramsey 
•  Saluda 
•  Sylco 
•  Talladega 
•  Tallapoosa 
•  Wilkes 
WATER TABLE: (Soils not considered drainable to a satisfactory level) 
•  Beason 
•  Bladen 
•  Bodine 
•  Colfax 
•  Hazlehurst 
•  Helena 
•  Herod 
•  Orange 
•  Rains 
•  Robertsdale 
•  Taft 
•  Wolfever 
•  Worsham 
FLOODING: (Flooding is infrequent and if protected from flooding they may be suitable) 
•  Buncombe 
•  Congaree 
•  Duckston 
•  Emory 
•  Ennis 
•  Ocelockonee 
•  Ousley 
•  Riverview 
•  Starr 
•  Stato 
•  Subligna 
•  Tocca 
•  Toxaway 
•  Transylvania 
Appendix C - GLOSSARY OF SOIL TERMS 
AERATION, SOIL: The Exchange of air in soil with air from the atmosphere. The air in a well aerated soil is similar to that in the atmosphere; the air in poorly aerated oil is considerably higher in carbon dioxide and lower in oxygen. 
AGGREGATE, SOIL: Many fine particles held in a single mass or cluster. Natural soil aggregates, such as granules, blocks, or prisms are called peds. Clods are aggregates produced by tillage or logging. 
AULLUVIUM: Material, such as sand, silt, or clay, deposited on land by streams. 
BOTTOM LAND: The normal flood plain of a stream, subject to flooding. 
CLAY: As a soil separate, mineral soil particles less than 0.002 millimeter in diameter. As a soil textural class, soil material that is 40 percent or more clay, less than 45 percent sand, and less than 40 percent silt. 
COLLUVIUM: Soil material, rock fragments, or both moved by creep, slide, or local wash and deposited at the base of steep slopes. 
DEPTH OF ROCK: Bedrock is too near the surface for the specified use. 
DRAINAGE CLASS (NATURAL): Refers to the frequency and duration of periods of saturation or partial saturation during soil formation, as opposed to altered drainage, which is commonly the result of artificial drainage or irrigation but may be caused by the sudden deepening of channels or the blocking of drainage outlets. Seven classes of natural soil drainage are recognized: 
EXCESSIVELY DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil very rapidly. Excessively drained soils are commonly very coarse textured, rocky, or shallow. Some are steep. All are free of the mottling related to wetness. 
SOMEWHAT EXCESSIVELY DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil rapidly. Many somewhat excessively drained soils are sandy and readily pervious. Some are shallow. Some are so steep that much of the water they receive is lost as runoff. All are free of the mottling related to wetness. 
WELL DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil rapidly, but not rapidly. It is available to plants throughout most of the growing season, and wetness does not inhibit growth of roots for significant periods during most growing seasons. Well drained soils are commonly medium textured. They are mainly free of mottling. 
MODERATELY WELL DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil somewhat slowly during some period. Moderately well drained soils are wet for only a short time during the growing season, but periodically they are wet long enough that most meophytic crops are effected. They commonly have a slowly pervious layer within or directly below the solum, or periodically receive high rainfall, or both. 
SOMEWHAT POORLY DRAINED: Water is removed slowly enough that the soil is wet for significant periods during the growing season. Wetness markedly restricts the growth of mesophytic crops unless artificial drainage is provided. Somewhat poorly drained soils commonly have a slowly pervious layer, a high water table, additional water from seepage, nearly continuous rainfall, or a combination of these. 
POORLY DRAINED: Water is removed so slowly that the soil is saturated periodically during the growing season or remains wet for long periods. Free water is commonly at or near the surface for long enough during the growing season that most hydrophytic crops cannot be grown unless the soil is artificially drained. The soil is not continuously saturated in layers directly below plow depth. Poor drainage results forma high water table, a slowly pervious layer within the profile, seepage, nearly continuous rainfall, or a combination of these. 
VERY POORLY DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil so slowly that free water remains at or on the surface during most of the growing season. Unless the soil is artificially drained, most mesophytic crops cannot be grown. Very poorly drained soils are commonly level or depressed and are frequently ponded. Yet, where rainfall is high and nearly continuous, they can have moderate or high slope gradients. 
FLOOD PLAIN: A nearly level alluvial plain that border a stream and is subject to flooding unless protected artificially. 
FRAGIPAN: A loamy, brittle subsurface horizon low in porosity and content of organic matter and low or moderate in clay but high in silt or very fine sand. A fragipan appears cemented and restricts roots. When dry, it is hard or very hard and has a higher bulk density than the horizon or horizons above. When moist, it tends to rupture suddenly under pressure rather than to deform slowly. 
HARDPAN: A hardened or cemented soil horizon, or layer. The soil material is sandy, loamy, or clayey and is cemented by iron oxide, silica, calcium carbonate, and other substances. 
HORIZON, SOIL: A layer of soil, approximately parallel to the surface, having distinct characteristics produced by soil-forming processes. In the identification of soil horizons, an upper case letter represents the major horizons. Numbers or lower case letters that follow represent subdivisions of the major horizons. An explanation of the subdivisions is given in the Soil Survey Manual. The major horizons of mineral soil are as follows: 
0 HORIZON: An organic layer of fresh and decaying plant residue at the surface of a mineral soil. 
A HORIZON: The mineral horizon at or near the surface in which an accumulation of humified organic matter is mixed with the mineral material. Also, a plowed surface horizon, most of which was originally part of a B Horizon. 
E HORIZON: The mineral horizon in which the main feature is loss of silicate clay, iron, aluminum, or some combination of these. 
B HORIZON: The mineral horizon below an 0, A , or E Horizon. The B Horizon is in part a layer of transition from the overlying horizon to the underlying C Horizon. The B Horizon also has distinct characteristics such as: 
An accumulation of clay, sesquioxides, humus, or a combination of these; 
Prismatic or blocky structure; 
Redder or browner colors than those in the A Horizon; or 
A combination of these 
The combined A and B horizons are generally called the solum, or true soil. If a soil does not have a B horizon, the A horizon alone is the solum. 
C HORIZON: The mineral horizon or layer, excluding indurated bedrock, which is little affected by soil-forming processes and does not have the properties typical of the A or B horizon. The material of a C horizon may be either like or unlike that in which the solum formed. If the material is known to differ from that in the solum, the Arabic numeral 2 precedes the letter C. 
R LAYER: Consolidated rock beneath the soil. The rock commonly underlies C horizon, but can be directly below an A or B horizon. 
IMPERVIOUS SOIL: A soil through which water, air, or roots penetrate slowly or not at all. No soil is absolutely impervious to air and water all the time. 
INFILTRATION: The downward entry of water into the immediate surface of soil or other material, as contrasted with percolation, which is movement of water through soil layers or material. 
INFILTRATION CAPACITY: The maximum rate at which water can infiltrate into a soil under a given set of conditions. 
INFILTRATION RATE: The rate at which water penetrates the surface of the soil at any given instant, usually expressed in inches per hour. The rate can be limited by the infiltration capacity of the soil or the rate at which water is applied at the surface. 
INTAKE RATE: The average rate of water entering the soil under irrigation. Most soils have a fast initial rate; the rate decreased with application time. Therefore, intake rate for design purposes is not a constant but is a variable depending on the net irrigation application. The rate of water intake in inches per hour is expressed as follows: 

 
LOAM: Soil material that is 7 to 27 percent clay particles, 28 to 50 percent silt particles, and less than 52 percent sand particles. 
LOAMY: Soil ranging for moderately coarse textured to moderately fine textured soils. 
MEDIUM TEXTURED SOIL: Very fine sandy loam, loam, silt loam, or silt. 
METAMORPHIC ROCK: Rock of any origin altered in mineralogical composition, chemical composition, or structure by heat, pressure, and movement. Nearly all such rocks are crystalline. 
MODERATELY COARSE TEXTURED SOIL: Sandy loam and fine sandy loam. 
MODERATELY FINE TEXTURED SOIL: Clay loam, sandy clay loam, and silty clay loam. 
MORPHOLOGY SOIL: The physical make-up of the soil including the texture, structure, porosity, consistence, color, and other physical, mineral, and biological properties of the various horizons, and the thickness and arrangement of those horizons in the soil profile. 
MOTTLING, SOIL: Irregular spots of different colors that vary in number and size. Mottling generally indicates poor aeration and impeded drainage. Descriptive terms are as follows: abundance, few, common, and many; size, fine, medium, and coarse; and contrast, faint, distinct, and prominent. The size measurements are of the diameter along the greatest dimension. Fine indicates less that 5 millimeters (about 0.2 inch); medium, from 5 to 15 millimeters (about 0.2 to 0.6 inch); and coarse, more than 15 millimeters (about 0.6 inch). 
MUCK: Dark colored, finely divided, and well decomposed organic soil material. (See Sapric soil material). 
ORGANIC MATTER: Plant and animal residue in the soil in various stages of decomposition. 
PAN: A compact, dense layer in a soil that impedes the movement of water and the growth of roots. For example, hardpan, fragipan, clayplan, plowpan, and land traffic pan. 
PARENT MATERIAL: The unconsolidated organic and mineral material from which soil forms. 
PED: An individual natural soil aggregate, such as a granule, a prism, or a block. 
PEDON: The smallest volume that can be called "a soil". A pedon is three dimensional and large enough to permit study of all horizons. Its area ranges from about 10 to 100 square feet (1 square meter to 10 square meters), depending on the variability of the soil. 
PERCOLATION: The downward movement of water through the soil. 
PERMEABILITY: The quality of the soil that enables water to move downward through the profile. Permeability is measured as the number of inches per hour that water moved downward through the saturated soil. Terms describing permeability are: 

 
PLINTHITE: The sesquioxide-rich, humus-poor, highly weathered mixture of clay with quartz and other diluents. It commonly appears as red mottles, usually in platy, polygonal, or reticulate patterns. Plinthite changes irreversibly to an ironstone hardpan or to irregular aggregates on repeated wetting and drying, especially if it is exposed also to heat from the sun. In a moist soil, plinthite can be cut with a spade. It is a form of laterite. 
PONDING: Standing water on soils in closed depressions. Unless the soils are artificially drained, the water can be removed only by percolation or evapotranspiration. 
POOR FILTER: Because of rapid permeability the soil may not adequately filter effluent from a waste disposal system. 
PROFILE, SOIL: A vertical section of the soil extending through all its horizons and into the parent material. 
RUNOFF: The precipitation discharged into stream channels from an area. The water that flows off the surface of the land without sinking into the soil is called surface runoff. Water that enters the soil before reaching surface streams is called groundwater runoff or seepage flow from groundwater. 
SAND: As a soil separate, individual rock or mineral fragments from 0.05 millimeter to 2.0 millimeters in diameter. Most and grains consist of quartz. As a soil textural class, a soil that is 85 percent or more sand and not more than 10 percent clay. 
SANDSTONE: Sedimentary rock containing dominantly sand-size particles. 
SEDIMENTARY ROCK: Rock made up of particles deposited from suspension in water. The chief kinds of sedimentary rock are conglomerate, formed from gravel; sandstone, formed from sand; shale, formed from clay; and limestone, formed from soft masses of calcium carbonate. There are many intermediate types. Some wind-deposited sand is consolidated into sandstone. 
SEEPAGE: The movement of water through the soil. Seepage adversely affects the specified use. 
SERIES, SOIL: A group of soils that have profiles that are almost alike, except for differences in texture of the surface layer or of the underlying material. All the soils of a series have horizons that are similar in composition, thickness, and arrangements. 
SHALE: Sedimentary rock formed by the hardening of a clay deposit. 
SHRINK-WELL: The shrinking of soil when dry and the swelling when wet. Shrinking and swelling can damage roads, dams, building foundations, and other structures. It can also damage plant roots. 
SILICA: A combination of silicon and oxygen. The mineral form is called quartz. 
SLOPE: The inclination of the land surface from the horizontal. Percentage of slope is the vertical distance divided by horizontal distance, and then multiplied by 100. Thus, a slope of 20 percent is a drop of 20 feet in 100 feet of horizontal distance. 
SUBSOIL: Technically, the B horizon; roughly, the part of the solum below plow depth. 
SUBSURFACE LAYER: Technically, the A2 or E horizon. Generally refers to a leached horizon lighter in color and lower in content of organic matter than the overlying surface layer. 
SURFACE LAYER: The soil ordinarily moved in tillage, or its equivalent in uncultivated soil, ranging in depth from 4 to 10 inches (10 to 25 centimeter). Frequently designated as the "plow layer", or the "Ap Horizon". 
TERRACE: An embankment, or ridge, constructed across sloping soils on the contour or at a slight angle to the contour. The terrace intercepts surface runoff so that water soaks into the soil or flows slowly to a prepared outlet. 
TEXTURE, SOIL: The relative proportions of sand, silt, and clay particles in a mass of soil. The basic textural classes, in order of increasing proportion of fine particles, are sand, loamy sand, sandy loam, loam, silt loam, silt, sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, and clay. The sand, loamy sand, and sandy loam classes may be further divided by specifying "coarse", "fine", or "very fine". 
TOPSOIL: The upper part of the soil, which is the most favorable material for plant growth. It is ordinarily rich in organic matter and is used to topdress roadbanks, laws, and land affected by mining. 
WEATHERING: All physical and chemical changes produced in rocks or other deposits at or near the earth's surface by atmospheric agents. These changes result in disintegration and decomposition of the material. 
Appendix D - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT/BMP FACILITIES COVENANT 
City of Woodstock, Georgia 
Public Works/Utilities 
THIS Covenant made and entered into this _____ day of _______, 20___, by and between (Insert Full Name of Owner) ___________ hereinafter called the "Landowner", and City of Woodstock, Georgia hereinafter called the "City." 
WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property described as (City of Woodstock Tax Map/Parcel Identification Number) ___________ as recorded by deed in the land records of Cherokee County, Georgia at Deed Book _______ Page _______, hereinafter called the "Property," and 
WHEREAS the Landowner is proceeding to, or has, made improvements on the Property; and 
WHEREAS, the Site Plan/Subdivision Plan known as ___________ (Name of Plan/Development) hereinafter called the "Plan," which is expressly incorporated herein by reference, as approved, or to be approved, by the City, provides for detention of storm water within the confines of the Property; and 
WHEREAS, the City requires that onsite storm water management/BMP facilities as shown on the Plan be constructed and adequately maintained by the Landowner, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners association; 
WHEREAS, Chapter Seven of the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001) addresses issues relating to the operation and/or maintenance of storm water systems; and 
WHEREAS, the Landowner, its successors and assigns, understands that the execution and adherence to the provisions of this Covenant is a condition precedent to the City's permitting, and/or approving the final plant for the Property and subdivision located thereon; 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises and mutual covenants the parties hereby agree as follows: 
1.  The on-site storm water management/BMP facilities shall be constructed, operated, and maintained by the landowner, its successors and assigns, in accordance with the plans and specifications identified in the Plan, as well as in accordance with State and Federal law, the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual, and any and all applicable City ordinances. 
2.  The Landowner, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners association, shall adequately maintain the storm water facilities and improvements on the Property. Adequate Maintenance required by this Covenant shall include, but is not limited to, scheduled and corrective maintenance of all facilities and improvements intended to manage and/or control storm water on the Property, with such facilities and improvements to expressly include, but not be limited to pipes, channels structures, vegetation, berms, outlet structures, pond areas, access roads, or any other improvement relating to storm water on the Property, but excluding any such improvements located on, under, or within any publicly owned rights of way (the "Storm Water Facilities and Improvements"). Adequate maintenance is herein defined as keeping such Storm Water Facilities and Improvements in good working condition such that they satisfactorily perform their intended design functions. 
3.  The Landowner, its successors and assigns, shall inspect the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements and submit an inspection report to the City on an annual basis. The purpose of the inspection is to assure safe and proper functioning of the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements located on the Property. Each annual inspection shall include a full and complete inspection of all Storm Water Facilities and Improvements located on the Property. Any and all deficiencies identified during such inspections shall be noted in the inspection report submitted to the City. The inspection report shall also include a detailed plan for any and all repairs to the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements necessary to correct any deficiencies identified during the inspection, with the repair plan to be prepared by a professional engineer, or some other duly qualified professional, licensed in the State of Georgia. 
4.  The Landower, its successors and assigns, hereby grants permission to the City, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the Property and to inspect the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements as deemed necessary by the City for purposes of protecting the public health, safety or welfare, for purposes of investigating or inspecting any reported or suspected deficiencies in the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements on the Property, for purposes of responding to or investigating citizens' complaints relating to the management or control of storm water on the Property, or for any other purpose deemed necessary by the City. The City shall provide the Landowner, its successors and assigns, with a copy of any inspection findings, as well as a directive to commence with any required repairs. To the extent that the City does not agree with or to the contemplated repairs proposed by the Landowner, The City may submit an alternate repair plan to the Landowner. 
5.  In the event the Landowner, it successors and assigns, fails to maintain the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements on the Property in good working condition acceptable to the City, or fails to make repairs as specified in the inspection report within a reasonable time frame as established by the City, with such time frame not to be shorter than thirty (30) days, the City may enter upon the Property and take and all action necessary to correct deficiencies identified in the inspection report. The Landowner, its successors and assigns, shall be responsible for any and all fees and expenses incurred by the City in taking such corrective action. This provision shall not be construed to allow the City to erect any structure of a permanent nature on the land of the Landowner outside the easement for the storm water management/BMP facilities. It is expressly understood and agreed that this Covenant imposes no obligation or responsibility on the City to routinely maintain or repair any Storm Water Facilities and Improvements located on the property. 
6.  The Landowner, its successors and assigns, will perform all work necessary to keep the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements in good working condition as required by the Approved Plan, as well as by State and Federal law, the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual, and any and all applicable City ordinances. 
7.  In the event that the City performs or undertakes work of any kind pursuant to this Covenant or expends any funds or resources in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, material, and the like, the Landowner, its successors and assigns, shall reimburse the City upon demand, within thirty (30) days of receipt of same. 
8.  This Covenant shall impose no liability on the City with respect to the maintenance or repair of any Storm Water Facilities and Improvements on the Property, nor does the City assume any obligation or duty to undertake or perform any action allowed for, or permitted by, this Covenant. The Landowner, its successors and assigns, further agrees to I indemnify and hold the City harmless from any liability arising out of the management, operation, maintenance, or failure of any Storm Water Facilities and Improvements subject to this Covenant. 
9.  Notwithstanding any right extended to the City pursuant to this Covenant, it is expressly recognized and acknowledged that the City retains all prosecutorial rights and remedies available to it, including the enforcement of any and all applicable City ordinances, against the Landowner, its successors and assigns, relating to the operation, maintenance, and/or repair of Storm Water Facilities and Improvements located on the Property. 
10.  This Covenant shall be recorded among the lands records of Cherokee County, Georgia, and shall constitute a covenant running with the land, and shall be binding on the Landowner, its administrators, executors, assigns heirs and any other successors in interests, including any homeowners association. 
WITNESS the following signatures and seals 

 
Attachment A  Responsible Person 
The Landowner hereby identifies the responsible person or position responsible for ensuring that the inspection and maintenance of the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements is accomplished according to the inspection and maintenance schedule prepared by the engineer of records for this Property ______________________  ______________________(Address or Name of the Property as ______________________(Name and title of person so identified). 
Results of the inspections shall be submitted annually to the City of Woodstock. Inspection reports shall be submitted to: 
City of Woodstock  Public Works/Utilities Department  103 Arnold Mill Road  Woodstock, GA 30188 
If the responsible entity or contact person changes City of Woodstock shall be notified in writing of the change no later than thirty (30) days from the effective date of such change. 
_____ Responsible Entity 
_____ Contact Person's Name 
_____ Signature 
_____ Address 
_____ City, State, Zip Code 
_____ Phone Number 
Attachment B  Required Inspection and Maintenance Schedule 
Attach a maintenance and inspection schedule. Refer to Chapter 7 of the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual for minimum recommended inspection and maintenance requirements. 
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS 
This table contains all amendments/ordinances adopted since the original adoption of the Land Development Regulations on January 24, 1995 and included in this publication. For all amendments/ordinances adopted after September 24, 2009, see the Code Comparative Table following this Table of Amendments. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table contains all amendments/ordinances adopted after September 24, 2009 and included in this Land Development Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Land Development Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to state law. 

 