THE CODE OF HABERSHAM COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Published in 2006 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
Republished in 2014 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of 
HABERSHAM COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Sonny James, Commissioner, District 1 
Andrea Harper, Commissioner, District 2 
Chad Henderson, Commissioner, District 3 
Natalie Crawford, Commissioner, District 4 
Ed Nichols, Commissioner, District 5 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Philip Sutton 
County Manager 
____________ 
Donald Hunt 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Crystal Ward 
County Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of 
HABERSHAM COUNTY, GEORGIA 
(7/24/2017) 
____________ 
Stacy Hall, Commissioner, District 1 
Andrea Harper, Commissioner, District 2 
Victor Anderson, Commissioner, District 3 
Natalie Crawford, Commissioner, District 4 
Ed Nichols, Commissioner, District 5 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Philip Sutton 
County Manager 
____________ 
Donald Hunt 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Lindsay Underwood 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of Habersham County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2006 Code as amended through July 1, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President, Supplement Department, and Kelly Cribbs, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Crystal Ward, County Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Habersham County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Habersham County, Georgia. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the Habersham County, Georgia. 2014. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - LOCAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the 1956 Ga. Laws, page 2077. Amendments to the original act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Section catchlines have been added by the editor in order to facilitate indexing and reference. Any other additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 the words "roads and revenues" have been stricken from the name of the governing authority. Pursuant to art. VI, § VI, ¶ 14 of the Georgia Constitution of 1976, the words "ordinary" and "court of ordinary" have been changed, without notation, to "judge of the probate court" and "probate court" respectively. 

Section 1. - Board of commissioners. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners of Habersham County shall be composed of five members. One member shall be elected from each commission district by the voters of the entire county at large. Any person offering as a candidate to represent a commission district must reside in the commission district from which he or she offers. 
(b)  For the purpose of electing the members of the board of commissioners, Habersham County shall be divided into five commission districts which shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: haberccsbwk1 Plan Type: Local User: Tara Administrator: Habersham. 
(b)[c]  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Habersham County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Habersham County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4642, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws page 5630, § 1) 
Section 2. - Commissioner districts. 
(a)  The members of the board of commissioners who were elected at the general election in November, 1998, shall continue in office for the terms to which they were elected and until successors are elected and qualified as provided in this section. The members of the board of education who were elected at the general election in November, 2000, shall continue in office for the terms to which they were elected and until successors are elected and qualified as provided in this section. 
(b)  The first members of the reconstituted Board of Commissioners of Habersham County from Commission Districts 2 and 3 shall be elected at the time of the general election in November, 2002. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  The first members of the reconstituted Board of Commissioners of Habersham County from Commission Districts 1, 4, and 5 shall be elected at the time of the general election in November, 2004. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  Successors to members elected under subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be elected at the time of the November general election next preceding the expiration of such terms of office and shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(e)  All members shall be elected in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(f)  Commission Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 as they exist immediately prior to the effective date of this Act shall continue to be designated as Commission Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and, on and after the effective date of this Act, such members of the board serving from those former commission districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this section. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2069; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 3671; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4808; 1998 Ga. Laws, page 4642, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 5630, § 1) 
Section 2A. - Term of office. 
(a)  The member of the board of commissioners representing Commissioner District 1 elected at the 1984 general election shall be elected for a term of office of four years beginning on January 1, 1985. The term of office of the member of the board of commissioners representing Commissioner District 2, which is scheduled to expire on December 31, 1985, is extended to expire on December 31, 1986. At the 1986 general election, the members of the board of commissioners representing Commissioner Districts 2 and 3 shall be elected for terms of office of four years beginning on January 1, 1987. Thereafter, the members of the board of commissioners representing Commissioner Districts 1, 2, and 3 shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of their respective terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four years. All members of the board of commissioners shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  All members of the board of commissioners shall be nominated and elected in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, known as the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  The members of the board of commissioners holding office prior to the election of members pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall continue to serve as the governing authority of Habersham County until their successors are elected and take office as provided by said subsection (a) of this section. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3671; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4808) 
Section 3. - Qualifications of members. 
Any person to be eligible to serve as a member of the board must be at least 25 years of age on the date of the election; must have resided in Habersham County for at least two years immediately preceding the date of the election; must be a resident of the commissioner district from which he offers for election; and must be qualified and registered to vote for members of the General Assembly. 
Section 4. - Oath of members. 
Before entering upon his duties, each member of the board shall take an oath to faithfully perform his duties under this Act and the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, [and] such oath shall be administered by the Judge of the Probate Court of Habersham County. 
Section 5. - Bond of members, clerk and superintendent of roads. 
Before entering upon the discharge of his duties, each member of the board, the clerk, and the superintendent of roads, as hereinafter provided, shall each give bond in the sum of $10,000.00 with a surety company authorized to do business in Georgia, as surety, payable to the Judge of the Probate Court of Habersham County, for the use of Habersham County. Such bond shall be conditioned for the satisfactory performance by each of the members, the clerk and the superintendent of roads, of the duties of his office and for a true accounting of all monies and effects of said county coming under his custody, possession, or control. Such bonds shall be filed in the office of the judge of the probate court and shall be recorded upon his minutes. The premium on such bonds shall be paid from the funds of Habersham County. 
Editor's note— Each year ACCG provides Statutory Bond Coverage to those County officials that are required by State or local ordinance or resolution to be bonded to a required amount. Coverage is signed off and approved by the Probate Judge annually. 
Section 6. - Vacancies. 
In the event a vacancy occurs on the board for any reason other than the expiration of the members' term of office, it shall be filled by a special election to be called by the Judge of the Probate Court of Habersham County within fifteen days after the vacancy occurs. Such election [is] to be held within the commissioner district in which the vacancy exists. Such election shall be held on a day not less than ten or more than fifteen days from the date of the issuance of the call. The Judge of the Probate Court shall conduct such election and the person so elected shall serve for the unexpired term. 
Section 7. - Compensation of members. 
The Chairman of the Board of Commissioners shall be compensated in the amount of $900.00 per month, and the other members shall be compensated in the amount of $800.00 per month. Each member, including the chairman, shall also receive a monthly compensation supplement in the amount of $100.00 upon completion of the voluntary course of training resulting in designation as a certified county commissioner. Members of the commission will receive compensation increases when classified service employees receive an increase. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2619; 1969 Ga. Laws, page 2069; 1969 Ga. Laws, page 2079; 1974 Ga. Laws, page 3320; 1986 Ga. Laws, page 5554; Res. of 2-6-2006 ) 
Section 8. - Quorum; votes. 
Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum and no action shall be taken by the board without the concurring vote of at least three members of the board. All votes of the board shall be proposed by a motion and followed by a second. Failure to obtain a second on a motion shall cause the motion to fail without the necessity of a vote. No two members shall come together to conduct, direct, consult, or consider any business of the board without notifying at least one other member of the board as to such action. Thereafter, the members of the board who have then consulted, conducted, directed, or considered the business of the county shall make a disclosure to the remaining members of the board as to any decisions or agreements reached or matters discussed. 
This section shall not prohibit any discussions or consultations made during a meeting or at a recess of a meeting or when all board members are present and have an opportunity to participate. Further, this section shall not prohibit two members of the board from participating in any conferences, seminars, discussions on other boards served upon by the members, or in any circumstance when all board members were informed or had the opportunity to be aware that the board members would participate in such activity. At the first meeting in each year, the board shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson to serve for that year. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the board and shall serve as the executive officer of the board. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall preside. If both the chairperson and the vice chairperson are absent, the remainder of the board may choose a presiding officer for that meeting only and such the presiding officer shall yield to either the chairperson or the vice chairperson anytime either officer becomes present at such meeting. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4642, § 2) 
Section 9. - Appointment and duties of clerk. 
The board is hereby authorized to employ a clerk to be compensated in an amount to be determined by the board, to be paid from the funds of Habersham County. It shall be the duty of the clerk to keep the minutes and records of all proceedings of the board and to discharge such other duties as the board may prescribe. 
Section 10. - Appointment and duties of superintendent of roads. 
The board is hereby authorized to employ a superintendent of roads who shall be appointed by and serve under the direction of the county manager. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, page 3829, § 1) 
Section 11. - Powers. 
The board shall have and exercise all the powers which were vested by law in the judges of the inferior courts and the probate court, when sitting for county purposes, and is hereby expressly given complete power, authority and control relative to county matters of Habersham County. The board is hereby authorized to employ necessary personnel, and to fix their compensation, to assist in the performance of the duties imposed by this Act. 
Section 12. - Purchasing. 
The board of commissioners shall be authorized to prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing of supplies, equipment, and other materials and services for the county. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2619; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 3671; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4808; 2005 Ga. Laws, page 3829, § 2) 
Section 13. - Meetings; offices; responsibilities of commissioners regarding attendance to official business. 
The Board shall hold a regular meeting on the third Monday in each month and may hold other meetings, as deemed advisable, upon the call of the Chairman or upon the call of any two of the members. The Board shall maintain an office at the courthouse of Habersham County or as near thereto as possible. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2619; Res. of 10-19-2009 ) 
Section 13.1. - County manager. 
(a)  There is created the office of County Manager of Habersham County The county manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board. In addition to the duties contained in this Act, the county manager shall assume all such other duties as assigned by the board from time to time and as contained in any job description for such position as may be adopted by the board and as may be amended. 
(b)  The county manager shall be chosen by the board solely upon the basis of executive, educational, and administrative qualifications which shall include actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices with respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this Act or as further defined by the board. No member of the board shall be appointed as county manager during the term of office for which he or she is elected. 
(c)  The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall continue as the executive officer of the county, and the board shall continue to be the executive entity of the county. It shall be the duty of the board to set the overall executive policy and procedures for the county. The county manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the county and the head of the administrative branch of county government. The county manager shall be responsible to the board for the proper and efficient administration of all of the affairs of the county over which the county manager has jurisdiction. It shall be the duty of the county manager to: 
(1)  Hire, discharge, or suspend, in accordance with the ordinances, policies, and rules adopted by the board, all officers and employees of the county under the jurisdiction of the board; provided, however, that the county attorney, clerk of the board; and auditor shall be appointed and removed by action of the board; 
(2)  Supervise the administration of the affairs of the county and see that all ordinances, resolutions, regulations, and policies of the board are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(3)  Exercise administrative control over all departments or divisions of the county government under the jurisdiction of the board; 
(4)  Act as the budget officer and submit, subject to requirements established by the board, an annual budget for consideration and adoption by the board; 
(5)  Keep the board fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the county; 
(6)  Supervise and direct the official conduct of all county officers and department heads appointed by the board pursuant to subsection (d) of this Code section. 
(7)  Attend all meetings of the board with the right to enter discussion and make recommendation, provided that the county manager shall have no vote; 
(8)  Act as the chief purchasing agent for the county and establish policies and procedures for procurement of all supplies and materials required by the county, and all purchase orders and contracts for sums less than $5,000.00 may be executed by the county manager or his or her designee. 
(9)  Administer the construction and maintenance of all roads and bridges under the jurisdiction of Habersham County and have administrative responsibility for any other construction or capital improvement projects. 
(d)  There is established an order of command whereby all matters of personnel or general administration of the county to be considered by the board shall first be presented to the manager for his or her review, and it shall be the duty of the county manager to present such matters before the board. However, any person or employee may seek to address the board following the submission of a matter to the county manager as provided in this Act, provided that the county attorney shall answer directly to the board and may present matters to the board without prior review of the county manager. The board may direct the county attorney to investigate any matter, including the conduct of the county manager, without first informing the county manager, if the board considers such action to be in the best interest of the county. Further, department heads may take direction from the board and the board may receive reports or information directly from employees in a time of crisis or emergency or when it is necessary to safeguard the interests of the county or its citizens. 
(e)  The county manager shall serve at the pleasure of the board for an indefinite term as an at will employee and may be terminated by majority vote of the board. 
(f)  All actions of the county manager shall be taken and performed consistent and in compliance with all federal and state laws, local ordinances, policies, and directives as may be established by the board 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 4642, § 3; Res. of 1-25-2010 ) 
Editor's note— Please refer to Article IV, Finance, Division 2. Purchasing, for up to date information on the County Manager's purchasing thresholds. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Local Acts and any amendments thereto. 

 
The following table is a chronological listing of the ordinances/resolutions that amend these Local Acts. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Habersham County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto: 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions . All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of commissioners may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of the County. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Habersham County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Habersham County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a county officer or county employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following . The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include words of all other genders. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor . The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number includes the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. Any reference to an act of the General Assembly by name or title is a reference to such act as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies . Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the county. 
Ordinance. The terms "ordinance" and "resolution" are interchangeable. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding . The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road . The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the county, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Sec. - 1-3. Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of The Code of Habersham County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: . . .." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"The Code of Habersham County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________ , that reads as follows: . . .." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness; 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise; 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget; 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code; 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan or the Comprehensive Land Development Resolution; 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment; 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley; 
(9)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision or adopting or amending subdivision regulations; 
(10)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code; 
(11)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(12)  That is temporary, although general in effect; 
(13)  That is special, although permanent in effect; or 
(14)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq. 

Sec. 2-19. - Closed meetings. 
(a)  The chairman of the board of commissioners or designated presiding officer shall, following closure of a meeting, have the authority to adjourn the closed portion of the meeting and return to regular session when he anticipates or determines the discussion, dissemination or publication of information within a closed session may or will exceed the purposes under the law for which said meeting was closed. Upon adjournment from a closed meeting to an open meeting by the chairman or presiding officer, the chairman shall make the announcement of the adjournment from closed session back to regular session. The chairman shall state his reasons for anticipating or determining the discussion, dissemination or publication of information may or would exceed the purposes for which said meeting was closed. Any member of the board who disagrees with the chairman's actions shall state their objection in the open meeting. All said discussions shall be recorded within the minutes. Said adjournment from closed session to regular session by the chairman shall not preclude the board from returning to closed session when it is determined said action shall be in accordance with the prescribed law and shall not violate the chairman's right or ability to make a true statement within the affidavit required under O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4(b). 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure that no matters within the exceptions provided by law or identified as a specific relevant exception are discussed and withheld from the public. Further, the resolution from which this article is derived allows the chairman or presiding officer to make a true affidavit pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4(b). 
(Res. of 7-19-1999) 
Secs. 2-20—2-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the resolution of April 1, 1991, the board of commissioners adopted the "Revised Personnel Policies and Procedures, Position Classification and Pay Plan for Habersham County, Georgia" which became the official personnel management system for the county. An official copy of that document is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. The county's antinepotism policy is set forth in a resolution adopted November 1, 1982, an official copy of which is also on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-42—2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Ethics, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-71. - Purpose. 
The proper operation of democratic government requires that the public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; the government decisions and policy be made through proper channels of the governmental structure; public office not be used for personal gain; the public officials and employees be free from the appearance of impropriety; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all county officials and employees is adopted. The purpose of this policy is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the county and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private, financial or other interests in matters affecting the county. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business entity means any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership or person, in either a representative or a fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or corporation. 
Confidential information means information which, by law or practice, is not available to the public. 
County official or official means the county board of commissioners, county manager, county attorney and his assistants and any county employee who has been appointed to the position by either the county manager or the board of commissioners acting independently or jointly and any member of any other county board of authority. 
Employee means and includes all those persons employed on a regular or part time basis by the county, as well as those persons whose services are retained under the terms of a contractual agreement with the county. 
Immediate family means an official or employee and the spouse of an official or employee, their parents, children, brothers and sisters related by blood or marriage. 
Interest means direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a public officer, official or employee as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the county, except for such contracts or transactions which, by their terms and by the substance of their provisions, confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of simple benefits to all persons and/or property similarly situated. For purposes of this policy, a county official or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of: 
(1)  His immediate family; 
(2)  Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship exists with the county official or employee; 
(3)  Any business entity in which the county official or employee is an officer, director or member having a financial interest in, or employed by it; 
(4)  Any business entity as to which the stock, legal ownership or beneficial ownership of a county official or employee is in excess of five percent of the total stock or total legal and beneficial ownership, or which is controlled or owned directly or indirectly by the county official or employee. 
Official act or action means any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of any official or employee of the county or any agency, board, committee, authority or commission thereof. 
Reprimand means an oral or written disciplinary measure as defined on page 24 of the Personnel Policies and Procedures. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-73. - Standards. 
(a)  Interest in contract of transaction. No county official or employee having the power or duty to perform an official act or action related to a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the county shall: 
(1)  Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or transaction; 
(2)  Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising or appearing on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person involved in such contract or transactions; 
(3)  Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a person or business entity involved in such contract or transaction; or 
(4)  Have solicited, accepted or granted a present or future gift, favor, service or thing of value from or to a person involved in such contract or transaction, except as provided herein. 
(b)  Preacquisition of interest. No county official or employee shall acquire an interest in or be affected by a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the county at a time when the public employee believes or has reason to believe that such contract or transaction will be directly or indirectly affected by an official act or action of the county. 
(c)  Disclosure of information. No county official or employee shall without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the county, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others. 
(d)  Incapable service. No county official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render service for any private entity, unless approved in writing by such employee's or official's department head or superior. The standards used for approval or disapproval of employment shall be based on whether the outside employment will or can cause a conflict of interest with the employee's or official's employment with the county and whether it will cause interferences with the efficient performance of an employee's or official's duty with the county. 
(e)  Appearance. No county official or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person other than himself, his spouse or minor children, before any county agency, authority or board. However, a member of the board of commissioners may appear before such groups on behalf of his constituents in the course of his duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. 
(f)  Public property. No county official or employee shall request or permit the unauthorized use of county-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit. 
(g)  Special treatment. No county official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen in the same or similar circumstances. 
(h)  Later case interest. No county official or employee shall, after the termination of service or employment with the county, accept remuneration of any kind for any appearance before any board, commission, committee, agency or authority of the county on behalf of any adverse party in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which he personally participated during the period of his service or employment, which was under his active consideration during the period of his service or employment, or as to which he could have acquired knowledge or information during the period of his service or employment. 
(i)  Political recrimination. No county official or employee, whether elected or appointed, shall promise an appointment to threaten the dismissal from any county position as a reward or punishment for any political activity. 
(j)  Withholding of information. No county official or employee shall knowingly withhold any information that would impair the proper decision making of any of the county board, authorities, agency or commissions. 
(k)  Payment of debts. All county officials and employees shall settle all accounts between them and the county, including the payment of taxes, in a timely fashion. 
(l)  Organizational integrity. County commissioners, as policy makers, shall refrain from unduly interfering in the daily administrative affairs of department supervisors. Commissioners shall not, acting alone, make suggestions to the department supervisors or other employees, except the county manager, regarding the hiring, firing or disciplining of county employees, unless requested to do so by the department director. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-74. - Exceptions. 
(a)  It shall not be deemed a violation of the standards of this policy if the interest of a county official or employee in a person or business entity is a contractual obligation of less than $500.00 which has not been preceded by any other obligation, discharged or existing, between the parties and which is not the first in a series of two or more loans or debts which either of the parties is under any obligation to make or incur. 
(b)  The following shall not be deemed a violation of the standards of this policy: 
(1)  Legitimate salary, benefits, fees, commissions or expenses associated with an official's or employee's non-public business; 
(2)  An award, plaque, certificate, memento or similar item given in recognition of the official's or employee's civic, charitable, political, professional or public service; 
(3)  Food, beverages and registration at group events to which all similarly situated employees or officials are invited; 
(4)  Actual and reasonable expenses for food, beverages, travel, lodging and registration for a meeting which are provided to an official or employee so that he may participate or speak at the meeting; 
(5)  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business; 
(6)  Any gift with a total value less than $100.00 in any calendar year; 
(7)  Promotional items generally distributed to public officials; 
(8)  A gift from a member of the public official's immediate family; or 
(9)  Food, beverage or expenses afforded public officials or employees and members of their immediate families, or others that are associated with normal and customary business or social functions or activities. 
(c)  It shall not be deemed a violation of the standards of this policy if a county official or employee, in his capacity as such official or employee, participates in the making of a contract even if such official or employee has a private pecuniary interest or performs in regard to that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on his part, if: 
(1)  The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitive bidding; or 
(2)  The board of commissioners at regular meeting, after determining that it is in the best interest of the county to do so, authorizes the participation. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-75. - Disclosure of interest in legislative action. 
(a)  Any member of the board of commissioners who has financial or personal interest in any proposed legislation before the commission shall immediately disclose on the record the nature and extent of such interest. 
(b)  Any other official or employee who has a financial or personal interest in any proposed legislative action of the board of commissioners and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the commission, shall disclose on the record the nature and extent of such interest. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-76. - Abstentions. 
A county official or employee who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by an official act or action shall abstain from any participation in the same. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-77. - Ethics panel. 
(a)  Procedure. Any person having a complaint against an officer, official or employee of the county of this division shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation. The complaint shall be filed with the county manager. In the event the complaint regards the county manager, it shall be filed with the commission chairman. Upon receipt of a complaint, the county manager, or in the event the complaint regards the county manager, the commission chairman shall appoint three members of the commission, who, along with the county attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(b)  Composition of the board of ethics. The board of ethics shall be composed of the following: 
(1)  The board of ethics of the county shall be composed of five residents of the county to be appointed as provided in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the county for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office, and shall remain a resident of the county while serving as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one year period, any interest in any contract, transaction or official action of the county. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of ten individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The county clerk shall maintain a listing of these ten qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the board of commissioners, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members have been appointed. The board of ethics will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the county shall provide meeting space for the board. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the county, it shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(c)  Duties and powers. The board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of a complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the county attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this article; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint, as it deems necessary, to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(d)  Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. The board of ethics, as appointed herein set forth, shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the board of commissioners within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(e)  Penalty and member rights. 
(1)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of this division shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the county. 
(2)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(f)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(2)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Habersham County within 30 days after the decision of the board. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(g)  Enforcement. In the event that an ethics panel finds that a violation of the county code of ethics has occurred, the board of commissioners, at a public hearing within 30 days of the rendering of the panel's findings and recommendations, may by majority vote, decide that no action is to be taken, or may decide to take any action consistent with state law, including the censure, reprimand, discipline or termination of the official or employee. In the event that a member of the board of commissioners is a party under investigation, such commissioner shall not participate in any such decision. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-78. - Penalties. 
(a)  Employees are subject to the following penalties and actions for a breach of this division: 
(1)  Written warning or reprimand; 
(2)  Suspension without pay; 
(3)  Termination of employment; 
(4)  Recovery of value transferred or received by the county; and 
(5)  Cancellation of the contract or rejection of the bid or offer. 
(b)  County officials are subject to the following penalties and action for breach of ethics: 
(1)  Written warning or reprimand; 
(2)  Removal from office as provided by state law; 
(3)  Cancellation of the contract or rejection of the bid or offer; 
(4)  Recovery of the value transferred or received; and 
(5)  Debarment or suspension from award of county contract for a period of up to three years. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-79. - Distribution. 
Each official and employee elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall be furnished a copy of this division within his Habersham County Personnel Policies and Procedures before entering upon the duties of this office or employment. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-80. - Compliance with applicable laws. 
No officer, official or employee shall engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law, now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to him by virtue of his office. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Sec. 2-81. - State code adopted by reference. 
The code of ethics for government service established by O.C.G.A. §§ 45-10-1 and 45-10-3 is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2005) 
Secs. 2-82—2-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local government finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; local government bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-106—2-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 14, 2015, § 1, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 2-124—2-140, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted July 5, 2005; and an ordinance adopted Mar. 19, 2007. 

Sec. 2-124. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these purchasing policies and procedures is to provide guidance for the procurement of goods and services in compliance with procurement provisions of Habersham County ("county") and the State of Georgia. The goal of this policy is to establish, foster, and maintain the following principles: 
• To consider the best interests of Habersham County in all transactions; 
• To purchase without prejudice, seeking to obtain the maximum value for each dollar expenditure with maximum quality standards; and 
• To subscribe to and work for honesty and truth in buying. 
The adoption of this purchasing manual and the approval of any subsequent revisions to it by the Board of County Commissioners of Habersham County, Georgia, shall authorize the policies and procedures contained herein for official use of county business. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-125. - Scope. 
The scope of this manual and the policies and procedures contained herein governs all departments under the jurisdiction of the board of county commissioners, as well as all purchasing transactions which are paid for directly from County funds under the control of the board of county commissioners. This manual and the policies and procedures contained herein pre-empts all previously existing purchasing manuals, policies, and procedures. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-126. - Authority, responsibilities, thresholds, and form requirements. 
(1)  Authority. The board of county commissioners is the designated procurement authority, within the policies stated herein, and it is authorized to delegate aspects of this responsibility to purchasing officers. Such authority includes the right and responsibility to question specific quantities, quality, and necessity for items requested, in order that the best interests of the county will be served. The board of county commissioners and the purchasing officers are the only individuals processing legally-binding purchasing authority. Even when not required by law or bond policy, these individuals have an ethical responsibility to solicit, negotiate, and contract so as to obtain the best materials and services for the best possible cost. 
(2)  Responsibilities. The county will make every effort to obtain high quality goods and services at the best possible price. All procurement procedures will be conducted in a fair and impartial manner with avoidance of any impropriety. All qualified vendors have access to county business. No vendor will be arbitrarily or capriciously excluded. It is the intent of the county that competition be sought to the greatest practical degree. The condition of the exchanges shall be made clear in advance of the competition. Specifications shall reflect the needs of the county. 
Every person employed by the county is responsible for the control of supplies, materials, and equipment that has been provided in order to accomplish their activities. Department directors are responsible for the control of material usage, allocation of supply quantities, physical security for materials, and proper disposition of surplus items. 
a.  Department directors will have the following responsibilities: 
Approving completed check request forms and/or purchase orders for items based on need, lead time, and approved budgetary amount; 
1.  Obtaining any additional approvals as required by estimated threshold amount or the nature of the purchase; 
2.  Submitting approved check request forms and/or purchase orders to accounts payable; 
3.  Purchasing approved items; 
4.  Securing W9, EVerify, and other necessary forms required when doing business with a new vendor; 
5.  Receiving and verifying purchase; 
6.  Submitting signed packing slips or work orders to accounts payable once the merchandise or labor has been received; 
7.  Submitting signed invoices to accounts payable for payment. 
b.  The finance director will have the following responsibilities: 
1.  Approving purchase orders that exceed the department directors estimated bid threshold authority; 
2.  Initiating a request for proposal or request for quote on purchase orders that exceed the estimated bid threshold. 
c.  The county manager will have the following responsibilities: 
1.  Approving purchase orders that exceed the finance director's estimated bid threshold authority. 
d.  The information technology director will have the following responsibilities: 
1.  Approving purchase orders that are related to technology. 
e.  The fleet director will have the following responsibilities: 
1.  Approving purchase orders that are related to fleet management and services. 
f.  The facilities management director will have the following responsibilities: 
1.  Approving purchase orders that are related to buildings and maintenance. 
(3)  Thresholds. 

 
(4)  Form requirements. 
a.  Check request forms and purchase orders are to include: 
1.  Company name and address 
2.  Date 
3.  General Ledger number 
4.  Quantity 
5.  Item or service description 
6.  Price 
7.  Preparer's signature 
8.  Other approvals as required 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ; Res. of 10-16-2017 , § 1) 
Sec. 2-127. - Purchases by a purchasing card. 
The purchasing card (P-Card) is a credit card issued by SunTrust Bank. It is a fast and flexible purchasing tool that provides an extremely efficient and effective method of purchasing and paying for items within the following parameters: 
The purchasing card enables cardholders to purchase non-restricted commodities directly from suppliers. Approved purchases can be completed with suppliers over the phone, in person, or over the internet. 
The purchasing card will be issued in the employee's name with "Habersham County" clearly indicated on the card. The purchasing card program provides a cost-efficient method for purchasing goods and services. Built-in card features make the program easy to control and reduces processing costs at all levels by minimizing the number of invoices and checks. Responsibilities, thresholds, and requirements detailed in these policies and procedures apply to purchases by purchase card but may follow different practices and processes due to their electronic nature. 
Employees and/or elected officials issued purchasing cards will sign a purchasing cardholder agreement prior to being issued a purchasing card. Purchasing cards are requested by department directors through a purchasing card request form. The purchasing card request form establishes a line limit for the cardholder. The following elected officials are authorized to use a card: 
• Clerk of court 
• Commissioners 
• Coroner 
• Magistrate judge 
• Sheriff 
• Tax commissioner 
(1)  Practices. 
a.  All purchases must be for official Habersham County use only. 
b.  Authorized users shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
c.  Training and traveling expenses follow guidelines established in the Habersham County Employee Handbook & Policy Guidelines and Section 6 of the Habersham County Purchasing Policies & Procedures. 
d.  Cardholders must sign all receipts as their names appear on the front of their purchasing cards. 
e.  No cash is accepted in lieu of credit on the cardholder's purchasing card under any circumstance. 
f.  Only those officials and employees with a signed and approved purchasing cardholder agreement on file are authorized to use a purchasing card. 
g.  Transaction limits for purchasing cards are subject to the thresholds established in the Habersham County Financial Polices & Procedures section 2-126(3), Thresholds. Furthermore, purchasing cards have a specified transaction limits listed in separate Appendix I. 
h.  Receipts are required for all card transactions; see 2-127(2)g. All receipts and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. §50-18-70 et seq. 
i.  The board of commissioners designates a finance specialist within the finance department as the county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
1.  Manage county issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
2.  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
3.  Serve as liaison to elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
4.  Provide training on card policies and procedures to elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card and their staff. 
5.  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
6.  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
7.  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this ordinance, county procurement ordinance and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
8.  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse on the cards. 
9.  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
10.  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise required by the County's record retention policy. 
(2)  Process. 
a.  Electronic approval. 
1.  The department director approves electronically. 
2.  If a purchase order is required based on threshold that purchase order number is entered into ESP by cardholder or department card administrator. 
3.  The cardholder or department card administrator retains picking tickets or packing slips until monthly statement is ready for processing. 
4.  Each transaction will have a proper GL code, signed itemized receipt, and purchase order (if applicable) before submitting to accounts payable. 
b.  Using enterprise spend platform (ESP) to create a requisition. 
1.  Sign on to ESP at https://enterprisespendplatform.suntrust.com. 
2.  Enter user email address, username, and password. 
3.  Click on sign on. 
4.  Click on create new requisition. 
5.  Type in product or service being paid (i.e. office supplies) as requisition label. 
6.  Check the date and save. 
7.  Search or type in the general ledger (g/l) code. * 
8.  Type in the purchase order number. * 
9.  Type in the amount of the purchase. * 
10.  In the notes section, type in a detailed description as it would normally be written on a manual purchase order. List the quantity of items to be ordered, an item number, etc. 
11.  Click to save. The requisition will automatically be submitted electronically for the department director's approval, and if necessary, to accounts payable based on the total purchase amount. 
* Click on the + to the left of the g/l code to split the amount. Select blank space as g/l code to delete any unnecessary split. 
c.  Dispute a charge prior to receipt of monthly statement. 
1.  The cardholder or department card administrator may dispute a transaction prior to receiving his/her mailed monthly statement by simply clicking the check box &#8730; for disputed in the transaction details coding window from the account statement module. This will automatically notify SunTrust Bank and the charge will not appear on your mailed monthly statement. 
d.  Dispute a charge after receipt of monthly statement 
1.  Cardholders or department card administrators must verify each transaction on his/her mailed monthly statement. If a transaction is incorrect for whatever reason, the cardholder must notify accounts payable and SunTrust Bank within 60 days after the billing cycle date. The cardholder must indicate charges in dispute on the front of the coded statement for payment. Otherwise, it is understood that the cardholder accepts the charges as correct. 
e.  Printing card statement. 
1.  Cardholder must verify all of the transactions on his/her purchasing card and include a general ledger code and purchase order number (if applicable). 
2.  Sign on to ESP at https://enterprisesspendplatform.suntrust.com. 
3.  Enter user email address, username, and password. 
4.  Click on sign on. 
5.  Click on statement manage. 
6.  Select print statement from the main menu. 
7.  Select time period for statement (current statement will automatically appear first). 
f.  Payment procedures for purchasing card statements mailed purchasing card statements should be received after the 10th of every month. Electronic statements will be available the 16th of every month. Cardholders or department card administrators must print the statements from ESP and submit it with the necessary documentation within five days. 
g.  Cardholders will submit all required receipts and check requests for purchase orders. Disciplinary action may be deemed necessary if cardholders do not submit required information. Furthermore, the finance department will audit and review purchases. 
1.  On the rare occasion that a receipt is lost, employees should document the purpose of the purchase, the goods/services that were purchased, the amount, the supplier or merchant information, quantity, unit price, then sign and obtain their supervisor's signature on a lost receipt form. Repeat failure to submit timely coded statements, receipts, summaries, and required check request forms or purchase orders to accounts payable may result in the following: 
a.  First offense: Suspension of cardholder's privileges for a minimum of seven days and an oral warning. 
b.  Second offense: Suspension of cardholder's privileges for a minimum of 30 days, a written reprimand to be maintained in the employee's county personnel file, and supervisor notification. 
c.  Third offense: Immediate termination of cardholder's privileges, a written reprimand to be maintained in the employee's county personnel file, supervisor notification and other disciplinary action as described in the Habersham County Employee Handbook & Policy Guidelines. Furthermore, misdemeanor/felony prosecution may be sought in instances of fraud see g. Disciplinary Action 2 for further detail. 
2.  Finance department is responsible for auditing and reviewing purchases made with purchasing cards. Due to the volume of transactions and limited staff auditing will be randomized. The audit process will utilize a purchasing card audit check list to confirm documentation is complete, charges are reasonable, sales tax is not paid, and other purchasing card practices are followed. 
3.  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(C)(8) the following penalties (for public officials, both elected and nonelected as well as those in every department, agency, board, bureau, commission, authority or similar body of Habersham County) shall apply for those who misuse public funds via purchasing card (P-Card). 
a.  If specifically limited and specifically authorized purposes are in writing, employees or elected officials using purchasing card for non-authorized purposes are guilty of felony; 
b.  Those found guilty shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000.00 or imprisonment for not less than one year or more than three years, or both; 
c.  Violations do not have to occur in Georgia or in any particular city or county to be prosecuted; and 
d.  During said prosecution, the crime shall be considered to have been committed in the county in which such public official holds office or in which a government employee is employed. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ; Res. of 10-16-2017 , § 2) 
Sec. 2-128. - Purchases requiring a bid. 
Each purchase or service that is estimated to cost over $20,000.00 requires formal advertising, sealed bids, and shall be awarded by the board of commissioners. 
(1)  Initiating bid process. 
a.  A department director or elected official submits a written description of items or services for bid to the finance department. 
b.  Finance department creates a request for proposal or request for qualifications. This should consist of, but is not limited to: 
1.  Specifications of proposal or quote. 
2.  Contract conditions and terms, including the right to reject any and all proposals. 
3.  Place, time, and date that the bid is to be received. 
4.  Contact information for questions and interpretations. 
5.  Non-collusion affidavit. 
6.  Certificate of non-discrimination. 
7.  Bidders declaration. 
8.  Bid tabulation. 
c.  Upon department director approval, the finance department, through the county clerk, will submit a legal ad to The Northeast Georgian, and/or at least one newspaper qualified to accept legal advertising of general circulation in Habersham County, when required. It will have a run time of two weeks prior to the bid due date (unless otherwise required by law). RFP/RFQs will also be posted on the county's website and State of Georgia's procurement website. 
(2)  Bid process. Sealed bids will be received at any time during regular business hours prior to the specific date and time advertised. Each bid will be date and time stamped as it is received by the finance department. Each bid will be publicly opened and read as stated in the bid package. All bids will then be available for public inspection. 
(3)  Bid award. The board of commissioners will receive a recommendation from the county manager and award the bid to the lowest, responsive, and responsible bidder during its regular board meeting. 
a.  When only one bid is presented, the same rules apply as to acceptance and rejection. Thus, if the single bid applies with all the material specifications the county may award the single bidder the contract as the lowest, responsive, and responsible bid. Conversely, the county states on all bids that it has the right to reject any and all bids. Therefore, the county has the privilege to reject a single bid that is found unacceptable. Should there be a decision to set a new bid date, the single bid should be returned to the vendor unopened with a letter explaining the entire transaction. 
b.  The Board of Commissioners of Habersham County, reserves the right to show preference to local bidders in the purchase of supplies, equipment, and services. The amount shall not exceed five percent of the amount bid or quoted and/or $50,000.00 whichever is less. A "local" bidder is defined as an individual or business that maintains a place of business or maintains an inventory of merchandise and/or equipment in Habersham County; is licensed by Habersham County and/or the State of Georgia, if required, and is subject to Habersham County real and/or personal property taxes. Notice of preference availability shall be included in the invitation to bid and in all advertisements. Note: State law prohibits local preference for public works or road project bids. 
c.  Consideration will be given to the original company's expertise regarding bids on improvements, work to existing equipment, or projects that are proprietary in nature. 
d.  When the board of commissioners does not select the lowest bidder, the finance department shall document the reason(s) why the low bid was not awarded. If there is a bid protest by a bidder, they must file a written protest within three days after the bid has been awarded. The protesting bidder will need to send a certified signed letter explaining his/her protest to the finance department. 
(4)  Bonding and insurance requirements. 
a.  Construction/public works projects where cost is $50,000.00 or greater require a five percent bid bond, a 100 percent performance bond and a 100 percent payment bond. 
b.  Projects other than public works may require a five percent bid bond, a 100 percent performance bond, and 100 percent payment bond. 
c.  Bonding may also be required for other purchases when deemed necessary by Habersham County. Any bonding requirements will be specifically stated in the solicitation. 
d.  Bid bonds may be submitted in the form of a cashier's check, certified check, bank draft, money order, or an irrevocable letter of credit made payable to Habersham County, or a bid bond issued by a surety company licensed to issue such bonds in the State of Georgia. The guarantee shall ensure the execution of the contract document and the furnishing of a payment bond and a performance bond. 
e.  Payment bonds and performance bonds must be issued by a surety company licensed to issue such bonds in the state of Georgia. 
f.  The insurance and bonding company should be licensed to do business by the Georgia Secretary of State, authorized to do business in Georgia by the Georgia Insurance Department, listed in the Department of Treasury's Publication of Companies holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Surety on Federal Bonds and as acceptable reinsuring companies, and must have an A.M. Best rating of A-V (A-5) or higher. 
(5)  Exceptions. Provisions as to formal advertising and sealed bids shall not apply to the following classes of purchases or other exceptions as the board of county commissioners may from time to time adopt; 
a.  Lease/rental of real property. 
b.  Contracts involving policies of insurance or surety company bonds. 
c.  Purchases made through Georgia State contracts or against federal purchase contracts. 
d.  Contracts with public utility service companies under tariffs on file with the public service commission, contracts made with another political subdivision of the State of Georgia, the federal government, and any agency of the State of Georgia or any municipal authority. 
e.  Contracts involving the services of members of the medical or legal profession, engineers, architects, accountants, or other personal services involving professional expert advice. 
f.  Purchase of supplies and equipment required for parts or components being procured as replacement parts in support of equipment specially designed by a manufacturer, where data available is not adequate to assure that the part of component is identical with the part it is to replace or where contemplated procurement is to match or complement equipment or components previously purchased. 
g.  Purchase of technical, non-personal services in connection with the assembly, installation, or servicing (or the instruction of personnel therein) of a highly technical or specialized nature. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-129. - Recurring purchases. 
To be considered recurring, an expense must be a routine expense defined monthly or quarterly. Examples of recurring expenses are: utility bills, facility cleaning bills, landscaping bills, telephone bills, internet usage fees, postage meter rental fees, copier maintenance fees, and facility rent. Recurring expenses do not require a purchase order process except when they are a contracted service. For contracted services a check request form or purchase order should be completed for the typical cycle (e.g. one year or a contract period). The same approval, quote, and document requirements apply based on annual estimated threshold amounts. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-130. - Emergency purchases. 
Emergency purchases are authorized when there is an immediate need for items or services to deal with an emergency situation. Emergencies are defined as existing conditions which pose a threat to the safety, health, or welfare of the citizens of Habersham County. 
If the emergency occurs during normal working hours, the department director must attempt to obtain appropriate authorization for the purchase through verbal communications as defined in Section 1 of the Purchasing Policies & Procedures and submitting required documentation based on estimated threshold within 24 hours. The documentation shall make note of the reason for emergency. 
In an emergency situation the county manager may authorize an emergency purchase and waive any bid requirements as these requirements would cause undue delay in the delivery of essential services under such conditions. 
If the emergency occurs at night, on weekends, or on holidays, the department director may initiate independent action after attempting to contact the county manager if the estimated threshold exceeds their authority. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-131. - Business travel expenses. 
Habersham County will reimburse employees for reasonable business travel expenses incurred while on assignments away from the normal work location. All business travel must be approved in advance by the department director and comply with established policies. 
Employees whose travel expenses have been approved are responsible for making their own travel arrangements. 
When approved, the costs of travel, meals, lodging and other expenses directly related to accomplishing business travel objectives will be reimbursed by Habersham County up to the limits stated in the official county travel policy. Employees are expected to limit expenses to reasonable amounts. Travel expenses paid for utilizing Habersham County's P-Card system will follow the same procedures as illustrated in Section 2: Purchases by a Purchasing Card. Furthermore, receipts for meals should be itemized so it is clearly identifiable what food and/or drink was purchased. Failure to provide an itemized receipt may prohibit reimbursements and/or initiate disciplinary action as outlined in Section 2: Purchases by a Purchasing Card. 
Employees who are involved in an accident while traveling on business must promptly report the incident to their immediate supervisor. Vehicles owned, leased, or rented by Habersham County may not be used for personal use without prior approval. 
When travel is completed, employees should submit completed travel expense reports within five days. Reports should be accompanied by receipts for all individual expenses in accordance with the established county policy. 
Employees should contact their supervisor for guidance and assistance on procedures related to travel arrangements, travel advances, expense reports, reimbursement for specific expenses or any other business travel issues. Abuse of this business travel expenses policy, including falsifying expense reports to reflect costs not incurred by the employee, can be grounds for disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. 
For a more detailed explanation, please see the full policy below. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to provide guidelines for authorization and administration of travel and business expense reporting by county employees. Objectives of these guidelines are uniformity and fairness to all travelers, conservation of public funds, and a level of comfort while traveling that allows business to be conducted in a dignified manner. 
b.  Scope. These policies and procedures apply to all of Habersham County employees, elected officials, and members of the advisory boards who are authorized to travel on county business. 
1)  Definitions. 
a.  As used in this statement of policy, "county business" shall pertain to either of the following: 
1.  "Business travel" — Travel for the purpose of conducting official county business. 
2.  "Professional/educational travel" — Travel to attend meetings, conferences, and training programs for professional growth and development as well as the mutual benefit of the county. 
b.  "Authorizing party" — Individual authorized to approve or disapprove all travel-related requests. Individual is assumed to be in a level of authority such that they can accurately evaluate the need for the cost and benefit of such travel. 
c.  "Requesting Party" — Individual who will be incurring travel costs. 
d.  "Out-of-Town" is considered to be outside of Habersham County. 
2)  Administration. 
a.  Employees are expected to search out the most reasonably-priced arrangements for their travel event, taking into consideration their personal safety and a reasonable level of comfort and dignity. 
b.  The county does not contract with a specific travel agent. Employees should book travel arrangements through the event coordinator, if applicable. If an event coordinator is not designated for the event, an agent of your choosing or utilization of one of the many internet sites available for such purposes is appropriate. 
c.  Travel arrangements that include air travel, lodging, and/or car rental should be made as far in advance as possible, preferably at least 30 days prior to the travel event, to ensure the most economical and desirable arrangements. Airfare should be "refundable" in case the travel is cancelled. 
d.  An employee traveling on appropriate and pre-approved business will be reimbursed for reasonable costs incurred in conformance with this policy. 
3)  Guidelines for authorization of travel. 
a.  Decisions as to which travel is authorized begin with the budgetary process. Travel needs should be anticipated and submitted in the annual budget for approval by the county commission. 
b.  The authorizing party's responsibility is to stay within his/her departmental budget's travel allocation as approved by the county commission. 
c.  Prior to approving a travel request, the authorizing party is responsible for determining that a sufficient unexpended appropriation remains in the travel budget to pay for all expected costs of the travel. 
d.  Personal items and alcoholic beverages are not authorized travel expenses. Expense reports must be prepared to reflect only actual expenses essential to the conducting of county business by the employee. 
e.  All out-of-state travel requires department director/designee approval. 
4)  Travel expense policies. The following payment guidelines are intended to set forth maximum standards. Employees and officials of the county are expected to spend funds prudently. The county will only pay for expenses that are actually and necessarily incurred for the benefit of the county. 
a.  Lodging: Subsistence/necessities. 
1.  Payment for lodging is authorized when the individual's travel requires overnight accommodations. Receipts are required for all lodging costs. 
2.  Employees and officials may request direct payment or be reimbursed for the cost of single standard room accommodations typically occupied by business travelers at moderately-priced hotels. The minimum corporate, governmental or lowest special rate should be requested along with any other discounts which you might be entitled to receive. 
3.  The county will pay only actual room rental costs supported by the hotel bill for each night required for the event. Expenses beyond room rental cost are not eligible for reimbursement. This includes, but is not limited to, pay-per-view movies, room service or other incidental costs (such as smoking in a non-smoking room fine). 
4.  All employees and officials shall attempt to incur only reasonable hotel expenses when out of town. 
5.  Hotel or electronic booking receipts must be attached to the expense report or pay request form. 
6.  Employees and officials may be exempt from state sales tax and hotel/motel tax on rooms, lodging and accommodations when traveling on official business within the State of Georgia. The employee or official must obtain tax exemptions or they will be personally responsible for the tax. 
a.  State of GA Sales Tax Exemption 
b.  Hotel/Motel Excise Tax Exemption 
b.  Meals. Employees, elected officials, and other authorized personnel are entitled to reimbursement for meals based on the IRS Federal Guidelines as set according to the IRS Standards which can be found at the following link: http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/104877. 
1.  Day of departure — Employees may only receive per diem for meals occurring while officially on travel status. For example, 
a.  If an employee departs at 3:00 p.m., the employee is not eligible for breakfast or lunch per diem amounts for the day of departure. 
b.  If an employee departs on an overnight trip prior to 6:30 a.m. the employee is eligible for per diem for breakfast on the day of departure. 
c.  If an employee departs on an overnight trip prior to 11:00 a.m., the employee is eligible for per diem for lunch on the day of departure. 
d.  If an employee departs on an overnight trip prior to 5:30 p.m., the employee is eligible for per diem for dinner on the day of departure. 
2.  Day of return — Employees may only receive per diem for meals occurring while officially on travel status. For example: 
a.  If an employee returns at 11:00 a.m., the employee is not eligible for per diem for lunch on the day of return. 
b.  If an employee returns from an overnight trip after 6:30 a.m., the employee is eligible for per diem for breakfast on the day of return. 
c.  If an employee returns from an overnight trip after 1:30 p.m., the employee is eligible for per diem for lunch on the day of return. 
d.  If an employee returns from an overnight trip after 7:30 p.m., the employee is eligible for per diem for dinner on the day of return. 
c.  Modes of travel. The mode of transportation used should be the most reasonable, convenient, and economical available. 
1.  Air. 
a.  It is the obligation of each employee and official to choose the least expensive flight from alternatives. In many cases, a traveling employee can save hundreds of dollars by purchasing tickets on discount airlines, utilizing promotional flights that may require advance booking, or by booking flights that may entail an extra stop, or may depart or arrive at times slightly less convenient. The savings available on these flights frequently outweigh the traveler's inconvenience, even when they necessitate travel schedule adjustments. 
In this era of low priced airfare electronic ticket purchasing, ticket exchanges, cancellations, or credit for unused tickets have become more difficult to obtain. Therefore, the traveling employee must be certain of their travel needs before booking. 
b.  The approved class of transportation for all employees is coach/tourist. Most major airlines offer discounted fares under certain conditions. Every effort should be made to take advantage of these discounted rates by planning and ordering tickets within required time frames. 
c.  If a business trip is canceled prior to departure, immediately begin the process of refunding the unused tickets. 
2.  County vehicles. When using county vehicles, carpooling is strongly encouraged. Most county vehicles available will accommodate four individuals comfortably. Utilize a second county Vehicle or a personal vehicle if there are more than four traveling employees. 
3.  Personal vehicles. Prior approval from the finance director or county manager must be obtained before reimbursement is granted to a county employee. Elected officials and/or staff working under their direction are exempt from obtaining approval prior to reimbursement. 
a.  The reimbursement rate for personal mileage is equal to the rate published by the Internal Revenue Service (see IRS website for current rate at www.irs.gov/Tax-Professionals/Standard-Mileage-Rates) and authorized by the county manager. This rate is intended to cover fuel, maintenance, liability, and physical damage insurance cost of the personal vehicle. 
b.  Requested mileage payment must be supported by the anticipated route obtained from a reputable internet map/direction system, which gives the anticipated mileage traveled (i.e. MapQuest). The county will pay the shorter of the mileage distance from the employee's office or the employee's home. Part-time employees, full-time employees, and elected officials are entitled to mileage reimbursement providing travel is part of official county business. 
c.  An employee who receives a vehicle allowance is permitted to use a county vehicle or personal vehicle to travel outside the county provided such travel is official county business or training. If such travel is outside the normal scope of day-to-day use of said vehicle, mileage reimbursement may be obtained as outlined above in paragraph "B". 
4.  Local ground transportation. 
a.  Local transportation costs incurred while on out-of-town business will be paid. 
b.  Receipts for the above services should be obtained, when possible, and provided to support payment. 
d.  Registration. 
1.  Registration fees for conferences or seminars are paid when supported by receipts and proper approvals. 
2.  Whenever possible, advance registration should be used. Registration should be made in a timely fashion in order to take advantage of early registration discounts available. 
e.  Miscellaneous. 
1.  Business meals. 
a.  Some officials and members of management are required to meet with persons of other governmental jurisdictions and professional institutions from which an exchange of information can be obtained that will prove beneficial to the county. When, in the opinion of the official or manager, there has been such an exchange, they may deem it appropriate to pay for the meal. A vendor may be allowed to pay if it is in compliance with the county's Code of Ethics. 
b.  Such meals may be reimbursed pursuant to the following stipulations: 
a.  The requesting party is the county manager, or a department director, or it is a part of a professional learning opportunity (ex. a Lunch and Learn). 
b.  A receipt is provided. 
f.  Other miscellaneous expenses. 
1.  Expenses not previously covered should be entered as "Miscellaneous" and a brief explanation must be given. 
2.  Receipts must be attached for all items when customarily provided or easily obtained. 
f.  Non-allowable expenses include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Air travel and other personal trip insurance. 
2.  Barber, manicurist, shoe polisher, spa services, and laundry. 
3.  Briefcases or other items of personal use. 
4.  Entertainment expenses (such as airline headsets, theater, movies, and sporting events) of the employee or official while traveling. 
5.  Personal reading material or services. 
6.  Repairs, maintenance, or insurance on personal vehicles. 
7.  Traffic fines and court costs. 
8.  Unauthorized club or other membership dues or fees. 
9.  Unauthorized trips, entertainment, gifts, or donations. 
10.  Laundry service/dry cleaning (unless the stay for business was more than four nights). 
11.  Mini-bar contents. 
12.  Movies/videos. 
13.  Parking fines. 
14.  The loss/theft of goods (this should be covered by your own travel insurance of which you can reclaim $170.00 annually). 
15.  Childcare. 
16.  Pet care. 
17.  Any personal elements of your business trip. 
18.  Personal car maintenance or damage to personal vehicles while on business. 
19.  Spa treatments and health/fitness clubs. 
20.  Toiletries. 
21.  Alcohol. 
5)  Expense reimbursement procedures: Upon returning from an authorized trip, the requesting party shall present to the authorizing party a complete itemization of all trip expenses on a Habersham County Government Expense Report (expense report). 
a.  The completed expense report shall be prepared, summarizing all expenses incurred deducting any prepayments and/or travel advances and submitted to the authorizing party no later than ten business days after returning from the trip OR within ten days following the end of the month in which the travel occurred. 
b.  The expense report should be prepared accurately, completely, and should include all required receipts and explanations to facilitate its review, understanding, and processing. Direct payments (registration, hotel, etc.) and advances to the employee should be deducted, with a net amount due to or from the employee shown. 
c.  The authorizing party shall review, sign, and submit the expense statement to the department head within ten working days and no later than ten days following the end of the month in which the travel occurred. 
d.  An employee who knowingly submits a false claim for reimbursement will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination and criminal action. 
O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. False Statements and writings, concealment of facts and fraudulent documents in matters within jurisdiction of state or political subdivisions. A person who knowingly and willfully falsifies, conceals, or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a material fact; makes a false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation; or makes or uses any false writing or document, knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry, in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of state government or of the government of any county, city or other political subdivision of this state shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than five years, or both. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-132. - Conflict of interest. 
Habersham County expects employees to avoid situations that cause a conflict of interest between their private interests and the business interests of Habersham County. Employees should also be sure that their private and business activities would be perceived as proper and free of conflicting interests. Employees have an obligation to conduct business within guidelines that prohibit actual or potential conflicts of interest. This policy establishes only the framework within which Habersham County wishes to operate. The purpose of these guidelines is to provide general direction so that employees can seek further clarification on issues related to the subject of acceptable standards of operation. Contact the human resources department for more information or questions about conflicts of interest. 
Transactions with outside firms must be conducted within a framework established and controlled by the executive level of Habersham County. Business dealings with outside firms should not result in unusual gains for those firms. Unusual gain refers to bribes, product bonuses, gifts, loans, special fringe benefits, unusual price breaks, and other windfalls designed to ultimately benefit the employer, the employee, or both. 
An actual or potential conflict of interest occurs when an employee is in a position to influence a decision that may result in a personal gain for that employee or for a relative as a result of Habersham County's business dealings. For the purposes of this policy, a relative is any person as defined in the nepotism/hiring of relatives policy. 
No "presumption of guilt" is created by the mere existence of a relationship with outside firms. However, if employees have any influence on transactions involving purchases, contracts, or leases, it is imperative that they disclose to the county manager as soon as possible the existence of any actual or potential conflict of interest so that safeguards can be established to protect all parties. 
Personal gain may result not only in cases where an employee or relative has a significant ownership in a firm with which Habersham County does business but also when an employee or relative receives any kickback, bribe, substantial gift or special consideration as a result of any transaction or business dealings involving Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-133. - Equal opportunity. 
Habersham County will provide an equal opportunity for all businesses to participate in county contracts regardless of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, political affiliation, age, handicapped status, sexual orientation, sexual preference, or transgender status. The county will actively seek to ensure that minority-owned and operated firms have the opportunity to participate in the purchasing process, including binding, negotiations, and contract awards. The county will not knowingly conduct business with contractors that discriminate or permit discrimination against persons because of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, political affiliation, age, handicapped status, sexual orientation, sexual preference, or transgender status. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-134. - Ineligible vendors. 
Any person, firm, or corporation in arrears to Habersham County for taxes, or otherwise, will not be qualified to bid on any purchase until their lien to the county has been cleared. No requisition will be approved for such vendors. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-135. - Gifts and gratuities. 
An employee of the county may not accept personal gifts or favors of value or elaborate entertainment from any person or firm with whom the county is presently doing or has previously done business or from anyone desiring to establish business relations with the county. 
Normal courtesies or items distributed as part of an advertising program may be accepted when there is obviously no intent to obtain special consideration for the donor. Return of gifts, gratuities, or refusal to accept them, should be done promptly and tactfully. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-136 - Violations. 
Any elected official, agent, or employee of the county or person doing business with the county who knowingly violates the provisions of this article shall be personally liable for any losses incurred by the county. 
Any elected official or employee who violates the provision of this article shall be subject to discharge or removal from office for cause or such lesser disciplinary action as may be appropriate in accordance with the county's personnel policies and procedures. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 2-137. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or both fined and imprisoned. Each day that such a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
( Ord. of 12-14-2015, § 1 ) 
Secs. 2-138—2-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC RECORDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-164—2-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 16, 2012, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 2-195—2-203, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted May 2, 2005. 

Sec. 2-195. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known, and referred to, as the "Habersham County Records Management Ordinance". 
( Ord. of 7-16-2012(1) ) 
Sec. 2-196. - Purpose. 
This chapter is made, adopted and enacted to provide for a procedural control for the destruction, storage, or preservation of records of the Habersham County Government, for identification of those records which are historically valuable and to provide for their permanent preservation, to provide for proper identification and storage facilities for such documents as are important as documentary evidence of history and heritage, and for other purposes. 
( Ord. of 7-16-2012(1) ) 
Sec. 2-197. - Georgia Records Act adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Habersham County, Georgia, the Georgia Records Act and such rules and regulations established pursuant to said act as a basis for establishing a records management program in Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 7-16-2012(1) ) 
Sec. 2-198. - Administration. 
The county manager, or his/her designated representative, shall be responsible for the administration of the records management program. The county clerk shall serve as records management officer for Habersham County. The county manager will act as the alternative records management officer. The records management officer will act for and on behalf of the county in directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
( Ord. of 7-16-2012(1) ) 
Sec. 2-199. - Records retention schedule. 
The most recent "Retention Schedules for Local Government Records", as compiled by the Georgia Department of Archives and History and as approved by the State Records Committee, are hereby adopted and by reference incorporated herein and made a part of this Code as completely and to the same extent as all provisions thereof were fully recited in this chapter. Provided, however, that the Habersham County Board of Commissioners may make recommendations to revise, amend or add schedules not in conflict with state law and deemed advisable and necessary. 
( Ord. of 7-16-2012(1) ) 
Sec. 2-200. - Equipment; alteration, destruction of records. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall provide for adequate equipment and supplies for the proper storage of records. Such equipment may include microfilm or microfiche or other equipment as permitted or required by state law. 
(b)  No record shall be altered or destroyed except in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 7-16-2012(1) ) 
Sec. 2-201. - Records to be open. 
(a)  In all cases where an interested member of the public has a right to inspect or take extracts or make copies from public records, instruments or documents, any such person shall have the right to access to the same while in the possession, custody and control of the records management officer or his/her authorized deputy. Such work shall be done under the supervision of the records management officer, who shall have the right to adopt and enforce reasonable rules governing the work. All inspections, extracts or copies shall be done in the room or office where the records, documents or instruments are kept by law or the location deemed appropriate by the records management officer. 
(b)  The records management officer may make copies of any records or any preservation duplicates, or may make reproductions of such records. The records management officer may charge fees as stated by O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71, et seq. 
(c)  All written requests for records made under the Act directed to the county shall be made to the records management officer, or in his or her absence, to the alternate. 
(d)  The records management officer is directed to cause all county websites to prominently display this designation and requirement. 
( Ord. of 7-16-2012(1) ) 
Secs. 2-202—2-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC ACCESS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Right of access to make photographs or reproductions of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71. 

Sec. 2-230. - Availability; confidential records. 
(a)  All records of the county government are public records, except certain records, which are expressly excluded by statute from being made available to the public. 
(b)  No confidential records shall be available except by court order or the authorization of the county attorney. 
(c)  No confidential tax records shall be available except by court order or the express written consent of the affected taxpayer. Such consent shall be notarized and in a form satisfactory to the chief appraiser/assessor and the county attorney. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 2-231. - Time of access. 
Access to public records shall only be during normal business hours, which are from 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Consideration shall be given to the normal business operations of the office involved for the benefit of the public, but the office heads and staff will make every reasonable effort to see to it that all eligible records are available when not needed for public use. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1992; Ord. of  7-16-2018(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 2-232. - Requests for copies. 
All requests for copies of public records shall be produced in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70, et seq., and shall be subject to all the fees and costs allowed by the law. The various office heads will make staff available to produce copies of requested records under the following terms: 
(1)  A dated written request shall be given to the particular office head or constitutional officer, describing in clear and specific detail each record desired to be copied. The request shall be dated and signed by the requesting party. Broad general descriptions such as "memoranda," "qualified sales," etc., will not be acceptable, and clarification may be requested. 
(2)  The county attorney shall be contacted if there is any question as to whether or not the requested records are excluded by statute from being made available to the public. 
(3)  When the production of requested records is approved by the office head or county attorney, the office head or the constitutional officer shall assign staff to make such copies at such times as are convenient to the particular office involved, considering the normal business operations of the office. However, every effort will be made to produce such copies no later than five days from the date the request is given to the office head or the constitutional officer involved, depending upon the number of copies to be made. If it will take longer than three business days for an office to produce copies, they must notify the records officer responding to the request. 
(4)  All requests for copies of records shall be made no later than ten working days prior to the trial or hearing date of any case. The purpose of this requirement is to afford office heads and staff an opportunity to carry on the routine business of the particular office involved on behalf of the public. 
(5)  The policies and procedures set out in this section shall not be applicable to the clerk of superior court, clerk of the probate court or clerk of the magistrate court of the county when the documents to be copied are considered records which are normally open to public inspection in the regular course of business of such office. The clerks of the superior court, probate court and magistrate court of the county shall establish their own policies and procedures for the copying of such records. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1992; Ord. of  7-16-2018(2) , § 2) 
Secs. 2-233—2-257. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Listed in this article are the county authorities which have been established pursuant to an act of the general assembly. Following the name of each authority is a citation to the act by which it was created. Habersham County Gas Distribution Authority, 1953 Ga. Laws, page 2230. Habersham County Hospital Authority, 1969 Ga. Laws, page 2097. Habersham County Industrial Development Authority, 1964 Ga. Laws, page 876 (continued 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4207). Habersham County Water and Sewerage Authority, 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3327. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-258—2-277. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— A copy of the rules and regulations governing the county airport is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and maintenance of airports by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authorization to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27. 

Sec. 2-278. - Creation; membership. 
The Habersham County Airport Commission (hereinafter "the commission") is hereby established and shall be composed of five members. 
(Res. of 2-4-1974; Res. of 11-16-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 2-279. - Term of office. 
The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Habersham County BOCC for terms of three years. Each commissioner shall appoint one member to the BOCC. The initial term for three (3) members (appointed by BOCC commissioners for Districts 1, 3 and 5) shall commence immediately upon appointment hereunder and shall expire February 1, 2018 and every three years thereafter. The remaining two members (appointed by BOCC commissioners for Districts 2 and 4) shall commence immediately upon appointment hereunder and shall expire February 1, 2019 and every three years thereafter. 
(Res. of 2-4-1974; Res. of 11-16-2015 , § 2) 
Sec. 2-280. - Officers. 
The commission shall elect annually at its February meeting from its membership a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary and such other offices as may be deemed necessary or advisable from time to time. 
(Res. of 2-4-1974; Res. of 11-16-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 2-281. - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall advise the county manager or his designee and the BOCC on any aspect of the maintenance and operation of the Habersham County Airport. Such powers shall include, but are not limited to: 
• Educating and advising the county on applicable FAA regulations. 
• Proposing rules, regulations and policies for airport operation. 
• Proposing by-laws for the commission for submission to and approval by the BOCC. 
• Reporting on maintenance needs as they arise. 
• Serving as a liaison between the FBO (fixed base operator) and the county. 
• Representing the interests of the pilots and other users and/or tenants of the airport. 
• Assisting in the development of marketing strategies for the airport. 
• Assisting in the further development of the airport facilities. 
• Recommending operation and maintenance changes as such may arise. 
(Res. of 2-4-1974; Res. of 11-16-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 2-282. - Quarterly report. 
The commission shall, at least quarterly, file a written report of the status of the airport with the BOCC. 
(Res. of 2-4-1974; Res. of 11-16-2015 , § 5) 
Sec. 2-283. - Right of board of commissioners to remove members or abolish commission. 
The BOCC may, at any time, with or without cause, remove any member from the commission or abolish the commission in its entirety. 
(Res. of 2-4-1974; Res. of 11-16-2015 , § 6) 
Secs. 2-284—2-314. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-52-1 et seq.; joint development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-53-5.1. 

Sec. 2-315. - Created and activated. 
The Banks/Habersham/Rabun Counties Joint Development Authority is hereby created and organized as follows: 
(1)  Public purpose. The authority is created for the public purpose of promoting and expanding business, industry and trade in Banks, Habersham and Rabun Counties and to attract and support new business and industry to provide increased employment for the citizens living within the jurisdiction of the authority and to expand the ad valorem property tax base for the three counties. 
(2)  Members and officers. 
a.  The number of members of the authority shall be nine. Three members shall be appointed by the governing body of each participating county and each such member shall be a resident and taxpayer of such county. Except as provided below, the term of office of each member shall be three calendar years. 
b.  The persons appointed by the governing bodies of Banks and Habersham Counties, respectively, who currently hold office as members of the authority, shall continue to serve as members of the authority for the balance of their current terms of office. 
c.  One of the members initially appointed by the governing body of Rabun County shall serve a term ending December 31, 2007, one shall serve a term ending December 31, 2008, and one shall serve a term ending December 31, 2009. Such initial members shall be appointed by separate resolution of the governing body of Rabun County. 
d.  After expiration of the term of each member, the terms of office of their respective successors shall be terms of three calendar years. If, at the end of any term of any member, a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed, and such successor's term shall commence on the date of his or her appointment and shall end on the December 31 that is three years after the scheduled end of the immediately preceding term. 
e.  The members of the authority shall constitute its board of directors. A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the authority. 
f.  The members shall receive no compensation for their services as members or directors of the authority, but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
g.  The current officers of the authority shall continue to hold office for their current terms or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Staff. The authority shall have the power to hire an executive director who will act as chief operating officer of the authority. The executive director shall serve as secretary of the authority and shall hire all staff, be responsible for the annual work plan and budget creation. 
(5)  Term. The authority shall be deemed formally created and authorized to do business upon filing with the secretary of state of the Articles of Organization with supporting resolutions from the two counties, attached as Exhibits "A" and "B." The authority shall have perpetual existence but may be dissolved at any time by the adoption of appropriate concurrent resolutions by the board of directors of Banks County and by the board of directors of Habersham County. If so dissolved, all assets and debts and rights and obligations of the former authority shall devolve to the board of directors of Banks County and the board of directors of Habersham County in such proportions and manner as shall be specified in said concurrent resolutions dissolving the authority. 
(6)  Taxation. The authority shall not be required to pay any state or local taxes or other assessments imposed by the state, or any county, municipal corporation or other political subdivision or taxing district, nor shall there be any ad valorem property taxes assessed against property acquired and owned by the authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, supervision or leased to a private entity, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-3. The foregoing exemption from taxes shall not include an exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by or used by the authority. 
(7)  Powers of the authority. The authority shall have all the powers provided for under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6, including but not limited to the power: 
a.  To bring and defend actions; 
b.  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
c.  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the powers of the authority, any of which contracts may be made with the county in which the authority is located or with any one or more municipal corporations in such county; 
d.  To receive and administer gifts, grants and devises of any property and to administer trusts; 
e.  To acquire, by purchase, gift or construction, any real or personal property desired to be acquired as part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovation or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
f.  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage, dispose of or grant options for any real or personal property or interest therein for any such purposes; 
g.  To dispose of any real property for fair market value, regardless of prior development of such property as a project, whenever the board may deem such disposition to be in the best interests of the authority if the board prior to such disposition shall determine that such real property no longer can be used advantageously as a project for the development of trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities; 
h.  To mortgage, convey, pledge or assign any properties, revenues, income, tolls, charges or fees owned or received by the authority; 
i.  To extend credit or make loans to any person, firm, corporation or other industrial entity for the planning, design, construction, acquisition or carrying out of any project, which credit or loans shall be secured by loan agreements, mortgages, security agreements, contracts and all other instruments, fees or charges; upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine reasonable in connection with such loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserves and insurance funds; and, in the exercise of powers granted by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6 in connection with a project for such person, firm, corporation or other industrial entity, to require the inclusion in any contract, loan, agreement, security agreement, or other instrument, of such provisions for guaranty, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance and financing of a project as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; 
j.  To acquire, accept or retain equitable interest, security interest or other interest in any property, real or personal, by mortgage, assignment, security agreement, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, loan agreement or other consensual transfer, in order to secure the repayment of any moneys loaned or credit extended by the authority; 
k.  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority or land owned or leased by others and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms or corporations or any other contribution, all of which the authority is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
l.  To borrow money and issue its revenue bonds and bond anticipation notes from time to time and to use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to or improving the project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued and to otherwise carry out the purposes for which the authority was created and to pay all other costs of the authority incident to or necessary and appropriate to such purposes, including the providing of funds to be paid into any fund to secure such bonds and notes, provided that all such bonds and notes shall be issued in accordance with the procedures and subject to the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8; 
m.  As security for repayment of authority obligations, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate or otherwise encumber any property, real or personal, of the authority and to execute any trust agreement, indenture or security agreement containing any provisions not in conflict with law, which trust agreement, indenture, or security agreement may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such obligations, either in payment of principal or interest or in the performance of any term or condition, as are contained in such agreement or indenture; and 
n.  To extend for the promotion of industry, agriculture and trade within its jurisdiction any funds of the authority determined by the board to be in excess of those needed for the other corporate purposes of the authority. 
(8)  Limitations of the authority and prohibited transactions. The authority shall be prohibited from directly owning or operating a project, except for an industrial park, as provided under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-7, and all members of the board shall be prohibited from transacting business for pecuniary gain with the authority, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5(e) with such exceptions as provided therein. 
(9)  Job tax credits. The authority shall be able to take advantage of tax credits as outlined in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1(e). 
(10)  Regional facilities. Acting as the agent for the counties involved the authority may create regional facilities as allowed under amendment 1 to the state constitution. The counties will enter into a single contract relating to expense and tax sharing no matter in which county the park is located. 
(11)  Debt. The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the state, Banks and Habersham Counties or any municipal corporation located therein. 
(12)  Bonds. The authority shall be entitled to issue bonds, bond anticipation notes, trust indentures, deeds to secure obligations, security agreements, and mortgages as provided under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8, subject to the limitations of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-9. 
(13)  Dissolution. If for any reason the separate corporate existence of the authority is terminated and dissolved, all assets and debts and rights and obligations of the former authority shall devolve to the board of directors of Banks County and the board of directors of Habersham County in such proportions and manner as shall be specified in said concurrent resolutions dissolving the authority. 
(14)  Amendment . The board, by majority vote, shall have the right to amend this division so long as such amendment does not violate any of the provisions of the Development Authorities Law for the state, as referenced herein. 
(15)  Severability. In the event any provisions of this division are determined to be unconstitutional or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions contained herein shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Res. of 7-19-2001; Res. of 1-9-2007, § 2) 
Editor's note— Official copies of the activating concurrent resolutions approved by both the Habersham County and the Banks County boards of commissions, referred to as Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B" in the preceding section, are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Secs. 2-316—2-333. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Recreation board authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-3. 

Sec. 2-334. - Created. 
The parks and recreation board is hereby created. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005, § 1(1)) 
Sec. 2-335. - Membership and powers. 
(a)  Duties. The duties of the board shall be advisory in nature and shall include responsibilities such as to: 
(1)  Advise in the initiation, planning, organization, implementation and coordination of public recreation programs and activities for the county. 
(2)  Advise the initiation, planning and design and to recommend a system of parks, facilities, etc., that will accommodate the public's need for parks and recreation activities. 
(3)  Assist with the preparation and development of rules and regulations by which parks and recreation programs may operate. 
(4)  Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of parks and recreation programs. 
(5)  Advise and recommend ways and means by which parks and recreation programs may be improved or strengthened. 
(6)  Support new programs and activities as public need may dictate. 
(7)  Recommend a system of fees and charges for use of parks and recreation facilities or for participation in parks and recreation programs. 
(8)  Perform other duties and responsibilities as may be conferred by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(b)  Powers. In order to perform the foregoing duties, the board shall have the following authority: 
(1)  To adopt bylaws and other rules of procedure to achieve its purposes and functions. 
(2)  To recommend rules governing participation in parks and recreation programs. 
(3)  To suggest rules governing the hours of operation and use of county parks and facilities. 
(4)  To endorse county staff approval of contracts for the provision of certain programs and services related to recreation facilities and activities which are awarded within guidelines established by the board of commissioners. 
(5)  To adjudicate complaints, disputes or other grievances from the public arising out of parks and recreation activities. 
(6)  To evaluate programs and activities which are offered from year to year. 
(7)  To file an annual report with the board of commissioners relative to program accomplishments for the preceding fiscal year. 
(c)  Membership. The board shall be representative of the community and shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the county and who shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Terms of office of members. The terms of office of the members of the board shall be for five years. Members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve as members until their successors have been appointed. 
(e)  Election of officers . The board shall elect from its membership a chairman and other officers as may be desired. Officers shall be elected on a calendar-year basis and may be reelected for succeeding terms. 
(f)  Meetings. Board meetings shall be on a monthly basis unless when determined otherwise by the board. The chairman of the board, or in his absence, the vice-chairman, may call a special meeting of the board at any time by giving each member 24 hour notice. Special meetings will be scheduled upon request by four or more members. A quorum of the board shall be in attendance before action of an official nature can be taken. A quorum is at least one more than the number absent, of the appointed members. 
(g)  Attendance of members. An appointed member who misses three or more consecutive regularly scheduled meetings loses his status as a member of the board until reappointed or replaced by the board of commissioners. Alternatively, an appointed member who misses 50 percent or more regularly scheduled meetings in a 12-month period (not limited to calendar year) loses his status as a member of the board until reappointed or replaced by the board of commissioners. Absences due to sickness, death or other emergencies of like nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall not affect the member's status on the board except that in the event of a long illness, or other such cause for prolonged absence, the member may be replaced. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005, § 1(2)) 
Secs. 2-336—2-358. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted 7-16-2018 , § 3, repealed art. VI, div. 5, §§ 2-359—2-361. Former art. VI, div. 5 pertained to fairgrounds commission and derived from an ordinance adopted January 4, 1999. 

Secs. 2-359—2-361. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 6-27-2016 , in effect repealed ch. 6 and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein. Former ch. 6 pertained to similiar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted on June 21, 2010. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-1. - General policies and purpose. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in Habersham County only after the issuance of a license for such sale by the county and only in the manner permitted by said license. Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the county only by a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this chapter, and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  All licenses granted by the county for the sale of alcoholic beverages are a mere grant or privilege subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the county ordinance and state law and subject to being revoked by the board of commissioners of Habersham County. 
(c)  Each licensee of the county shall display the license prominently at all times at the outlet for which the license is issued. A separate license must be issued for each outlet of sale and a separate application must be made for each outlet. 
(d)  The purposes of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with state law, 
(2)  Guarding against monopoly and concentration of the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in one group. 
(3)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons. 
(4)  Promotion of appropriate land use planning and zoning in accordance with the county's comprehensive planning and land use policies and regulations. 
(5)  Protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions. 
(6)  Protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage(s) means and includes all alcohol, beer, malt beverage or wine as defined in this section. 
Applicant means any one or more persons applying for a license in the county or renewal thereof. 
Application means those forms required by the county to be completed by persons applying for an original license or a renewal license under this chapter. 
Beer and malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion of decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water, containing no more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. The term "beer" is used interchangeably with "malt beverage". 
Board of commissioners shall mean the Habersham County board of commissioners. 
Brew pub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A, § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
Building and planning director shall mean the Habersham County Building and Planning Director or his/her designee. 
Church means any place of permanent public religious worship and shall exist if a building permit therefor has been obtained and construction of the church has commenced or substantial materials, or supplies for its construction, have been moved to the site. 
County shall mean Habersham County and when used in a geographical sense means the unincorporated areas of Habersham County. 
County clerk shall mean the county clerk of Habersham County or his/her designee. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell malt beverages or wines and which derives at least 40 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Hotel means every building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed, sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are regularly served to such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels, shall be classified as hotels for the purpose of this chapter. 
Immediate family shall include the spouses, parents, children, brothers and sisters, related by blood or marriage. 
License shall mean the formal approval granted or issued by the county to a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages within Habersham County. 
Licensee means the individual licensee and in the case of a partnership, corporation, private club, or non-profit tax exempt organization, includes the partnership, corporation, private clubs, or non-profit tax exempt organization and the named licensee. 
Outlet means the definite structure, whether a room, ship, store, building, restaurant, or club, in which activities permitted by this chapter are conducted. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, non-profit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Premises shall mean not only the structure wherein an outlet for sale of alcoholic beverages is operated under a county license, but shall include all of the lot whereon said outlet is located, except where such outlet is located in a hotel or shopping center. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Sheriff means the sheriff of Habersham County or his/her designee. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by fermentation, or natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term wine does not include cooking wine mixed with other ingredients to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Zoning shall mean the zoning classifications as approved for the unincorporated areas of Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-3. - License categories; qualifications for issuance of a license. 
(a)  The following classifications of licenses shall be issued pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)  Malt beverages—package. 
(2)  Wine—package. 
(3)  Malt beverages—consumption on the premises. 
(4)  Wine—consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Any person who desires to obtain a license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or by the package must meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. If the applicant is a corporation, the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as a part of the application process. If the applicant is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operating in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, such club or corporation may be licensed without reference to the financial interest qualifications of this section if no officer, director, trustee, manager, member, or stockholder therein can, in any event, derive any financial gain from the sale of alcoholic beverages by such club or corporation. The individual being primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this section must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. If the applicant is a private club, each member of its governing body must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. The specific qualifications are as follows: 
(1)  No license shall be issued to an applicant who is under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted to this country as a permanent resident. 
(3)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages may be issued to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
a.  An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of a felony, particularly, but not limited to, those offenses involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, tax law violations or violations relating to the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
b.  An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, tax law violations or violations relating to the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, if such conviction indicates to the board of commissioners that the applicant will not maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with the federal, state or local laws, rules, and regulations. 
c.  An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
For purposes of subsections a. through c. above, a "conviction" under this chapter shall include any plea of guilty or admission of guilt and subsequent sentence under the First Offender Act of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60, or any similar sentencing provision for the first offenders of any other state or of the United States. A plea of nolo contendre for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or any county ordinance, except traffic violations, or the forfeiture of a bond (except traffic offenses) when charged with a crime is also considered a conviction under this chapter. 
d.  An applicant who has been held in civil or criminal contempt by any federal, state or local court if such citation indicates to the board of commissioners that the applicant will not maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules, and regulations. 
e.  An applicant for a license to sell beer and wine for consumption on the premises who has been denied or has had revoked for cause within five years of the date of his/her application any license issued to him/her by Habersham County and/or any other municipality, county and/or state to sell alcoholic beverages or an applicant for a package beer and wine license at an outlet in Habersham County at which the license at that outlet has been revoked for cause within five years of the date of the application. 
f.  An applicant as determined by the board of commissioners, by reason of such applicant's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, records of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or local laws. 
g.  A location that is not in compliance with any federal, state or local regulation, including but not limited to, a state certificate of occupancy or state fire marshal certificate of approval if the noncompliance has not been remedied by the applicant within a period of three months from the date of the application. 
(4)  The applicant, whether it be an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club, or a private club, shall be the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the holder of the lease thereon for the period covered by the license. If the premises are leased, a copy of the lease will be furnished to the county building and planning director's office with the application. 
(5)  The named licensees shall be active in the operation of the outlet and personally be present on the premises sufficiently to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the owner of the outlet is a corporation, the corporation and its principal officers shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If the owner of the outlet is a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If the owner of the outlet is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or a private club, the entity and its principal officers and/or governing body shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(6)  No license to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or in the original package shall be granted or issued unless the location within such area of the county is, at the time such application is made, located within one of the zoning designations permitting such use as prescribed by the zoning ordinances of the county: 
Private clubs shall be exempt from the above zoning classification requirements and need not contain such designations in order for a license to issue. 
(7)  No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to any outlet located within 100 yards of the property line of any church building or of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college building existing at the time of application. No license for the sale of wine or malt beverages by the package shall be issued where the outlet for such sales is located within 100 yards of the property line of any church building, school building, educational building, school grounds, or college building existing at the time of the application. The above provisions do not apply to renewal of a license or to applicants seeking a new license if the location was licensed by Habersham County to sell alcoholic beverages at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. For the purpose of this chapter, the schools or colleges referred to herein, shall include only such state, county, city, church, private, or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and expressly exclude buildings used by school officials solely for administrative purposes in which school children are not regularly taught. For purposes of this chapter, school and educational buildings shall also include daycare centers if the daycare centers receive State or federal funding for an educational program at the time of application. Distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground according to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(c). 
Unless waived by the building and planning director out of recognition of the absence of any school or church buildings in proximity to the outlet, all applications for a license shall have attached thereto a current certificate from a registered surveyor of this state showing a scaled drawing of the premises, the location or premises where the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet, and the distance in linear feet measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground from the subject applicant's structure to the property line of the tract which is located nearest the church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus building defined in this subsection. 
(8)  No license shall be issued to any person who fails to comply with all the rules and regulations regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages contained in this chapter. 
(9)  No license shall be issued to any person who owes any delinquent taxes, and/or assessments to Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-4. - The application process. 
(a)  Any person desiring to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink or by the package shall make written application to the building and planning director for the appropriate license on forms required by the county and filed with the county building and planning director's office. All applications shall be fully completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a partnership, then each partner shall sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a corporation, the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises who is also the named licensee must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operated in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, the individual being primarily responsible for the club or organization's compliance with this chapter must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a private club, then each member of its governing body must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
All applications shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Unless waived by the building and planning director out of recognition of the absence of any school or church building in proximity to the outlet, the application shall have attached a current certificate from a registered surveyor of this state, showing a scaled drawing of the premises, the location on the premises where the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet, and the distance in linear feet measured by the most direct route of travel, on the ground, from the proposed outlet to the property line of the tract upon which is located the nearest church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college grounds or college campus building as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  If the outlet is to be located on leased premises, then a copy of the lease must be attached. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation and by-laws, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
(5)  If the applicant is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic or social club or corporation which is organized and operating in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, a copy or the charter or articles of incorporation, as well as sufficient proof of the organization's tax exempt status shall accompany the application. 
(6)  If the applicant is a private club, a copy of the articles of incorporation and by-laws, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
(7)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints for all persons required to sign the application to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as specified under Georgia law. Each person required to sign the application for an original license and/or renewal license, must authorize the county or its designated representatives to secure from any state, county, municipality or federal court, any police department and/or law enforcement agency his, her or its criminal history and civil history and further authorize the county, its officers and employees to use such information in determining whether or not an alcoholic beverage license will be issued to the applicant. Further, the applicant must authorize the county, its officers and employees to use such information in a public hearing if necessary, to determine whether or not the applicant's license should be denied, voided, cancelled and/or revoked. Each applicant waives any rights he, she or it may have under state or federal law, statute and/or court ruling to preclude the county from securing such criminal and/or civil history from any source and waives and right he, she or it may have to preclude the county from using such information publicly in determining whether the license will be issued to such applicant. 
(8)  The application shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check in the amount as set from time to time by the board of commissioners for an investigative fee. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded to the applicant. All other fees paid to the county which were submitted as part of the application, including, but not limited to, the investigative fee, the sign fee, and any employee application permit fee(s) shall be retained by the county. 
(9)  All applications for licenses shall contain a full and complete statement of all material facts which tend to show whether the applicant or applicants, or any member or members of their immediate families, own a financial interest in any other alcoholic beverage outlets, or any interest in a wholesale alcoholic beverage entity, and/or distillery or brewery, and what interest they and each of them will have in the alcoholic beverage outlet being requested from this county. 
(10)  The building and planning director may require any additional information and records he reasonably deems necessary. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denying a license or revoking an issued license, and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(11)  Each applicant shall certify that applicant has read this chapter and if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and shall require each of the licensee's employees to be familiar with this chapter. 
(12)  If the application is for sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, the applicant shall attach to such application a representative menu or bill of fare of prepared food or meals offered by the eating establishment to the public. 
(b)  Once an application, the accompanying documents described above, and the required investigative and license fees are filed with the county building and planning director's office, the sheriff's office shall conduct a criminal investigation of the applicant and produce a written criminal investigation report concerning all information relating to the fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, prior alcohol violations, and other matters pertaining to law enforcement. In the event the failure to obtain fingerprinting information from state and federal authorities delays completion of the written report, the sheriff's office may later supplement any fingerprinting information. If the fingerprinting information later reveals that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this chapter, this may be grounds for denying the application or revoking a license, despite an otherwise satisfactory written report. Upon production of the criminal investigation report, the sheriff's office shall assemble the application forms and all accompanying documents relating to investigation and processing of the application and deliver such documents to the building and planning director for review. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant meets the requirements set by this chapter and the building and planning director believes that the applicant may meet all other qualifications of this chapter, then the building and planning director shall schedule the application for a hearing at the next regularly scheduled board of commissioners meeting and shall so inform the applicant of this fact before such meeting. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this chapter, or if the building and planning director finds that the applicant fails to meet all other qualifications outlined by this chapter, then the building and planning director shall inform the applicant, in writing, that the application has been denied, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his/her right to appeal; said appeal to be before the board of commissioners in accordance with section 6-12 of this chapter. If an applicant desires to appeal a denial by the building and planning director, the applicant must file a written request for an appeal hearing with the building and planning director within five business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial by the building and planning director. 
(c)  Any application which the building and planning director determines to satisfy all the qualifications outlined in this chapter, including character requirements as contained in the criminal investigation report of the sheriff, shall be scheduled for review at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. At that meeting, the applicant and any person opposed to said application has the right to present to the board of commissioners any information that the board of commissioners determines is relevant to the licensing decision. In making its determination on whether to approve or deny the application, the board of commissioners shall look to the qualifications set forth in this chapter and consider the public interest and welfare. The board shall have the sole discretion to grant or deny the application based on the information presented. A decision by the board of commissioners shall be made within 45 days from the date of the board of commissioners meeting unless the decision is postponed for purposes of the board obtaining additional information deemed necessary for consideration of the application. Notice of the decision by the board of commissioners shall be mailed to the applicant. In the event the application is denied, such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal; said appeal to be in accordance with section 6-12 of this chapter. 
(d)  At the time the applicant makes application for a license, he shall pay to the building and planning director's office an amount as set from time to time by the board of commissioners as a non-refundable sign fee for the posting on the premises where the activities permitted by such license are to be conducted, a notice of the pending application. The sign shall be posted and furnished by the county and will be painted or printed in black letters one and one-half inches in height, against an orange background, on a two-face, back-to-back surface of not less than 14 × 30 inches in space, and shall be placed by the county with the base of the sign nor more than three feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises, facing the most frequently traveled road, street, or highway abutting same, and not more than ten feet there from. The sign shall state clearly the nature and purpose of the application, and the name of the person, partnership, organization, corporation or private club making the application. 
(e)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for the same type of license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(f)  Upon the issuance of a license, the licensee must have and continually maintain in Habersham County, a registered agent upon whom any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter may be served. This person must be an individual and must be a resident of Habersham County, Georgia. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the building and planning director in such form as he or she may prescribe. 
(g)  Upon approval by the board of commissioners of the application for a license, the building and planning director shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. If the applicant is an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of the individual. If the applicant is a corporation, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. If the applicant is a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners. If the applicant is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operated in the county as a mutual benefit membership group, the license shall be issued hi the name of the club or corporation and in the name of the individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter. If the applicant is a private club, the license shall be issued in the name of the private club and in the name of one of the members of the private club's governing body who shall be the named licensee. All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1, shall pay the full license fee without pro-ration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1, will be one-half the annual license fee. License fees are not refundable once the license is granted by the county. 
(h)  In the event the board of commissioners denies the application for a license, the applicant may appeal to the board of commissioners for reconsideration of the denial by filing a written request for an appeal hearing with the building and planning director within five business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial. Any such appeal hearing concerning a denial shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in section 6-12. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-5. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file a renewal application accompanied by the requisite license fee and investigative fee as set from time to time by the board of commissioners with the building and planning director's office upon forms prescribed by the county on or before October 1 of each year without penalty. Persons holding a license for more than any one establishment and desiring to renew the license for such establishments shall pay only one investigative fee charge. Applications for renewal filed after October 1 shall be subject to a late charge of ten percent of the license fee. 
(b)  Each application for renewal will show the date of the original application and state there have been no changes in any of the information and data contained in and/or furnished with the original application and that the applicant or applicants for the renewal are familiar with applicable Georgia laws and regulations and with the rules and ordinances of the county. The renewal application must be signed and sworn to by all applicants in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. In the event it is discovered by the county that changes have occurred, which are in any way different from those facts shown in the original application and the documents furnished with the original application, the renewal shall be void. The applicant may be required to file a new application if changes have occurred in the information and data furnished with the original application. The applicant will furnish all information required by the renewal application and failure to furnish the information will be grounds for denying the application. A false statement made on the renewal application will void the application and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Each application for renewal of a license shall be approved or denied in accordance with the procedures prescribed in section 6-4 of this chapter, except that the public hearing for all applications of renewal will be conducted before the board of commissioners at the regularly held December meeting of the calendar year. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-6. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except upon the death of a licensee, at which time such license may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or lawful adult heir or heirs of such deceased person. If the legal representatives of such deceased licensee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter when the time arrives to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. 
(b)  Whenever a licensee doing business as a sole proprietorship loses its license as a result of the provision of this chapter, the licensee's successor in interest, upon filing an application for a new license, may continue to operate under the terms of the prior license until such time as the new application is approved or denied by the board of commissioners; provided, however, no such continued operation shall be authorized until such time as a new application for license is made and the required fees paid to the building and planning director's office. Payment of fees shall not be required of a corporation whose predecessor in interest remains the named licensee under the new lease. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-7. - Restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distribute, sell, or possess for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage when such person does not have a license from the county to sell or possess or manufacture for sale of such beverage, provided that this subsection shall not be interpreted to preclude the otherwise illegal practice of private production of beer as permitted under O.C.G.A, § 3-5-4 or the private production of wine as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-3 for private use and consumption or to require the procuring of a license for a private party conducted at a private home, business, or other private establishment for which alcoholic beverages are provided at no charge. 
(b)  Except as otherwise authorized by law, no licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall sell or permit to be sold alcoholic beverages to any person under the legal drinking age as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A, § 3-3-23. 
(c)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall permit on the licensed premises the sale, barter, exchange, giving, providing or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A, § 3-3-22, 
(d)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. The sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted on election days in outlets not located within 250 feet of a polling place. 
(e)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall sell or permit to be sold any single beer, wine cooler, or similar alcoholic beverage that is customarily packaged for sale as part of a four-pack, six-pack, twelve-pack, or similar package as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. §3-3-26. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  In any case where a reasonable and prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or employee of the licensee, to see and to be furnished with proper identification in order to verify the age of such person. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person or the person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and including, but without being limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or state department public safety identification card as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(h)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
(i)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall permit any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverage sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises. This specifically prohibits the use of "to go" cups or any device permitting any person to remove the alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises, 
(j)  No person employed or working in any capacity at any licensed outlet shall solicit or encourage patrons to purchase drinks to be consumed by or otherwise disposed of by any such person so employed or working as prescribed by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 
(k)  No licensee, or employee of the licensee, shall add to the contents of a bottle or refill an empty bottle or in any other manner misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. No retail licensee shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any delivery to be made to and/or sales be made outside of the outlet. It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages from "drive-in" or service windows. The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas and patios, provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such outlet, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(m)  Reserved. 
(n)  The licensee shall keep the premises clean, and in proper sanitary condition, and in full compliance with provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(o)  No licensee shall permit on the premises any gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machines, slot machines, pin ball machines, video machines, or similar machines which are in violation of the gambling provisions of the State of Georgia; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the lawful playing of bingo by establishments licensed to operate a bingo game under O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-50 -16-12-62. 
(p)  When a change occurs in the relationship of a person, or in the status of any property or license, or any change in payment of rents, ownership of the lease, or buildings or land on which the outlet is located, any change in corporate ownership or management, any loss or damage to goods which result in a claim against an insurance policy and any change in the division of profits, any change in any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever, and any change in facts stated or claimed in any application or report herein required, a sworn statement of such change in all material facts relating hereto shall be filed with the sheriff's office and then forwarded to the building and planning director and failure to do so within 14 days after such change shall, unless such time limit is extended for good cause, be reason for cancellation of a license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. In the event that a licensee seeks to change the named licensee of an establishment, the application shall be amended by attaching a new personal statement along with an investigative fee set from time to time by the board of commissioners. The new named licensee shall satisfy the qualification requirements as set forth in this chapter and be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. 
(q)  Any violation of the provisions contained under this section may result in the suspension or revocation of the license held by the licensee and criminal penalties for the licensee or employee as provided for in Title III of the O.C.G.A. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-8, - Regulations as to employees. 
(a)  Every licensee under this article shall maintain at all times on the premises for which the license has been issued, a list of all persons currently employed by such licensee at such premises, which list shall show the current full legal name, alias, date of birth, current address, current home telephone number, and social security number of each employee. 
(b)  The licensee is responsible for the conduct or actions of his/her employees in his/her employment. An act or omission of a licensee, owner, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment that is willingly or knowingly performed, and that constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter, shall subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Criminal penalties may also apply to the licensee or owner when it is determined that the act or omission did occur, and the acts or omissions of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee or owner, were condoned by the licensee or owner, or where the licensee or owner has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring as prescribed by Title III of the O.C.G.A. It shall be the duty of the licensee hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter at the outlet and to instruct each and every employee engaged in the sale and/or handling of alcoholic beverages of the terms hereof. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-9. - Regulations on premises. 
(a)  A licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall display inside the place of business their current prices. 
(b)  The exterior of each building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are opened for business. 
(c)  The licensee shall post in a prominent location on the licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of Habersham County and the State of Georgia in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage, intoxicated, or pregnant persons. Each sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the Department of Revenue of the State of Georgia and said sign shall be made available to said licensee by the building and planning director at a price to be established by the county. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-10. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Any suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of a license by the board of commissioners shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the board of commissioners consistent with the procedures set forth in section 6-12, and upon the following occurrences: 
(1)  Any licensed outlet that is found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to license revocation or suspension and shall also be subject to criminal citation and prosecution as outlined in section 6-11. 
(2)  Every license issued by the county for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be immediately revoked in case of bankruptcy, receivership, levy of legal process, or failure to promptly account for and pay the excise tax levied on the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Except as provided for transfers under section 6-6 above, any change in ownership of any entity owning a licensed outlet shall cause the board of commissioners to immediately revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(4)  All licensees must, within six months after the approval of said license, open for business the outlet referred to in the application for license, and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the said license. Failure to open the outlet and begin the sales referred to within the six-month period shall cause the board of commissioners to immediately revoke the license and no refund of any fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made. 
(5)  Any licensee who shall for a period of three consecutive months cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized in the said license, shall, after said three months period, cause the board of commissioners to immediately revoke the license, and no refund of any fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made. 
(6)  A license may be immediately suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the county license shall thereupon be immediately revoked. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  The board of commissioners shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any outlet which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to the board. 
(10)  The board of commissioners shall immediately revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(11)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee or licensed establishment to permit any person to engage in any activity on the premises for which the license is issued or within the place of business, which is in violation of the laws or regulations of any federal, state or county governing authority or regulatory agency. A violation of this subsection shall subject the license to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(12)  An act or omission of a licensee which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or regulation, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, taxes, gambling, violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, or constitutes a crime of moral turpitude, shall subject the license to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(13)  Any license shall automatically expire on December 31st of each year unless renewed by the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-11. - Enforcement of this chapter. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter shall subject the licensee to the following progressive actions by the board of commissioners, except for those violations and occurrences set forth in section 6-10 above that provides for immediate suspension or revocation upon notice and hearing: 
(1)  The first violation shall result in a warning or a license suspension for a period of up to 30 days. 
(2)  The second violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days. 
(3)  The third violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than 90 days nor more than six months. 
Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the board of commissioners from suspending a license for a period exceeding 30 days or 90 days, respectively, or from revoking the license if the board determines in its discretion that such action is necessary and in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of the county. 
In the case of a violation under this subsection by an employee, the suspension period may be mitigated by the board of commissioners upon presentation of evidence that the licensee established practices and procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(b)  In addition to the available actions to be taken by the board of commissioners, individuals who violate this chapter shall be subject to criminal citation and prosecution by the county code enforcement officer or county sheriff's department. The criminal penalties may result in a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(c)  Sworn officers of the sheriff's department and the building and planning director shall have the authority to inspect the outlet and premises licensed under this chapter during the hours when the outlet is open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other county, state or federal officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
(d)  In order to ensure that the licensed premises are kept clean, and are in full compliance with all other ordinances and regulations of Habersham County and the State of Georgia, the additional following representatives are authorized to inspect regularly the licensed premises: 
(1)  Representatives of the county health department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all county and state health rules and regulations and report any violations to the building and planning director. 
(2)  The county fire department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all county and state fire regulations and report any violations to the building and planning director. 
(3)  The county has the right to have an inspector inspect regularly the licensed outlet and premises to determine if the licensed outlet is in compliance with all technical codes of the county and report any violations to the building and planning director. 
(e)  Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by the licensee. The records shall be kept for a period of three years from the date of purchase and sale and should at all times be open to audit and/or inspection by the building and planning director or any designated employee or any outside agent or agents for the county upon approval of such outside agent or agents by the building and planning department, in the event an audit is called for by the building and planning director, the building and planning director shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-12. - Hearing on denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal of a denial of a license, upon presentation of evidence to the building and planning director of a violation of this chapter, or upon a showing to the building and planning director of any of the other occurrences set forth in section 6-10 as grounds for suspension or revocation, the building and planning director shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners or their appointee and provide written notice to the adverse party of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. The building and planning director shall also state in the written notice in reasonable detail basis for the denial or the violation or occurrence alleged that forms the basis for the denial or potential suspension or revocation. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the building and planning director and the adverse party and/or counsel for the adverse party. 
(b)  The board of commissioners or their appointee shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the competent evidence presented at the hearing. At its discretion, the board of commissioners may appoint a special master to conduct said hearing and make findings of fact and conclusions of law and report such findings and conclusions to the board of commissioners and to the building and planning director. 
(c)  At the hearing, after presentation of the case against the adverse party, the adverse party will have an opportunity to present his/her case, to rebut the allegations made against him/her, and present whatever defense he/she has. The adverse party shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the adverse party, and to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the findings and conclusions of the board of commissioners shall be forwarded to the building and planning director and it shall be the duty of the building and planning director to provide written notification to the adverse party of the actions of the board of commissioners, which actions shall comport with section 6-11 of this chapter. 
(e)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final unless appealed to the Superior Court of Habersham County, Georgia, within 30 days of the building and planning director providing written notification to the adverse party of the board's decision. 
(f)  For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by certified mail postage prepaid within three days after the date of deposit in the United States Mail. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Secs. 6-13—6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE-ORIGINAL PACKAGE 

Sec. 6-51. - License fees. 
The license fee for a license to sell malt beverages and wine by the package shall be paid to the building and planning director in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners by certified or cashier's check at the time of the filing of the original application and the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners upon renewal thereof. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-52. - Excise tax on the sale of beer and malt beverages. 
The county, in addition to excise taxes levied by the state, does hereby levy a local tax on the sale of beer and malt beverages of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces sold by wholesalers to retail package outlets in the county. Further, there is also levied by the county an excise tax on tap or draft beer of $6.00 per each container sold by wholesalers to retail package outlets in the county and containing more than 15 gallons and a like rate for fractional parts where the draft beer is sold in or from barrel or bulk containers. Said tax is imposed upon wholesalers and is payable on a monthly basis as set out under section 6-223. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-53. - Excise tax on the sale of wine. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax of $0.22 per liter on wines sold by a wholesaler to retail outlets in the county and a proportionate tax on the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Said tax is imposed upon wholesalers and is payable on a monthly basis as set out under section 6-223. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-54. - Type of retail outlet. 
Beer and wine may be sold at retail, by the package, only in outlets maintaining 75 percent of the floor space and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other foods, groceries, and general merchandise. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-55. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package outlets shall engage in the sale of beer and/or wine only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. No package beer and/or wine may be sold on Christmas Day or Thanksgiving Day. The sale of beer and wine is allowed on election days provided the outlet is not located within 250 feet of a polling place. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-56. - No consumption on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of malt beverages or wine by the package and it shall be unlawful for any licensee by the package to open for, or break the package for, a purchaser and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-57. - Listing of prices. 
Licenses shall indicate plainly by tag or labels on the bottles or containers, or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer and wine offered for sale. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Secs. 6-58—6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ON PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-131. - Locations where prohibited. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises, except in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a four-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments) prepared to serve food every hour they are open, pursuant to the applicable building, fire and safety codes in effect for the county. Outlets shall derive a minimum of 40 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance with these provisions. If such outlet provides a bar or counter service for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption, the seating for such bar shall not exceed ten percent of the total seating capacity of the outlet. 
(b)  During the initial annual period in which a license is granted, by the 20 th day of each month after such license is granted, the licensee shall submit to the county a statement from a certified public accountant that the income requirements set forth in subsection (a) have been met. Thereafter each consumption on the premises license holder shall submit annually at the time of the license renewal to the county the statement from a certified public accountant that the requirements of section have been met. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-132. - License fees. 
The licensee shall pay by certified or cashier's check a license fee for the sale of beer for consumption on the premises to Habersham County in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners to be paid at the time of application for said license and the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners for each annual renewal thereof. The licensee shall pay by certified or cashier's check a license fee for the sale of wine for consumption on the premises to Habersham County in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners to be paid at the time of application for said license and the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners for the renewal thereof. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-133. - Excise tax. 
The county hereby imposes an excise tax upon every purchase of beer or wine served for consumption on the premises of three percent of the purchase price of said beverage. Said tax shall be paid by the licensee to the county, and remitted monthly by said licensee. The imposition of this tax shall be administered pursuant to the following rules and regulations; 
(1)  Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed herein from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the building and planning director to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(2)  If requested by the purchaser, every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall at the time of collection for food and drinks served give to the purchaser a receipt on which the purchase price and tax imposed by this article on alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be itemized separately. In all cases where the collection of food and drinks is to be deferred payment or credit, the licensee is liable at the time of, and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The building and planning director and the board of commissioners shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(3)  The taxes imposed by this section shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any alcoholic beverage by the drink in this county. The frill amount of such taxes collected by the licensee shall be due and payable to the county monthly, on or before the 20 th day of the month following each monthly period. On or before the 20 th day of the month following each monthly period a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance department in such form as the building and planning director may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder; all returns shall show the gross receipt from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink and the amount of the tax collected on such drinks. 
(4)  If the building and planning director has cause to believe that the return, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any licensee is not proper, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is available to him. Should the county determine that a deficiency exists in the amount of the tax due by the licensee for one or more monthly periods, the amount of the deficiency shall be interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. The building and planning director or his designated representative shall give to the licensee written notice of this deficiency determination, and notice may be served by the county marshal or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the registered agent of the licensee. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee or by receipt of mailing. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20 th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(5)  If any licensee fails to make a return, the building and planning director shall make an estimate of the amounts of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, the amount of the total sales within the county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return, and shall be based upon any information which is available to the building and planning director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in the preceding paragraph. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20 th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned until the date of payment. 
(6)  Any licensee who fails to pay the tax herein imposed, or fails to pay any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the county within the time required, shall pay a penalty or 20 percent of the tax or amount of the tax or amount of the tax in addition to the tax or amount of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in the preceding section. 
(7)  At any time within three years after any tax, or any tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax, or any amount of tax required to be collected, the county may bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state, or of the United States to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the building and planning director, the excess amount paid the county may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the licensee, or may be refunded to the licensee if the licensee is no longer operating a licensed premises in the county. 
(8)  The building and planning director and the sheriff's department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax imposed by this section. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the county shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such forms as the building and planning director may require. The building and planning director or any person authorized in writing by the board of commissioners may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other faculties of any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. In the administration of the provision of this section, the building and planning director may require the filing of the reports by any person or class or persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to the purchases which are subject to the tax. The report shall be filed with the building and planning director and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase, and such other information as the building and planning director may require. The licensee shall keep a copy of this chapter at file outlet at all times. All employees of the licensee will be informed of the contents of this section. 
(9)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly, Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the building and planning director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-134. - Hours of sale. 
Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday, and between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and midnight on Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. All patrons must have exited the licensee's establishment within 30 minutes of the time which alcoholic beverages may no longer be sold, thus setting such exit time at 2:30 a.m. on Monday through Friday, and 12:30 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises on election days provided the outlet for such sale is not located within 250 feet of a polling place. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-135. - Consumption sales only. 
Licensees of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages by the package at that outlet and shall not permit a purchaser to remove from the premises any alcoholic beverage. This specifically prohibits the use of "to go" cups or any other device permitting any person to remove alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-136. - Licensee's price list. 
Licensees of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall display in prominent places, inside the outlet and/or on menus their current prices of wine or malt beverage by the drink. Provided, however, all licenses will keep a record of all sales of alcoholic beverages sold on which the excise tax is required to be paid under this chapter. No display of prices or brand names of alcoholic beverages to be served shall be displayed in such a manner as to be visible from the outside of the licensed outlet. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-137. - Patios and open areas. 
The consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas and patios, provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations, as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment, including, but not limited to regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress, and egress. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-138. - Happy hour promotions prohibited. 
No licensee shall advertise a happy hour. No licensee may serve discounted drinks, or increase the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. As used in this code section, the phrase "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage in the same calendar week. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-139. - Lighting. 
The exterior of each building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the outlet is opened for business. Also, the lounge and restaurant areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served, and all passageways shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that customers may be viewed by others inside the outlet. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-140. - Bring your own bottle "brown bagging" prohibited. 
No person may bring alcoholic beverages (brown bag) into any establishment, whether that establishment is licensed or is not licensed to serve alcoholic beverages, for the purpose of consuming alcohol on the premises during regular business hours of the establishment and/or while the establishment is open to the public. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-141. - Organizations exempt from food service requirement. 
Nationally recognized and chartered organizations such as veterans organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the Georgia Income Tax Law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food in order to sell alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all county ordinance regulations and general licensing application requirements for licensees, provided, however, any applicants for temporary licenses may be exempted from certain ordinance regulations and application requirements if the building and planning director, after consultation with the sheriff, determines that such exemption will not violate the purposes of this chapter as set forth in subsection 6-1 (d) herein. Any applicant requesting a temporary license must quality for said license by submitting an application on a form provided by the building and planning director to the sheriff's office and by tendering a certified or cashier's check to the sheriff's office in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners per each day alcoholic beverages are sold. Said temporary license will be granted to the same applicant a maximum of five days per year. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-142. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-143. - Nude dancing; findings; public purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; and Fort Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences we believe are relevant to the problems faced by Habersham County, Georgia, we take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)  The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcohol beverages for consumption on such premises within the unincorporated area of Habersham County: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (b)(1) above or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above; provided, however, that nothing shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Secs. 6-144—6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 6-181. - Definitions. 
(a)  Private club as used in tins section means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members and guests with: 
a.  Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  A sufficient number of staff employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary of other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  A fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Tips or gratuities, which are added to the bills under club regulations, shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-182. - License fees. 
A license fee authorizing a private club to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages shall be paid by certified or cashier's check to the county by the licensee in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners payable at the time of the application for the license or renewal thereof. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-183. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-184. - Regulation. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations. The county, however, will grant no alcoholic beverage license to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Secs. 6-185—6-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 6-221. - License required. 
Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages licensed by the State of Georgia or the agent of such wholesale dealer, shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages to licensed retailers or dealers in the county upon application for such license to the building and planning director and the presentation of satisfactory evidence that he understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of this county and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-222. - License fees. 
A wholesaler of alcoholic beverages sold in the county whose principal place of business is in the county shall pay to the building and planning director annual license fees as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners for beer and/or wine. 
A wholesaler dealer who is licensed to do business in more than one municipality or county of the State of Georgia and whose principal place of business is not in Habersham County shall pay to the building and planning director a license fee in the amount as set forth from time to time by the board of commissioners. Said license fees are payable at the time of application for a license or renewal thereof. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-223. - Excise taxes. 
All wholesale dealers engaged in the wholesale distributions of alcoholic beverages to retail package outlets in this county shall pay to the building and planning director an excise tax of $0.22 per liter of wine sold to retail package licensees and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Further, all wholesale dealers will pay to the county an excise tax for malted beverages sold to retail package outlets in this county, equal to $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. Further, the wholesale dealers will pay to the county an excise tax on tap or draft beer in the sum of $6.00 for each container sold containing not more than 15 ½ gallons and a like rate for fractional parts where the draught beer is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container. Each licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report and payment within the time required shall result m a payment penalty of ten percent of the excise tax amount due or $200.00 whichever is greater. Payment of this excise tax shall be made before the tenth day of each month for all sales made during the previous month. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-224. - Hours of sale. 
The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be from sunup to sundown only on days the outlets for sale of alcoholic beverages in the original package and by the drink are authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, and 12:30 p.m. to sundown on Sundays. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-225. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale license. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. No alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to any outlet in the county except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(b)  Licensed wholesalers or their employees shall follow all traffic rules in effect for the county and shall not in any way conduct their business so as to interfere with the flow of traffic in the county. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Secs. 6-226—6-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FARM WINERIES 

Sec. 6-250. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Farm winery means a domestic winery located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery, or a domestic winery which: 
(1)  Makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in this state; 
(2)  Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the state agricultural produce used in its annual production; and for this purpose such production of a substantial portion of such Georgia agricultural produce shall be determined by the state revenue commissioner; and 
(3)  Produces less than 100,000 gallons per year. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given complimentary or for a fee. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-251. - General authorization; notice to county. 
A farm winery which is qualified and licensed by the state shall be allowed to manufacture wine or to distribute such wine at wholesale and at retail at its tasting room; provided that the farm winery has given to the board of commissioners 60 days written notice of its intentions to commence operations and filed with such notice copies of its license and permits from the state. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-252. - Revocation of state license. 
When any state wine license issued by the state is revoked by the state revenue commissioner, the permission as above set out by the county shall automatically become invalid. 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Alcohol Beverage Ordinance Fee Schedule 

 
( Ord. of 6-27-2016 , § 1, (Exh. A)) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 21, 2018, repealed ch. 10, §§ 10-1, 10-2, 10-31—10-52, 10-70—10-80, 10-101—10-108 and 10-131—10-140 and enacted a new ch. 10 as set out herein. Former ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted January 13, 2014 ; and An ordinance adopted November 16, 2015 . 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment (of an animal) means the act of any person who: 
(1)  Places an animal by leaving a domesticated animal unattended for a period of time in excess of 36 hours without food, water, adequate ventilation or shelter on public or private property including, but not limited to, the property of the owner/custodian; 
(2)  Places an animal upon public or private property including, but not limited to, the property of the owner/custodian and including, but not limited to, leaving an animal contained in a box, bag, fence, house or other structure or tethered; or 
(3)  Places an animal in the custody of a state licensed entity or the animal is otherwise legally obtained by an entity such as, but not limited to, an animal shelter, veterinary clinic, grooming facility, boarding facility or pet sitter for treatment, boarding or other care and fails to reclaim the animal within 72 hours of notification or by a written agreed upon time. 
Adequate food means a sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age and health of the animal or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for a domestic animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the domestic animal in a state of good health and that prevents pain, suffering or significant risk to the animal's health. It should also be clean, dry and compatible with current weather conditions and to the breed of the domestic animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the dog to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure comfortably. The shelter should have proper bedding, ventilation, and lighting and afford the animal protection from extreme cold or hot temperatures. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, pet carriers, boxes, porches, decks or material that does not provided sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate space means: 
(1)  Sufficient space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal; 
(2)  Sufficient space during periods of confinement suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal to permit the animal to turn about freely, stand, sit, lie, move, etc. in a comfortable and normal position; or 
(3)  For sick or injured animals, confinement as directed by a veterinarian. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water with sufficient supply. Snow, ice and rancid/contaminated water are not adequate water. 
Animal means any domesticated animal that is accustomed to living in or about the habitation of humans including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated legal wild animals and/or legal exotic animals. 
Animal at large means any animal not under restraint or voice control and off the property of its owner. If an animal has no known owner or keeper, then it shall be considered "at large" when on any public or private property. 
Animal control department is defined in section 10-2 hereof. 
Animal control officer means a person employed by Habersham County to pick up, restrain or impound animals and who is responsible for discharging such other duties or functions pertaining to animals as may be prescribed by this or any other ordinance, by state law or by the lawful order of a county official authorized to supervise and direct animal control officers. See section 10-3. 
Animal control shelter means the facility designated by the board of commissioners for the impoundment, restraint, care, detention and disposition of animals. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, animal auction, kennel, performing animal exhibition or animal shelter except this term shall not include veterinary medical facilities, licensed research facilities, facilities operated by governmental agencies or licensed animal dealers regulated by the USDA under the provisions of U.S. Pub. Laws 89544 and 91579. 
Animal under restraint means any animal secured by a leash, lead or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure; under the present control of a responsible and competent adult person and obedient to that person's commands or an animal confined within a vehicle or crate, cage or otherwise secured in a pickup. In the case of a dog possessed by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Appropriate authority means Habersham County, the Habersham County Sheriffs Office, any duly authorized agent thereof, the State of Georgia, any city, any county, or any state or subdivision thereof. 
Attack means any biting or attempted biting or other action by an animal that places a person in danger of imminent bodily harm. An attack also means the actual biting of another animal. 
Barn cat program means a program in which shelters attempt to relocate a feral or free-roaming cat (excluding community cats) to a private owner of a barn or warehouse which can provide a safe area for the feral or free-roaming cat to roam which includes shelter, food and water. 
Board means Habersham County Board of Health. 
Cat means any age feline of the domesticated type. 
Certificate means a certificate of vaccination on a form furnished or approved by the Georgia Department of Human Services. 
Community cat means any feral or free-roaming cat without owner identification that has been sterilized, vaccinated and ear-tipped in accordance with the trap-neuter-release program (TNR). 
Community cat caregiver means any person who, in accordance with the TNR program, provides care including food, shelter or medical care to a community cat. A community cat caregiver shall not be considered the owner, harborer, controller or keeper of a community cat. 
County means Habersham County, Georgia. Where context requires, the term "county" shall also include the incorporated limits of any municipal government where, by intergovernmental agreement with the County, Habersham County Animal Care and Control is responsible for the enforcement of the municipal animal control ordinances. 
Dangerous dog control ordinance means article V of this chapter. 
Dog shall mean a domesticated canine. 
Eartip means a mark identifying a feral cat as being in a TNR program; specifically, the removal of approximately ¼-inch tip of the cat's left ear in a straight line, performed while the cat is under anesthesia, to identify the community cat as being sterilized and lawfully vaccinated for rabies. 
Feral cat means any cat which is known to live in a wild or semi-wild state without benefit of an owner, a cat which has escaped for a substantial period of time from the care of its owner or is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is existing in a wild state without benefit of domestication. A feral cat is unsocialized to people and typically avoids contact with humans. 
Governing authority means the Habersham County Board of Commissioners. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any dog which, not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Harboring means allowing any animal to remain, lodge or be fed within a home, store, yard, enclosure or a place of business or any other premises in which a person resides or controls. 
Health department means the Habersham County Health Department or, in the absence of a functioning health department, the Habersham County Board of Health. 
HCACC means Habersham County Animal Care and Control. 
Humane care means, but is not limited to, providing: access to wholesome and adequate food of sufficient quantity and quality and potable water of a drinkable temperature consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed; continuous access to an area with adequate space for exercise necessary for the health of the animal; sanitary shelter sufficient to protect the animal from the elements and weather conditions, extreme heat or cold temperatures, adequate ventilation and bedding to protect against cold and dampness suitable for the age, species and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a state of good health; adequate lighting for enclosed shelters; routine and emergency veterinary care in order to maintain an animal in a state of good health; proper grooming consistent with the normal requirements of the animal's size, species and breed. When necessary, euthanasia as provided under O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1 shall be deemed humane care. 
Kennel is an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling or boarding dogs or cats or engaging in the training of dogs or cats, licensed through the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle and other grazing animals. 
Microchip means a passive transponder which is implanted in an animal by injection and which is a component of the radio frequency identification (RFID) system, which serves as a permanent identification. 
Microchip reader means a device designed to read microchips at 125 kHz, both encrypted and non-encrypted, 128 kHz and 134.2 kHz, and which is ISO 11784 and 11785 compliant. 
Necessary veterinary care means veterinary medical attention appropriate to the circumstances, whenever an animal is known or suspected to have suffered an injury, accidental or deliberate, or exhibits signs of disease process such as shock, temperature fluctuation, tremors, swelling, broken bones, open wounds, inability to eat or drink, blistering, irregular or abnormal breathing, partial or total paralysis, abnormal discharge or bleeding, mange, weight loss, lethargy, dehydration or other signs of health problems. 
Neutered/spayed means rendered permanently incapable of reproduction by a licensed veterinarian. 
Nuisance means a dog or cat that is: 
(1)  Running at large; 
(2)  Chasing or running after vehicles, bicycles or persons; 
(3)  Attacking or interfering with persons or other domestic animals on public or private property; 
(4)  Trespassing upon public or private school grounds; 
(5)  Trespassing upon private property and interfering with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the property; 
(6)  Barking or making objectionable animal noises; 
(7)  Damaging the property of another person other than its owner or caretaker including, but not limited to, getting into or turning over garbage containers or damaging gardens, flowers, plants or other real or personal property or defecating on the property of another (without timely removal thereof). 
(8)  Causing serious annoyance to a neighboring residence and interfering with the reasonable use and enjoyment of that property. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association and/or any other legal entity, who or which owns, possesses, has custody of, harbors, feeds, maintains or knowingly causes or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept, has an animal in his care or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises. 
Rabies vaccination tag shall mean a tag furnished or approved by the Georgia Department of Human Services and which tag shall be worn by the vaccinated dog at all times. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, animal control agency or officer, county board of health or federal, state or local court. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Sexually mature animal means any dog or cat that has reached the age of 180 days. 
Shelter means, generally, adequate protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age, species and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a state of good health. Shelter for livestock includes structures or natural features such as trees or topography. Shelter for a dog includes one or more of the following: 
(1)  The residence of the dog owner or other individual. 
(2)  A doghouse that is an enclosed structure with a roof and of appropriate dimensions for the breed and size of the dog. 
(3)  A structure, barn or shed that is sufficiently insulated and ventilated to protect the dog from exposure to extreme temperatures or, if not sufficiently insulated and ventilated, contains a doghouse as provided under subparagraph (2) that is accessible to the dog. 
State of good health means freedom from disease and illness and in a condition of proper body weight and temperature for the age and species of the animal, unless the animal is undergoing appropriate treatment. 
Sterilization means rendering a dog or cat unable to reproduce by the surgical removal of its reproductive organs or by rendering a dog unable to reproduce by intratesticular injection approved by law. 
Tether means any chain, cable, tie out or wire designed to restrain an animal which is attached to an animal's collar or halter and is also attached to a stationary object or trolley system. 
Trap-neuter-release (TNR): A nonlethal approach to feral cat population control where feral cats are humanely trapped, sterilized and vaccinated, eartipped and then returned to the location where they were originally trapped with a caregiver. If no caregiver is available at that location, a caregiver will be located and the feral cat placed via adoption through the barn cat program (BCP). 
Trolley system means a method to confine an animal by tethering the animal to a cable which must be attached to two fixed points and be free of hazards, allowing the animal free access to food, water and shelter and confines the animal to the owner's property. 
Unsanitary conditions shall include any animal living space such as shelter and exercise area contaminated by health hazards, irritants, items or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Excessive animal waste; 
(2)  Garbage, trash or effluent; 
(3)  Standing water or mud; 
(4)  Rancid/contaminated food or water; 
(5)  Fumes, foul or noxious odors, contaminated air, hazardous chemicals or poisons; 
(6)  Decaying materials; 
(7)  Uncontrolled parasite or rodent infestation; and 
(8)  Areas that contain nails, screws, broken glass, broken boards, pits, poisons, sharp implements or other items that could cause injury, illness or death to an animal. 
Vaccinate or inoculate shall mean the injection of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine by a veterinarian into the proper site of an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. Department of Agriculture Veterinary Biologies Control Section license number approval stamped on the label of the container and having been approved by the Georgia Department of Human Services. 
Vaccine means a properly dated injectable material containing killed or attenuated rabies virus, licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture, Veterinary Biologies Section, and approved by the Georgia Department of Human Services. 
Veterinarian shall mean any person who holds a degree of doctor of veterinary medicine (DVM) and is licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Veterinary care means the medical care of an animal from or under the direction of a veterinarian and necessary to maintain the health of an animal based on the age, species, breed, etc., of the animal, or to prevent an animal from suffering from any medical condition/injury where withholding or neglecting to provide such care would: 
(1)  Endanger the health, well-being or welfare of the animal; or 
(2)  Promote the spread of communicable diseases. 
Vicious animal means any animal which: 
(1)  Constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more attacks of such severity as to cause physical injury; 
(2)  It makes an unprovoked attack on human beings or other domesticated animals; or 
(3)  Because of temperament, conditioning or training has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure other living creatures without provocation. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-2. - HCACC. 
HCACC shall consist of the director of HCACC and county animal control officer—grades 1, 2 and 3. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-3. - Powers and duties of HCACC and the animal control officer. 
HCACC shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and the duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Cooperation with the county board of health in the enforcement of rabies control regulations and of animal control directives. 
(2)  Cooperation in the promotion of animal control and welfare. 
(3)  Taking up and impounding animals that are in violation of this chapter, using any and all means available which are humane in nature; however, any officer shall be authorized, but not required, to impound animals or fowl not on the owner's or custodian's property. Any animal control officer can, in lieu of impoundment, issue a citation for violations of this chapter. 
(4)  Any animal control officer shall be authorized to enter either public or private property to impound any animal which he has reasonable cause to believe is in violation of this chapter. 
(5)  Any animal observed by a peace officer or an animal control officer to be in immediate danger may be removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable means available in order to prevent further harm, suffering or death of the animal. 
(6)  The animal control officer may destroy any animal which presents a threat of immediate harm to public health or safety or other innocent animals and which cannot be taken for impoundment without threat of serious harm to the animal control officer. The destruction shall be in the most humane method available to the officer on scene. HCACC shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of such animal found at large nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction. An immediate threat to the safety of any person may include, but not be limited to, a vicious animal, a potentially rabid animal or an attacking animal. 
(7)  Keeping a record of the number and description of all animals impounded or otherwise taken into custody, showing in detail as to each animal a general description by sex, breed and approximate age, together with any identification tag, vaccination tag or other marking (including microchipping) and the date of receipt. 
(8)  The director may designate any animal control officer to perform any of the duties of the director. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-4. - Interpretation of chapter; conflicting provisions. 
(a)  Where there is a conflict among articles or sections within this chapter, the article or section which is more restrictive shall apply. 
(b)  Definitions in one article of this chapter may be used to define terms in other parts of this chapter unless it is clear from the context that the definition does not apply. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Secs. 10-5—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 10-31. - Running at large prohibited; duty of owner to keep animal under control. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal to keep the animal under control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner. For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under control when it is confined within a vehicle, is under restraint by a competent person, is under voice control or is properly confined within an enclosure with permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit the animal to be out of control and unattended off the premises of the owner, or upon the property of another person without permission of the property owner or person in possession thereof. 
(c)  An animal within the property limits of its owner shall be under the immediate supervision of a responsible party when invitees are allowed on the property by owner. 
(d)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal within any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. 
(e)  The owner of any animal shall restrain or control so as to prevent it from chasing vehicles or attacking persons or other animals. 
(f)  The owner of any animal that is proven to be at large shall be in violation of this section, regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of lack of knowledge of the offense at the time it occurs. 
(g)  Any such animal at large may be impounded by the animal control officer. 
(h)  Any animal with no known keeper shall be considered "at large" and subject to impoundment. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-32. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while on property. 
It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal to ensure that it is confined by way of a fence, restraint or other enclosure including activated invisible fence or in some other physical manner under the control of a competent person so that it cannot wander off the real property limits of the owner, it being the intent of this article that an unattended animal be prevented from leaving the real property limits of its owner's property. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-33. - Abandonment of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to abandon any domestic animal owned by him. No person shall put out or abandon any animal on public or private property within the county. Each person who does abandon, permits such abandonment or aids in the abandonment of any animal shall be in violation of the law and shall be punished as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to turn out at large any sick, diseased or disabled animal but such animal shall, when rendered worthless by reason of sickness or other disability, be disposed of by the owner thereof in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or fowl that dies or is killed within the limits of the county to fail to remove or bury the carcass of such animal within a reasonable time and, in no event, more than 24 hours after its death. All animals buried within the county shall be buried in accordance with regulations of the board, if applicable. 
(d)  If the owner, possessor or custodian of an animal is not known and the animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds or other public places or premises or property of another without the property owner's permission as prohibited by this chapter, any law enforcement officer or agent or employee duly authorized by the county shall be authorized to immediately take possession of such animal and impound it in accordance with the rules and regulations provided by law for the detention, control and disposition of animals. 
(e)  Any animal placed in the custody, or otherwise legally obtained by the HCACC, a veterinarian or other care or boarding facility, which shall be unclaimed by its owner for a period of more than 72 hours after written notice by registered or certified mail if an address is able to be obtained, return receipt requested, to the owner at his last known address, or notice via recorded telephone contact, shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be turned over to the custody of HCACC and/or disposed of as such custodian may deem proper. If the owner cannot be located or no residence of the owner is identified, the animal shall be presumed abandoned after five days of impoundment have elapsed. 
(f)  Once impounded, an animal deemed abandoned as set forth in section 10-33(e), may be disposed of via adoption, transfer to rescue group or licensed veterinarian or, if in the opinion of the shelter director or a veterinarian that such animal has a temperament or condition such that euthanasia is the only reasonable course of action, humanely disposed of by euthanasia. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-34. - Animal neglect, cruelty to animals. 
(a)  No person shall by act, omission or neglect cause unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death to any animal. This section shall not apply to the killing of animals raised for the purpose of providing food nor does it apply to any person who shall hunt wild animals in compliance with the game and fish laws of the State of Georgia. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to the killing or injuring of animals for humane purposes or in the furtherance of medical or scientific research or in the necessary defense of one's person or personal property. 
(1)  Whoever willfully kills, abuses, maims, disfigures or poisons any animal shall be in violation of this chapter. Cropping, docking and dew claw removal performed by a veterinarian shall not be considered maiming or disfiguring. 
(2)  Whoever: 
a.  Overloads, overdrives, tortures or torments an animal of adequate food; 
b.  Beats, mutilates, hobbles or kills any animal; 
c.  Carries in or upon a vehicle or otherwise any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; or 
d.  Causes any such acts to be done shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. This section shall not prohibit the hobbling of an animal for legitimate training or approved medical care purposes. 
(3)  Whoever confines an animal and fails to supply adequate food, adequate water, sanitary conditions, necessary vet care, adequate shelter with access to adequate space, or causes unnecessary suffering or abandons any animal shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit, impede or otherwise interfere with animal husbandry, training techniques, competition, events, shows or practices not otherwise specifically prohibited by law. Specifically this section shall not prevent a person from humanely harming, maiming or killing any animal in defense of person or property, the person or property of another, any livestock, poultry or pet animal or damage being caused by an animal. Furthermore, this section shall not be construed to limit in any way the authority or duty of any law enforcement officer, animal control officer or veterinarian. 
(c)  Mandatory reporting—Veterinarian. Any veterinarian in this county who is presented with an animal for treatment of injuries or wounds resulting from the reasonable possibility of fighting, abuse or neglect shall file a report with HCACC and cooperate by furnishing the owner's name, address, contact information, dates, description of animal(s) involved and medical information with regards to the incident. Any veterinarian who in good faith makes a report, as required by this section, shall have immunity from any liability, civil or criminal, that otherwise might result by reason of such actions. For the purposes of any proceedings, civil or criminal, the good faith of any such veterinarian shall be presumed. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-35. - Animals disturbing the peace. 
(a)  No owner of an animal shall allow an animal to annoy or disturb any person not on the premises of the owner of the animal by unreasonable barking or other noises. For the purpose of this section, unreasonable barking or other noises shall mean barks, bays, cries, howls or other noises that are continuous or incessant for a period of 30 minutes or are intermittent for a period of one hour or more. Barking or noises shall not be considered unreasonable if the animal is responding to a trespass or attempted trespass on private property. This section shall have no application to noises or disturbances made by livestock, poultry or other animals emanating from a legitimate farming operation on property zoned for agricultural use. 
(b)  Any owner of an animal in violation of subsection (a) hereof shall be guilty of a nuisance and shall be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  No citation shall issue except upon the written complaint of three or more citizens living within 1,000 feet of any property upon which such a dog is usually maintained, harbored or kept; or upon receipt of a video recording (of not less than 30 minutes in length) of the violation accompanying the written complaint from one citizen. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-36. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement authority of this chapter shall be vested with the animal control officer or any other duly authorized sheriffs deputy of the county. Enforcement shall be based upon a complaint (except as set forth in section 10-35) lodged with HCACC or the county sheriffs office. Upon a complaint being lodged regarding any section of this chapter, a summons may be issued requiring the owner of any animal violating any of the provisions set forth in this chapter to appear before the judge of the magistrate court of the county on a day and time certain to answer for the violation of this chapter. If such violation of this chapter has not been witnessed by an officer of the county, a subpoena may be issued to the person making the complaint, requiring such person to appear on the day and time of the hearing set by the court to testify on behalf of the county. Any person who seeks to file a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter must do so in writing and thereby agreeing to cooperate with the HCACC and to testify in open court if necessary. The written complaint shall serve as written documentation of the alleged violation and shall be used in the prosecution thereof. In carrying out the duties of this chapter, the HCACC may employ equipment including, but not limited to, control poles, nets, leashes of any construction, chemical capture devices, snake tongs, oleoresin capsicum aerosols, snake hooks, humane traps, collapsible batons, firearms and metal carrying cages. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-37. - Commercial guard/security dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use or maintain any guard/security dog to have signs conspicuously posted on the premises where the guard/security dog is located to warn of the presence of the dog. This warning shall consist of a warning sign placed at each entrance and exit to the premises and in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the sign (eye level). If the premises are not enclosed by a wall or fence, a sign shall be placed at every entrance and exit to each structure on the premises in which a guard/security dog is located. Each sign shall measure at least ten inches by ten inches and shall contain block lettering stating "Warning, Guard Dog on Duty." In addition, for dogs rented or leased, the sign shall set forth the name, address and phone number of the responsible person to be notified during any hour of the day or night. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use or maintain a guard/security dog to ensure the dog is vaccinated against rabies and licensed as required by law. A current vaccination tag must be affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times as required by law. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in an open bed or flatbed truck. 
(d)  Any vehicle transporting guard dogs shall be identified as to the business owner. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to transport any guard dog in the county except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Each dog must be placed in separate holding bins. 
(2)  Each holding bin shall be enclosed and measure a minimum of 48 inches long by 18 inches wide by 30 inches high. 
(3)  Each holding bin must be adequately ventilated. 
(f)  No guard/security dog shall be chained, tethered or otherwise tied to any inanimate object, such as a tree, post or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(g)  A guard/security dog shall be confined within a building or other secure enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-38. - Vicious animals—Precautions to be taken by owners. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all animals, except dogs. Article IV of this chapter, pertaining to dangerous dogs and vicious dogs, shall apply to dogs as defined in that article. 
(b)  Owner precautions. An owner of a vicious animal as defined in section 10-1 hereof shall take the following precautions: 
(1)  At large. No person owning or having custody or control of any animal known to be vicious shall permit it to run at large or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(2)  Fencing. Owners who maintain a vicious animal out-of-doors shall fence with a perimeter or area fence. The kennel shall not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel must have secure sides, with a top attached to all sides and the sides securely set into the ground, on a concrete pad or attached to a wire bottom, out of which the animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape on its own volition. The kennel must be securely locked. The kennel as used in this section shall mean a small enclosure or pen. 
(3)  Warning sign. A warning sign (e.g., BEWARE OF VICIOUS ANIMAL) shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious animal is on the premises on all four sides of said enclosure. It is the intention of this section to make all persons who have legitimate business at the place where a vicious animal is kept to be fully warned that such vicious animal is present. 
(4)  Restraint. Whenever outside of its enclosure, but on the owner's property, a vicious animal must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(5)  Muzzling. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for any vicious animal on the streets or in any other public place, at any time, unless, in addition to the other requirements of this article, such animal is humanely and securely muzzled and in charge of a competent person to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. 
(6)  Tethering. No vicious animal shall be chained, tethered or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post or building. 
(c)  Violations. The owner of any vicious animal which is not confined in a building or secure enclosure or any person who shall release, either willfully or through a failure to exercise due care or control, shall be in violation of this article. Such animal shall be permanently confined or humanely destroyed. 
(d)  Exception. 
Exception: An animal is not considered vicious if it attacks, bites or menaces: 
(1)  Anyone attacking its owner; 
(2)  Unlawful trespassers on the property of its owner; 
(3)  Any person or animal that has tormented or abused it; 
(4)  If it is defending its young or other animal; or 
(5)  Any non-domesticated animal being hunted as part of lawful hunting activities. 
(e)  Non-classification. An animal will not be classified as vicious simply by nature of its size, breed, phenotype or other physical characteristics. 
(f)  Exemption of owner. An animal that bites its owner is exempted from this section, except the mandatory reporting requirement of section 10-106 shall still apply. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-40. - Detention of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to detain or hold the animal of another without notifying HCACC. If the animal is presumed stray, and the owner is not currently known, it shall be the responsibility of the finder to notify HCACC. If HCACC is not notified within five days, and no owner is found, the animal will be considered detained by finder and surrendering said animal to HCACC will incur a surrender fee. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-41. - Interference with officer. 
(a)  Upon the receipt of a complaint as set forth in section 10-36, it shall be unlawful for any owner to fail or refuse to permit an animal control officer to investigate such complaint by inspection of the animal and the premises. 
(b)  No person shall release, or attempt to release, an animal from the custody of the animal control officer or from a humane trap set by an animal control officer. 
(c)  Any person, who by word or act, resists, abuses, molests, obstructs or impedes the animal control officer, uses threatening language or force in order to intimidate, threatens to or attempts to do bodily harm toward such officer while engaged in the enforcement of this chapter or while engaged in the performance of any duty, or in the exercise of such authority, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly provide false information, a false statement or false representation to an animal control officer or hinder the investigation of any animal control officer discharging or attempting to discharge any legal duty imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-42. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the imposition of a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for up to six months (a maximum of 60 days in jail with 120 days probated or suspended) or both. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-43. - Confinement in motor vehicle. 
No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, an animal control officer or law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that this section is being violated shall have authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-44. - Prohibited animals. 
It shall be unlawful to purchase, sell, own, possess, harbor or breed skunks, foxes, prairie dogs, raccoons, coyotes, wolves, hybrid wolves, any hybrid animal that is part wild animal, exotic cats or any other wildlife unless licensed by the respective federal or state department of agriculture to possess such animal. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-45. - Breeding without a license. 
(a)  No owner of an animal (whether one or more) shall have more than one litter per household delivered during any 12-month period unless said owner holds the required license from the Georgia Department of Agriculture and a valid business license. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-46. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Collect animals and fail to provide them with humane/adequate care; 
(2)  Collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this article; or 
(3)  Collect, house or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-47. - Liability for damage done by animal. 
(a)  The owner of an animal which, while off the owner's property, causes injury, death or damage directly or indirectly to any person, livestock, poultry or pet animal or property, shall be liable to the person or owner of the livestock, poultry, pet animal or property for injury, death or damage caused by the animal, including consequential damages. 
(b)  This section is cumulative of other remedies provided by law. There is no intent to limit other causes of action which might inure to the owner of any livestock, poultry, pet animal or property. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-48. - Nuisance feeding. 
The feeding of any cat or any wildlife (excluding birds) by hand feeding or the setting out of food to be left attended or unattended, which creates or has the potential to create a hazard to public health or safety is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. [Managed Community Cat colonies shall be exempt from this section.] 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-49. - Habitual nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to permit the animal, whether willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, to commit a nuisance habitually: 
(1)  By running at large; 
(2)  By chasing or running after vehicles, bicycles or persons; 
(3)  By attacking persons or other domestic animals on public or private property; 
(4)  By trespassing upon public or private school grounds; 
(5)  By trespassing upon private property and interfering with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the property; 
(6)  By barking or making objectionable animal noises; 
(7)  By damaging the property of another person including, but not limited to, getting into or turning over garbage containers, damaging gardens, flowers, plants or other real or personal property or defecating on the property of another (unless timely removed); 
(8)  By causing serious annoyance to a neighboring residence and interfering with the reasonable use and enjoyment of that property; 
(9)  By any other action which is so offensive as to create a nuisance; or 
(10)  By repeated convictions for violation of this chapter. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "habitually" means at least three separate occurrences within a time period of no more than one year except that barking habitually, or making other objectionable animal noises habitually, means making the sound persistently or continuously for at least 30 minutes occurring at least three separate times within a period of no more than eight hours. For the purposes of this section, "persistently" or "continuously" shall mean non-stop utterances for 30 consecutive minutes with interruption of less than 30 seconds at a time during the said period. 
(c)  Each violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 for the first offense; $750.00 for the second offense and $1,000.00 for the third or subsequent offense. A subsequent violation of this section occurring ten or more business days after a previous citation for violation of this section shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(d)  An animal found to be a habitual nuisance shall be sterilized and microchipped at the expense of the owner. Owner shall keep the required microchip information current. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-50. - Failure to comply with notice from animal control relative to premises. 
(a)  Any person having charge, custody or control of any premises where any animal is kept given written or verbal notice by an animal control officer advising any conditions that exist in violation of this chapter and who fails to remedy such conditions within the time frame set by the animal control officer shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person having charge, custody or control of any premises where any animal kept who has been given written notice by the animal control officer advising of any conditions that exist in violation of the provision of this chapter and who fails to return contact to the animal control department shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-51. - Trapping. 
(a)  Except as set forth in section 10-54, no person shall set any trap to catch a domestic animal, permit any trap owned by them or in their control to be set to catch any domestic animal or allow a trap set to catch a domestic animal on their property. When a dog or cat is trapped, HCACC shall be notified and such dog or cat shall immediately be delivered to and relinquished to HCACC. 
(b)  Any wild animals inadvertently caught by use of a trap shall be the responsibility of the person setting the trap. 
(c)  Any death or injury to any domestic animal or wildlife resulting from trapping must be reported to HCACC. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-52. - Disposal of deceased animal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is caring for an animal, which has died or has been killed, to abandon the animal, its parts or blood. Such person shall dispose of a dead animal as provided for in this section. Under no conditions may dead animals be abandoned at any location including, but not limited to, wells or open pits of any kind on public or private land including property of the owner. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of an animal, its parts or blood by burial on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. 
(c)  No person shall abandon a dead animal in his or her possession by leaving the dead animal on the property of another. 
(d)  Disposal of animal carcasses by any approved method must be completed within 12 hours after death or discovery of the carcass unless the carcass is properly refrigerated or frozen. Carcasses which are buried must be buried at least three feet below the ground level but not more than eight feet and have not less than three feet of earth cover over the carcass. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-53. - Animal fighting/arenas. 
(a)  Animal fighting. 
(1)  No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, train, lend, borrow or handle any dog, cat, bird/fowl or other domestic, feral or wild animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in any animal fight/fight training, exhibition of animal fighting or being used as bait for fighting/aggressive animals. 
(2)  No person shall train, assist, umpire/referee or in any way participate in the training of any animal to be used for animal fighting or used as bait or for animal fighting, or torment, badger or bait any animal for the purpose of fighting or blood sport training or any other such activity, the primary purpose of which is the training/conditioning of animals for aggressive or vicious behavior or animal fights or exhibitions of fighting animals. 
(3)  No person shall charge admission to, participate in or be present as a spectator, handler, timekeeper, referee, guard, etc., at any animal fight/battle. 
(4)  No person shall profit from any activity connected with any animal fight or exhibition of animals fighting or training, or competitions or matches of fighting animals. 
(b)  Fighting/training arenas/areas, equipment. 
(1)  Arena/areas. No person shall, for the purpose of any exhibition/occurrence of animal fighting, training for animal fighting, or training of animals to display aggressive behaviors: 
a.  Build, make, maintain or keep a pit or other animal fighting arena or area, whether permanent or portable, on-premises owned or occupied by him; 
b.  Allow a pit or other animal fighting arena or area whether permanent or portable, to be built, made, maintained or kept on his premises; or 
c.  Build, make, maintain or keep a pit or other animal fighting arena or area, whether permanent or portable, on public or private property. 
(2)  Equipment. No person shall: 
a.  Possess, use, sell, give, trade or loan apparatus, paraphernalia, pit supplies, implements, programs, drugs or equipment used to train or condition animals to be aggressive, aggressive animals, game animals or animals used to train other animals to be aggressive. 
b.  Use any animal as bait or as a lure in training dogs for racing or other competitions. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to the training of domesticated hunting animals. 
(c)  Violation. 
(1)  Any animal or item found to be used in violation of subsections (a) or (b) of this section will be immediately confiscated by the HCACC. 
(2)  Violation of subparts of (a) or (b) shall be cumulative and shall constitute separate violations. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-54. - Confinement of female dogs and cats in heat required. 
Every such female dog or cat in heat (in estreus) shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with a male animal except for planned breeding. No owner or custodian of any dog in heat shall permit the dog or cat to roam or leave the property of its owner. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
State Law reference— Permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 10-55. - Misappropriation of an animal. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person who, knowing the identity of an animal's owner, without permission of said owner, does any of the following: 
(1)  Relinquishes the animal to an animal control officer without notifying the officer of the owner's name and address; 
(2)  Relinquishes the animal to an animal control officer and falsely represents himself as the owner of the animal; 
(3)  Sells the animal; or 
(4)  Gives the animal away. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-56. - Managed community cat program. 
(a)  HCACC or its volunteers, in order to encourage the stabilization of the free-roaming cat population in the county, may: 
(1)  Trap any free-roaming cat in a humane manner; 
(2)  Have the cat surgically sterilized, ear-tipped and vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian; and release the cat to HCACC for adoption or other disposition in accordance with law, or to a community cat caretaker who will maintain the cat as part of a managed colony of community cats; 
(3)  May return any free-roaming cat impounded by HCACC that bears an appropriate ear-tipping indicating it belongs to a managed colony to its managed colony unless illness or injury present an imminent danger to public health or safety. 
(4)  Exempt all cats that are part of a community cat management program if sterilized, vaccinated against the threat of rabies, and ear-tipped (preferable on the left ear) for easy identification; from the licensing, stray and at-large provisions hereof. 
(5)  Empower community cat caregivers to reclaim impounded feral cats without proof of ownership. 
(b)  TNR. 
(1)  Any person taking part in TNR activities shall not be deemed to be in violation hereof unless he is reckless or negligent in his actions or violate one of the within provisions. 
(2)  No person engaging in TNR shall leave a trap unattended in excess of 24 hours. 
(3)  No person shall knowingly leave a trapped cat unattended. 
(4)  No person who engages in TNR shall fail to have the left ear of the cat tipped for the purpose of being able to identify whether a cat has been previously altered. 
(5)  No person engaging in TNR shall take a cat to an unlicensed veterinarian or perform any surgeries, give any vaccinations or any non-emergency medical treatment themselves or by any other individual that is not a licensed veterinarian. 
(6)  No person engaging in TNR shall release a feral cat to any location in which there is not a caregiver. 
(7)  No person engaging in TNR shall fail to have the cat altered, ear tipped and given a rabies shot before releasing it. 
(8)  A feral cat caregiver who returns a feral cat in conjunction with TNR is not deemed to have abandoned the feral cat. 
(c)  Community cat/TNR education. HCACC may develop a program to facilitate and promote education concerning feral cats and TNR programs in the county. HCACC may work with local animal welfare and rescue organizations to develop and distribute educational information and to plan events to promote the public education program. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-57. - Unauthorized tethering. 
Unless prohibited hereinafter, no person shall, under any circumstances, tether or otherwise confine any animal in a manner that is contrary to the following: 
(1)  No person shall tether or otherwise confine any animal under any of the following circumstances: 
a.  The animal suffers from a condition that is known by that person to be exacerbated by tethering; 
b.  The animal is tethered in a manner in which it may become entangled with other tethered animals; 
c.  The tether extends over an object or edge in such a manner that could result in strangulation of or injury to the animal; 
d.  The animal is tethered in a manner that would allow it to reach within the property of another person, public walkway, or a road; 
e.  The tether weighs more than ¼ of the animal's weight; 
f.  The animal is sick or injured; 
g.  The animal is tethered on vacant or abandoned property; 
h.  The tether has weights attached. 
(2)  Humane tethering includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  The length of the tether must be a minimum of six feet, or at least three times the length of the animal measured from the animal's nose to the tip of its tail, whichever is greater. 
b.  The tether must allow the animal to move in and out of its shelter, to access food and water, and move about to avoid animal waste areas. 
c.  The tether must provide access to dry ground in case of heavy rains. 
d.  The animal must be tethered with a properly fitting harness or collar other than the lead or a pinch, prong or choke-type collar; the animal must be attached to the tether by a properly fitted harness or collar with enough room between the collar and the animal's throat through which two fingers may fit. 
e.  The animal may not be tethered by the wrapping of chain or tether around neck. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-58. - Expenses for treatment of diseased, injured or abandoned animals. 
An owner who reclaims or redeems an animal which has been treated for disease and/or injury while in possession of the animal control facility, prior to release of the animal to the owner, is required to reimburse HCACC for all expenses for treatment and care. Should the owner reimburse the treating veterinarian for such treatment, the owner must provide HCACC with a receipt of such payment before the animal is released to the owner. The payment for the expenses incurred in the treatment of such animals is in addition to the redemption/reclamation fees assessed, which are required to be paid to HCACC. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Secs. 10-59—10-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 10-73. - Notice to owners of impounded animals; redemption by owner. 
(a)  Any animal seized or impounded under any provision of this article shall be detained in the animal control shelter or any other such facility that the governing authority may so designate. 
(b)  Upon receipt of any impounded animal having a microchip or wearing a tag, the animal control officer shall make diligent efforts to ascertain the identity of the animal's owner and shall, within three business days of receipt, telephone the owner to give notice of the impoundment or notify the owner by personal contact or notice attached to the residence of the owner. 
(c)  The owner of the impounded animal may, after receiving such notice, regain possession of the animal upon payment of all applicable fees specified in this article. Such redemption shall not affect any criminal liability of the owner which may exist with respect to any violation of this article and shall not preclude proceedings against the owner for the purpose of pursuing sanctions under this article. 
(d)  An animal impounded must be claimed in five days or be subject to adoption or euthanasia. 
(e)  An owner must pay an impound fee as described in section 10-77 if claimed within the appointed five-day period. 
(f)  If not claimed within the five-day period, all impound fees described in section 10-77 apply including, but not limited to, reimbursement to HCACC for all medical expenses incurred. 
(g)  Any impounded animal adopted from HCACC that was not spayed or neutered per the adoption agreement may immediately be seized by HCACC and the owner may not be permitted to reclaim said animal. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-74. - Commencement of period of impoundment. 
(a)  All periods of impoundment specified in this article shall be deemed to commence at 12:01 a.m. of the day following the date of confinement. 
(b)  Once the period of impoundment has commenced, the fees set forth hereinafter shall be due and payable. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-75. - Fees and requirements for violations and impounds. 
(a)  The fees with respect to services performed in connection with the enforcement of this article shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time. A copy of such fee schedule shall be posted at the offices of HCACC. Such fees may be changed at any time and from time to time as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The fees established and collected under this article are not penalties but are imposed for the sole purpose of defraying expenses borne by Habersham County HCACC under this article. Such fees shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  An impounding fee. 
(2)  A boarding fee on a per-day basis. 
(3)  A rabies inoculation fee, if needed, as required by O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. 
(c)  Absent exigent circumstances, in no event shall any animal be redeemed by its lawful possessor, owner or custodian unless those fees established for boarding and/or the administration of necessary medical treatment to the animal are paid. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-76. - Consequences of animal impounded and not claimed. 
If for any reason an animal is impounded and not claimed by the owner after proper notification is made, the animal shall be considered abandoned and the following subsections shall apply. 
(1)  If the animal is not claimed by the owner within 72 hours of notice being given in accordance with section 10-73, the animal shall be deemed abandoned as set forth in section 10-33. HCACC may at its discretion dispose of such animal in accordance with state law. 
(2)  If any of the time periods in the subsection (1) of this section expire, the owner shall be deemed to have given his consent to the adoption of the impounded animal or the disposal of the animal in a humane fashion in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. All rights of ownership in such animal will immediately cease and the owner shall have no further claim to such animal. 
(3)  If an animal is impounded and through its appearance seems to have been abandoned or is stray, such animal will be kept for a period of five days before it will be considered for adoption or destroyed. The appearance of being abandoned or stray would include, but not be limited to, the following: no collar, tag, brand, microchipping or other identifiable marks, an appearance of being malnourished, excessively dirty or mange-like fur coat or any other condition that would lead the animal control officer to conclude that such animal is a stray. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-77. - Adoption. 
(a)  Personnel from HCACC may offer for adoption or placement with any person or any organization approved by HCACC an animal otherwise scheduled to be disposed of (euthanized) under the provisions of this chapter. No animal impounded shall be released to any person or organization for the purpose of animal experimentation. Any person or organization adopting an animal from HCACC shall pay the designated fees. 
(b)  Limiting adoptions. 
(1)  HCACC reserves the right to refuse to allow any person to adopt an animal in its custody or control. 
(2)  Any person convicted of cruelty, neglect, hoarding, animal fighting or abandonment of an animal will not be allowed to adopt an animal from HCACC. For the purpose of this section, a plea of nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction. 
(c)  Requirements for sterilization. Any person adopting an intact animal shall cause to have the animal spayed or neutered (sterilized) within 30 days from the date of adoption for animals over the age of six months or within the first six months of age for sexually immature animals. Failure to sterilize in accordance herein shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Any adopted animal not sterilized within the time specified may also be impounded by HCACC. Such animal may not be reclaimed and the violator shall not be permitted to adopt from HCACC again. No refunds will be given. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-78. - Destruction of animals due to disease, overcrowding, injury or likelihood of danger or injury to humans or other animals. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, HCACC may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the shelter when HCACC reasonably believes that destruction of the animal is necessary to prevent unnecessary suffering of the animal or to prevent disease or injury to the animals or humans due to (a) overcrowding in the shelter, (b) the presence or threatened presence of contagious disease, or (c) the likelihood of danger or injury to persons or animals. All medical fees incurred are the sole responsibility of the owner of the animal once identified. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-79. - Holding animals due to quarantine or as evidence in a criminal prosecution. 
Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter to the contrary, HCACC may refuse to release any animal impounded in the shelter or other director approved location for rabies or contagious disease quarantine or for the use as evidence in a criminal prosecution for such time period as HCACC may determine or until released by a court order. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-80. - Records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of HCACC to keep and maintain current and accurate records of all activities and transactions pertaining to the enforcement and impoundment of animals under this article. Such records shall include, but not be limited to, the name, address and phone numbers of persons filing complaints and owners of the animals impounded. Other information which shall be recorded will be the description and condition of each animal impounded and the date, time and circumstances of impoundment. 
(b)  Records shall also be maintained of all fees of any kind collected and any other records deemed proper for accurate accounting of activities. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-81. - Microchip identification scan. 
(a)  When any dog, cat or other large animal traditionally kept as a household pet is brought to the animal shelter, HCACC may, if the owner of the animal is not known, scan for the presence of an identifying microchip through the use of a microchip reader. If a microchip is found, HCACC shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner of the animal. 
(b)  HCACC shall not be liable for failing to detect a microchip or failing to contact the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-82. - Escape, injury or theft. 
HCACC shall exercise reasonable care to prevent the injury, escape or theft of any animal which is in its custody or which HCACC is attempting to bring into its custody under the provisions of this chapter, but it shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Secs. 10-83—10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 10-101. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this article is to prescribe rules for the prevention and control of rabies within the county by providing for the vaccination, tagging, certification of dogs and cats, the confinement of dogs/cats and other animals, to designate the county's rabies control officer, collection of rabies control fees and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-102. - Rabies control/animal control officer. 
(a)  The rabies control officer shall be the designated animal control officer and/or any other designated agent of the health department. 
(b)  Duties of the rabies control officer will include: 
(1)  Investigate and maintain a record of animal bites in the county. 
(2)  Provide for proper confinement of an animal involved in a bite incident. 
(3)  Provide stray animal pickup service. 
(4)  All duties required under this article. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-103. - State rabies vaccination tag; county registration required for dogs and cats. 
(a)  Every dog or cat three months of age or older shall be vaccinated against rabies. Dogs and cats will be revaccinated one year later. When dogs or cats one year of age or older are vaccinated with vaccines accepted by HCACC for providing a three-year duration of immunity, boosters will be required every three years. Otherwise, boosters shall be required annually. 
(b)  All dogs are required to wear a collar containing owner information at all times except as exempted by section 10-104. Owner information contained in a microchip shall be acceptable to comply with this requirement but shall not be a replacement for a visible collar. Dogs age three months or older are required to wear a collar and a current rabies tag at all times. 
(c)  A $5.00 fee will be assessed at the time of all rabies vaccinations (cats and dogs) for registration purposes. All dogs and cats shall be registered with the county. If a dog or cat is vaccinated for rabies by a veterinarian outside of the county, it is the responsibility of the owner to register the animal with the HCACC and pay the appropriate fee. If an owner or custodian of a dog or cat provides written verification that, at the time of rabies vaccination, his dog or cat has been spayed or neutered, such verification shall result in their registration fee being reduced to $3.00. 
(d)  All veterinarians receiving fees under this section shall deliver such fees to the county by no later than the 15th day of the subsequent month after receipt. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-104. - Dogs to wear collar, rabies vaccination tag; exceptions. 
The wearing of a rabies vaccination tag is not required for show dogs where the wearing of such tag could damage the coat or dogs when boarded in kennels, veterinary clinics or in an area zoned for agricultural purposes where the owner of the dog in question is using the dog for hunting purposes and has on his person a valid hunting license. In the latter case, the owner shall have the vaccination certificate in his possession where it may be shown upon demand by any duly constituted authority. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-105. - Reporting. 
(a)  The owner of any animal having signs suggestive of rabies shall confine the animal and immediately notify the rabies control officer or the health department reporting any information regarding any persons bitten or attacked by such animal. 
(b)  The rabies control officer shall report all known cases of rabies in the county to the health department. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-106. - Report of animal bites; confinement of biting animals. 
(a)  Any person having information that an animal has bitten a person or domestic animal including, but not limited to, physicians, veterinarians, peace officers, animal control officers, animal welfare groups, clinics, hospitals or any establishments providing health care or animal care services shall immediately report such to the county sheriffs office, HCACC or the health department. Knowingly failing to report such an incident shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  If an animal has bitten a person, such animal shall be immediately confined at a facility so designated by the animal control officer or the health department, including the premises of the owner. The confinement will be in accordance with section 10-107 hereinafter. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-107. - Confinement of dogs or other animals. 
(a)  HCACC shall be responsible for enforcement of all regulations pertaining to confinement of dogs or other animals. 
(b)  The owner of any dog or other animal as defined in this article shall confine or cause to be confined such dog or animal as prescribed in this section: 
(1)  A dog or other animal which has bitten a person (or other animal) shall be confined for a period often days following the date of the bite, in accordance with section 10-134(b), (c), (d) or (e), whichever is applicable. 
(2)  A dog or other animal, whether vaccinated or not, having signs suggestive of rabies shall be confined in isolation in a humane and escape-proof enclosure until its death or until its freedom from suspicion of having rabies is established and its release is authorized by a veterinarian. 
(3)  A dog or other animal not vaccinated and bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed or, if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, shall be placed in strict isolation in an approved kennel or other confinement area approved by an animal control officer for six months. One month prior to release by the veterinarian, the dog shall be vaccinated according to prescribed methods. 
(4)  Any dog or other animal which, as evidenced by its rabies vaccination tag, is properly and currently vaccinated for rabies and which is bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal may be revaccinated, confined in an approved manner for 60 days and then released by a veterinarian if no signs of rabies are evident. 
(5)  Every dog or other animal, whether vaccinated or not, shall be kept in a quarantined area confined at the owner's premises during the entire quarantine period unless other provisions deemed adequate to the animal control officer are made. 
(6)  Any dog less than three months old may be confined to the owner's premises, provided such permission is granted by the animal control department. 
(7)  Any unvaccinated dog brought into the county for a permanent stay from outside the county shall be confined or on leash until vaccinated as provided for by this chapter. 
(c)  Failure to comply with quarantine. After reviewing the circumstances of a particular case, the HCACC director may allow the owner to confine the animal on the owner's property. If the owner refuses to confine the animal as required by law, the HCACC director may order seizure of the animal and its confinement for the remainder of the quarantine period at an approved location at the expense of the owner. Any unvaccinated animal with exposure to rabies may be humanely destroyed. Failure to comply with quarantine includes, but is not limited to, allowing animal to run at large, inadequate confinement, unauthorized disposal and removal or relocation of animal. Such failure shall be a violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-108. - Violations, penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not less than $50.00 nor to exceed $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
State Law reference— Animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5 
Secs. 10-109—10-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 10-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this article. 
County animal control board means a board initially consisting of an appointee selected from the county veterinarians, an appointee selected from the county humane society and an appointee selected from the county board of commissioners. Each appointee shall serve a two-year term with the period of each term corresponding to a calendar year and shall be subject to reappointment. During the term of service, an appointee may be removed by the appointing entity with or without cause. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills or seriously injures a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog and is under the control or command of its owner; or no dog may be declared dangerous or vicious if the injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. 
(4)  Because of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to kill, attack, bite or injure other living creatures without provocation: 
a.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places; 
b.  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to unprovoked attack to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
c.  Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or private; 
d.  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose for dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; or 
e.  Any dog owned or harbored, not used for police or military purposes, primarily or in part for the purpose attack or guard training or any dog trained to attack humans; or 
f.  Any dog which endangers or threatens to endanger the safety of the residents of the neighborhood. 
Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure on the owner's property for keeping a dangerous dog or vicious dog in a locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and, in the case of a vicious dog, a secure top, and if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack or has already been classified as dangerous and attacks or bites a human or pet animal or any dog previously determined to be and currently classified as a dangerous dog or was a potentially dangerous dog prior to January 1, 2012, which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in section 10-131 or is maintained in violation of section 10-136. 
Working dog means any dog being used by a law enforcement or military personnel to carry out the law enforcement or military personnel's official duties. No working dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an unlawful act. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-132. - Applicability of provisions. 
Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a potentially dangerous dog in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a dangerous dog or vicious dog in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. The owner of any dog referred to in this section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2019. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-133. - Liability of county; liability of owner. 
Pursuant to state law, under no circumstances shall the county or any employee or official of the county be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-134. - Investigations by animal control officer; owner's responsibilities. 
(a)  Duty to investigate. Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within an animal control officer's jurisdiction, such officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(b)  Owner's responsibilities for dog without current valid rabies vaccination. If a dog, without a current and valid rabies vaccination, bites any person, it shall be the duty of the owner having possession and knowledge of such to arrange for and bear the cost of confinement of such dog in a veterinary hospital for a period of ten days in order to observe the dog for rabies. If the veterinary hospital determines the dog to be rabid, then the dog is to be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. If the dog is found to not be rabid, such dog may be claimed upon proof of a current rabies vaccination and an enclosure deemed proper by the animal control officer. When the ten-day observation period is satisfied, the owner of such dog shall have 72 hours to claim such dog. 
(c)  Owner's responsibilities for dog with current valid rabies vaccination. If a dog, with a current and valid rabies vaccination, bites any person, it shall be the duty of the owner, or person having possession of such dog and knowledge of such bite, to confine such dog for a ten-day period in an enclosure deemed proper by the animal control officer. 
(d)  Removal from enclosure after confinement period generally. A dog, which has not been classified a dangerous or vicious dog, may be removed from the proper enclosure restriction after satisfying the requirements of the ten-day confinement period. 
(e)  Continued confinement for dangerous or vicious dog. The owner of a dog, which has been classified a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, must continue confinement of the dog in a proper enclosure as long as the dog is so classified. 
(f)  Refusal to comply. In the event an owner of a dog fails or refuses to abide by this section, HCACC is hereby authorized and empowered to confiscate such dog, confine it at the expense of such owner at a veterinary hospital for such time it deems necessary in order to observe whether the dog is rabid. In the event the veterinary hospital determines the dog to be rabid, then such dog is to be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-135. - Procedures for classification as dangerous dogs or vicious dogs. 
(a)  Applicability for enforcement purposes. Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(b)  Notice requirement. When HCACC determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, HCACC shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of HCACC's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the animal control board on HCACC's determination within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall also provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, HCACC's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by law enforcement or military personnel to carry out the law enforcement or military personnel's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person, who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under Title 16, Chapter 5 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(c)  Confinement during pendency of hearing or appeal. During the pendency of any hearing or appeal of a determination that a dog is a dangerous or vicious dog as provided for in this section, the owner of such dog shall cause such dog to be confined at the expense of such owner of such dog, at a veterinary hospital, licensed kennel facility or in a proper enclosure deemed suitable by HCACC. 
(d)  Authority of HCACC to confiscate and confine. If an owner fails or refuses to abide by subsection (c) of this section, HCACC is authorized and empowered to confiscate such animal, confine it at the expense of such owner at a veterinary hospital, kennel facility or proper enclosure deemed suitable by HCACC during the pendency of any hearing or appeal mentioned in the subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Hearing. When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the animal control board for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the animal control board shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the animal control board shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify or overrule HCACC's determination. 
(f)  Notice of determination by animal control board. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall mail written notice of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to subsection (h), the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(g)  Retrieval of dog from veterinary hospital. After notification from the board that a dog has been determined to be a dangerous or vicious dog, the owner of such dog shall have three business days within which to pick up his dog from the veterinary hospital, provided the owner is in compliance with all requirements of this chapter. After such notification, the owner may appeal from any adverse decision rendered by the animal control board in such manner as provided by the laws of the state. Written notification of such an appeal shall be given immediately to HCACC. 
(h)  A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided in this section, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012 shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-136. - Requirements for possessing classified dogs. 
(a)  Restraint required. Any dangerous or vicious dog, as determined by HCACC, shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine a dangerous or vicious dog must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animal is within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pens must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures erected to house dangerous or vicious dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the county. All such structures must be in a clean and sanitary condition. If a dangerous dog is abutting property or an easement, a visible barrier must be included so that the dog cannot harass any person who has a right to be on property adjoining owner's property. 
(b)  Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit a dangerous or vicious dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length and in control of an adult. No person shall permit a dangerous or vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless an adult person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all dangerous or vicious dogs on a leash outside the dog's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals. 
(c)  Confinement indoors. No dangerous or vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when the screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(d)  Signs. An owners of a dangerous or vicious dog within the county shall display in a prominent place on his premises a sign easily readable by the public indicating that a dangerous or vicious dog is on the premises. 
(e)  Insurance. An owner of a dangerous or vicious dog must provide proof to HCACC of public liability insurance in a single-incident amount of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such dog. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy of the policy will be made unless ten days' written notice is first given to HCACC. An effective insurance policy with the coverage and in the amounts specified in this section must be maintained by the owner at all times. 
(f)  Euthanasia authorized. If it shall appear to a court that a dog is dangerous or vicious and that the owner of the dog is willfully allowing the dog to run at large, or has violated any of the provisions of this section, the court may, in addition to the usual judgment, order HCACC to take possession of and euthanize the dog. 
(g)  Owner shall enter the dog in a socialization behavior program approved or offered by HCACC. 
(h)  Owner must notify HCACC immediately if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human or pet animal on public or private property and shall notify HCACC within 24 hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(i)  Impoundment. If HCACC has probable cause to believe that a dog determined or acknowledged dangerous or vicious pursuant to this section, and said dog is in violation of this section, said dog may be impounded and held pending the ruling of the court for disposition. The owner of said dog shall be liable for all costs associated with impoundment, including impoundment fees, board fees, medical fee, euthanasia fee and disposal fee. 
(j)  An owner who rents property from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the property owner of the classification and provide proof from landlord granting permission to allow dog to live at the location. 
(k)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the county a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. Subject to the additional requirements of this article, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued if HCACC determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog and will be confirmed and registered with the HCACC; and 
(2)  The owner of the dangerous dog has written permission of the property owner where the dangerous dog will be kept if applicable. 
(l)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued if HCACC determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)  The dog must be sterilized by a license veterinarian and certificate of proof must be presented to HCACC; and 
(5)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $500,000.00 or the maximum amount authorized by state law issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the vicious dog; and 
(6)  The owner of the dangerous dog has written permission of the property owner where the dangerous dog will be kept. 
(m)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify HCACC if the owner is moving out of the county. The owner of a classified dog who moves to the county from another jurisdiction within the State of Georgia shall register the classified dog with the county within ten days of becoming a resident and notify the animal control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog as required in this section within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(n)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or renewal of a certificate of registration by HCACC does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this section are maintained by the owner of a classified dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(o)  HCACC is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Pursuant to state law, law enforcement agencies, including those of the county and the municipalities within the county, will cooperate with HCACC in enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(p)  An annual fee, which may be set from time to time in an amount deemed reasonable by the board of commissioners, in addition to any regular dog licensing fees, shall be paid to register classified dogs as required by this article. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, HCACC shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the classified dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions hereof. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(q)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(r)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person (or to any person residing with such person) who has been convicted (from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence) of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dog fighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in illegal drugs as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-31.1. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-137. - Restrictions on classified dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)  The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed four feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
(2)  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)  The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)  Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or other structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a.  The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed four feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
b.  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate. 
(2)  Unattended with minors. 
(c)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-138. - Confiscation of dogs. 
(a)  A law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(b)  A classified dog shall be immediately confiscated by any animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this article. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this article may recover such dog upon payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or animal control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(d)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-139. - Summons. 
Upon a complaint lodged with HCACC regarding any section of this article, a summons may be issued requiring the owner violating any of the provisions set forth in this article to appear before a court of the county on a day and time certain to answer for the violation of this article. If such violation of this article has not been witnessed by an officer of the county, a subpoena may be issued to the person making the complaint, requiring such person to appear on the day and time of the hearing set by the court to testify on behalf of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-140. - Violations; penalties. 
The owner of a classified dog who violates the applicable provisions of this article or whose classified dog is subject to confiscation hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The owner of a classified dog who is convicted for a violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for up to 60 days or both. The court may impose a sentence of up to six months but shall suspend at least 120 days in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60(a). Upon revocation of any probation imposed by the court, the court may revoke no more than 60 days. For a second conviction hereunder, a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed and for a third offense or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
ARTICLE VI. - APPLICABILITY, ENFORCEMENT AND OTHER PROVISIONS 
(Reserved for use by municipalities pursuant to intergovernmental agreements for the enforcement of the within chapter in the applicable municipality.) 

Sec. 10-141. - Applicability of Habersham County animal ordinance and procedures for purposes of enforcement in municipalities. 
(Reserved for use by municipalities pursuant to intergovernmental agreements for the enforcement of the within chapter in the applicable municipality.) 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-142. - Conflicting ordinances; citation of violations. 
(Reserved for use by municipalities pursuant to intergovernmental agreements for the enforcement of the within chapter in the applicable municipality.) 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 10-143. - Special municipal provisions. 
(Reserved for use by municipalities pursuant to intergovernmental agreements for the enforcement of the within chapter in the applicable municipality. Any city within Habersham County is hereby authorized to add any city specific violations for enforcement by the HCACC and the Habersham County Magistrate Court. Such violations shall be cited as section 10-143 and may include the specific subsection thereof along with the name of the city so long as such provisions do not conflict with other provisions herein.) 
(Ord. of 5-21-2018 , § 1) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 19, 2007, amended Ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14, §§ 14-1, 14-2, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Jan. 4, 1999; and Ord. No. 99-2, adopted Jan. 4, 1999. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Building inspection department. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established a department to be called the building inspection department, and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The qualifications of the building official and other technical code enforcement personnel shall be established by the board. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the building inspection department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this chapter, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the building inspection department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the building inspection department. The records of the building inspection department shall be open to public inspection. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of adjustment and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the county attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building inspection department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the construction board of adjustment and appeals during said year. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-2. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work, but a written order will follow. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentations as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter or the technical codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, do not provide adequate egress, constitute a fire hazard, are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by codes. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this chapter or the technical codes, shall be determined by the construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided that any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided that the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-3. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals which shall consist of five members and two alternates. The board shall appoint the members and alternates. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall consist of five members. Such members shall be composed of individuals serving on the board with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there shall be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry, and one member at large from the public. A member who is also a member of the board shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(2)  Terms. The terms of office of the members shall be staggered so that no more than one-third of the members are appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings shall, at the discretion of the board, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(3)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this chapter, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(4)  Secretary of the members. The building official shall act as secretary at each meeting of the members and shall make a detailed record of all proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for any decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(c)  Powers. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (d) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this chapter to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other buildings, structures or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(3)  Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the members may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(5)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeal to a shorter period. 
(6)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the members shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the members reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this chapter, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant, and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the members shall be final, subject however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. The members shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedures, not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The member shall meet on call of the chairman of the construction board. The members shall meet within 30 calendar days after a notice of appeal has been received. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-4. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-5. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the County of Habersham, Georgia, find and declare that within the unincorporated areas of the County of Habersham there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as mandated by law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the County of Habersham or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the County of Habersham where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the county finds that there exist in the county dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this section shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A § 41-2-7 exist within the County of Habersham, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 1-9-2012(1), § 1 ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 9, 2012 , supplied provisions to be added to this Code as § 14-3. In order to preserve the existing numbering system, at the discretion of the editor, this section has been redesignated as § 14-5 to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 14-6. - Nuisance abatement procedures. 
(a)  Continued use of other laws and ordinances. It is the intent of the board of commissioners that nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local enabling Act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this section shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Applicable codes means (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of the County of Habersham, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this section adopted under [O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8, and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this section or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(c)  Duties of owners' appointment of public officer procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(1)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the county, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
(2)  The board of commissioners of the County of Habersham appoint or designate the building department director, county fire marshall, county fire chief, county law enforcement, and his/her designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this section; 
(3)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the county of charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held, not less that 15 days, nor more than 45 days, after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
(4)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order; 
a.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property, 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41, of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
(5)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, and improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(6)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the county are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
(7)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
a.  The lien provided for in paragraph (7) of subsection (c) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Habersham County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Habersham County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection real property ad valorem tax, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of County of Habersham. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
b.  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of Habersham County. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
c.  The county may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
d.  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
e.  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. 
f.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(d)  Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structured defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time by adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(e)  Powers of public officers. The public officer(s) designated in this section shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the section; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the section to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(f)  Service of complaints. 
(1)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this section shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
a.  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
b.  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
c.  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(2)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriffs advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(4)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (6) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(5)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of the protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(6)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (f)(3), and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(7)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(8)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
( Ord. of 1-9-2012(2), § 1 ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 9, 2012 , supplied provisions to be added to this Code as § 14-4. In order to preserve the existing numbering system of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as § 14-6 to read as set out herein. 
Secs. 14-7—14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 14-41. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the desire of the board to adopt, in all respects, the various standard codes relating to amusement devices, building, fire prevention, electrical installations, gas, grading, mechanical, plumbing, and swimming pools. The adoption of these standard codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the county relating to construction and maintenance of buildings within the unincorporated areas of the county and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. The standard codes listed in this article are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully. 
(b)  Any matters in said standard codes which are contrary to existing ordinances of the county shall prevail. 
(c)  Any references in the standard codes made to the duties of certain officials named therein shall be the duty of the designated official of the county who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said standard code and shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the standard code. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-42. - Minimum standard codes for construction. 
(a)  The Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for construction promote the life, health, safety and general welfare of all citizens. The standard codes are also designed to protect the property of all citizens. 
(b)  It is the desire of the board to adopt and enforce, in all respects, the various Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for construction. 
(c)  It is the intent of the county to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs from time to time: 
Standard Building Code (International Building Code) current edition 
Standard Fire Prevention Code (International Fire Code) current edition 
Standard Gas Code (International Fuel Gas Code) current edition 
Standard Mechanical Code (International Mechanical Code) current edition 
Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code) current edition 
CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code (International Residential Code) current edition 
International Energy Conservation Code current edition 
National Electrical Code, 2005 edition 
(d)  The appendices of said standard codes, as adopted and amended by the International Codes Council and the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-43. - Enforcement of standard codes. 
(a)  It is the desire of the board to adopt and enforce, in all respects, the various state minimum standard codes. Local jurisdiction is required to adopt administrative procedures in order to enforce the standard codes by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 
(b)  The board hereby adopts the administrative procedures outlined in this chapter for enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction in the county. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-44. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as heretofore adopted. Hereinafter, all of the standard codes heretofore adopted shall be referenced as the "technical codes," as may be adopted by the state or local jurisdiction. 
(b)  Code remedial. 
(1)  Generally. The technical codes are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are; public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as the "service systems." 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this chapter, except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection and permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this chapter shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The county, nor any employee thereof, shall not be liable in tort for damages for any defects or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy of such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code, (International Building Code) as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, (International Fuel Gas Code) as amended, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this chapter. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, (International Mechanical Code) as amended, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related items, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code, (International Plumbing Code) as amended, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewer system. 
(7)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, (International Fire Code) as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water, heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)  CABO One- and Two-Family Dwellings. The provisions of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, (International Residential Code) as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every one- and two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(d)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this chapter shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(e)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(f)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provision shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(g)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-45. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to an existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes, as required by the building official. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Note— Chapter 34 of the International Building Code covers existing buildings. 
Sec. 14-46. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation and moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings, when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, or relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Secs. 14-47—14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 14-81. - Application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Exception. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter; 
(5)  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; and 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(c)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(d)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(e)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. The application shall indicate the proposed the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(f)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months (change to 180 days) after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 90 days each, may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-82. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer, legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering, and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E, and I occupancies; 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high; and 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m2) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(d)  Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(e)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate, in sufficient detail, how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(f)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor showing seal and signature on the survey. 
(g)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building, and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-83. - [Building official to review applications.] 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine, or cause to be examined, each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction, and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such an affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-84. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and, pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted, nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building, where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane or for the placing on any lot or premises of any such building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 32 of the Standard (International) Building Code. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-85. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state and local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the building official with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-86. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work, and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this chapter. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for a period not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be approved in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit, or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been completed in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-87. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed on Appendix 1, attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas system has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee, in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit in accordance with the fee schedules set by the board shall be paid, as required, at the time of filing the application. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of a building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(f)  Refund. If, within 30 days of issuance of a permit, the permit is withdrawn by the applicant, the applicant may receive a refund of 75 percent of the permit fee. At any time that work commences under a permit, there will be no refund. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Secs. 14-88—14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 14-111. - Existing building inspections. 
Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems from time to time during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and all violations of the technical codes, if any. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-112. - Manufacturers and fabricators. 
When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make or cause to be made an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and all violations of the technical codes, if any. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-113. - Inspection service. 
The building official may make or cause to be made the inspections required in section 14-116. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-114. - Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. 
The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals, all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-115. - Posting of permit. 
Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such a position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such a position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-116. - Required inspections. 
The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation inspections: To be made after trenches are excavated, forms erected, a minimum of two #4 reinforcement bars properly tied and set on chairs continuous in footing. Poured walls are to be inspected when steel is placed and tied and forms are set prior to placing concrete. Block walls are to be inspected when erected and prior to placing concrete fill, if required. Pier footings will be not less than eight inches in thickness. All grade stakes shall be metal. 
b.  Temporary electrical service: All temporary services will be permitted separately and inspected upon completion. Any overhead service will be installed on not less than a six-inch pole allowing a minimum of ten feet of clearance. GFI protection to personnel must be maintained. 
c.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
d.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected and protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. All rough-in boxes and fixture back boxes are to be made up. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping is installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.  Required tests: All plumbing systems shall be tested as required in section 312 of the International Plumbing Code. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after the trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping is installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, and bracing is in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with the reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To be made to verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To be made to verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation and correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-117. - Written release. 
Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing inspections. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-118. - Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. 
Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, or plumbing, mechanical and electrical work of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-119. - Plaster fire protection. 
In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Secs. 14-120—14-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 14-151. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied, or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building, until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. When necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and, for certain types of permits, is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect (utilities to) a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-152. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or, for certain types of permits, a certificate of completion, is issued. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize a temporary connection of a building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes in case of emergency, where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-153. - Posting of floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes by a specific business when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record in the building inspection department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design, which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building, in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-154. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
( Ord. of 2-19-2007, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESS TAXATION, LICENSING AND REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 16, 2015 , amended Ch. 18 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-115, pertained to businesses, and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 21, 2005, § 2(50-62—50-68); an ordinance adopted Aug. 20, 2012(1), § 1; an ordinance adopted Aug. 20, 2012(2), §§ 1—22; and an ordinance adopted Aug. 20, 2012(3), §§ 1—25. The ordinance adopted Mar. 16, 2015 , §§ 1—7, set out provisions to be numbered §§ 18-101—18-725. In order to maintain the established style of the Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 18-1—18-325 to read as set out herein. 

ARTICLE I. - BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 18-1. - Payment of tax required; applicability; display of license. 
As of March 1, 2015 and for each calendar year thereafter beginning January 1, 2016, each person engaged in or commencing any business, trade, profession or occupation in the unincorporated area of Habersham County, Georgia or, in the case of an out of state business with no location in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; and any applicable business license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the tax payer has a permanent business location in Habersham County. If the tax payer has no permanent business location in Habersham County, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the county manager or his designee, license inspector, code enforcement officer or the sheriff of Habersham County, Georgia or any of his deputies, upon his or their request. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-101) ) 
Sec. 18-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  "Habersham County, Georgia" as used herein shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of Habersham County, Georgia; wherever the term "county" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of Habersham County, Georgia. 
(b)  As used herein the following terms shall apply: 
Administrative fee means a base component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Board of commissioners means the governing body of Habersham County, Georgia, and shall also include the terms "board" and "board of commissioners of Habersham County." 
Business means any person who, in Habersham County, engages in, causes to be engaged in or represents himself or herself to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or indirectly. This shall include any person advertising by any means, including but not limited to signs, cards, circulars, newspapers, etc., that he or she is engaged in a business of any kind. 
Business license means the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee, payment of the regulatory fee, if any, and the payment of the occupation tax. Only one business license certificate shall be issued, which shall demonstrate that the fees and tax have been paid. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee. 
(a)  Any individual, owner, family member or relative who works 40 hours per week and whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer who withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099, shall be counted as an employee. Computation of employees who work less than 40 hours to produce full time equivalents is set out in subsection 18-5(b). For purposes of this chapter, each business will have a minimum of one employee. 
(b)  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2. 
Engaged in business or carrying on business means doing or performing any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any goods or services for sale primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, or renting real or personal property; all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within Habersham County. 
Flea markets as used herein shall mean a retail sales operation wherein one or more spaces are made available from which goods or wares are sold. 
Licensee means the person issued the license, his authorized employee in charge of the business of the licensee, or the person operating the business of the licensee. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Nonprofit organization means a corporation, club or group exempt from income taxation under the Internal Revenue Code and regulations thereunder as now existing or as hereafter amended, or regulations promulgated by the Secretary of State of Georgia, now existing or as hereafter amended. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person, wherever used in this article, shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of a profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Registration, business registration, and business tax registration are all synonymous with "business license" and shall mean the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee, the regulatory fee, if any, and the occupation tax, if applicable. Only one business license certificate shall be issued, which shall demonstrate that the fees and tax have been paid. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or a registration fee. development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Yard sale means sales of used household belongings by an individual at his principal residence or by a group of individuals combining such items for a group yard sale at one of their principal residences. Such sales may be held no more than four times in a calendar year, with each individual sale lasting no more than three consecutive days, and shall be exempt from the fee requirements of this chapter. All merchandise must be the property of the person(s) holding the sale and not be purchased for the purpose of resale. The term also includes garage sales, basement sales, or other similar usage. All other sales of merchandise are considered retail sales, and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-102) ) 
Sec. 18-3. - Purpose and scope of occupation tax. 
(a)  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the occupation tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession which is classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18). 
(b)  The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. 
(c)  All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinances. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-103) ) 
Sec. 18-4. - Administrative fee and regulatory fee structure; tax structure. 
(a)  A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee of $25.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will only be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those businesses that require an application on an annual basis, and on those businesses which will require an application for the initial business license for the purpose of regulating the business in reference to character checks, or other verification that is necessary to legally permit operation of that business for the current licensing year. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(1)  Classifying businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations according to whether such businesses and practitioners have a location within the unincorporated area of Habersham County and imposing and collecting differential regulatory fees on the basis of such a classification is prohibited. 
(2)  The regulatory fee is not a general revenue producing component of the license fee structure, and must reflect approximately the actual reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed. 
(c)  Regulatory fees authorized by this chapter shall be paid before commencing business or the practice of a profession as a condition precedent for transacting business or practicing a profession. 
(d)  Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health or safety of one or more individuals. 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the local government within two business days after commencing business or practice of a profession. 
(e)  Regulatory fees and administrative fees may not be prorated on businesses that close, dissolve, are sold or relocate outside unincorporated Habersham County, or otherwise cease to operate in unincorporated Habersham County, prior to the expiration of the license on December 31 of each calendar year. 
(f)  Any and all regulatory and/or administrative fees paid shall be non-refundable after the fact. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-104) ) 
Sec. 18-5. - Occupation tax levied; amount. 
(a)  An occupation tax is levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within unincorporated areas of Habersham County, Georgia, and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: The tax shall be levied on the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  The occupation tax shall be determined according to the number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that, for the purpose of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. The occupation tax shall be levied as set forth in the occupation tax fee schedule attached to the ordinance from which this chapter derives as Exhibit "A", which fee schedule shall be formulated from time to time by the board of commissioners and shall be maintained for public inspection by the county clerk. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-105) ) 
Sec. 18-6. - Occupation tax restrictions; transfer of business license. 
(a)  Habersham County shall not require an additional occupational tax on those businesses that have paid the occupation tax in other localities or states on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in Georgia, provided that those businesses or practitioners were taxed in full compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-14, and show proof of payment of the occupation tax. 
(b)  Habersham County shall not require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the unincorporated areas of Habersham County, Georgia, and sell property inside the unincorporated areas of Habersham County, Georgia. 
(c)  The business license shall not be transferable to another person, firm or corporation in the same location. The business license may be transferred from one location to another provided the ownership of the business remains the same and application is made hereunder in advance of re-location. Otherwise, a new application and license will be necessary. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-106) ) 
Sec. 18-7. - Payment of occupation tax by businesses with no location in state. 
If not exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7(f), the board of commissioners of Habersham County, Georgia, requires a registration and the assessment of an occupation tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia providing the largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is done or performed in the unincorporated area of Habersham County, and the business or practitioner has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the unincorporated area of Habersham County, Georgia, for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-107) ) 
Sec. 18-8. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration/business license certificate of each business operated in the county shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the business license department and that line of business being noted by the business license department upon the business license certificate which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-108) ) 
Sec. 18-9. - Each location considered separate business. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one store or location, each store or location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax; however, no more than one occupation tax shall be required for each location. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-109) ) 
Sec. 18-10. - Occupation tax on professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect each calendar year as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as provided in [section 18-5] of this chapter. 
(2)  A fee of $300.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee shall include all persons in the business who qualify as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-110) ) 
Sec. 18-11. - Exemption for practitioners exclusively practicing for government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-111) ) 
Sec. 18-12. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple locations. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the county where the employees can be allocated to each location, the number of employees used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those employees attributed to each county location. In the case of an employee who works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county, the municipal corporation or county in which the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year shall be authorized to count the individual as an employee who is employed within the local government's geographic jurisdiction for purposes of occupation tax. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the county the following: 
(1)  Payroll and personnel records necessary to allocate the number of employees of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's number of employees by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the county and taxation is levied for a criteria other than number of employees in the other local government's jurisdiction, the county shall not assess more than the allotted share of number of employees for the local operation. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-112) ) 
Sec. 18-13. - Miscellaneous exemptions. 
No occupation tax, regulatory fee or administrative fee shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization; 
(2)  Veterans with a ten percent or greater disability, upon presentation of a certificate of exemption from the state director of veterans services; 
(3)  Blind persons, upon presentation of a certificate of exemption from the judge of probate court of Habersham County; 
(4)  Such other businesses as are exempt by federal or state statute; 
(5)  Agricultural production of crops and livestock, except poultry hatcheries, forestry and fishing, and hunting and trapping; 
(6)  Sale of produce, fruits and vegetables grown by the seller when the point of sale is on the property where grown; 
(7)  The builder of a single home or outbuilding for his own use. This exemption does not extend to subcontractors or persons acting in a construction management capacity; 
(8)  Service performed by a unit of government, but not a private contractor for a unit of government. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-113) ) 
Sec. 18-14. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 by the state license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper state licensure before the county business license may be issued. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-114) ) 
Sec. 18-15. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificate of qualification, certificates of competency, certificate of occupancy, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business license, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the business license is issued. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-115) ) 
Sec. 18-16. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain registration. 
All persons subject to the occupation taxes provided in this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business prescribed in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a business license. Every person commencing business in Habersham County after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation subject to this chapter without first having so obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties provided herein, and, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 18-18 of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-116) ) 
Sec. 18-17. - Delinquent fees or tax; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. If any fees or occupation tax due under this chapter remain due and unpaid for 30 days from their due date, the person liable for the fees or tax shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of $2.00 per month until paid in full beginning on the first of the next month following the month in which the fees and tax became due. Said penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, the administrative fee and the regulatory fee, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. On renewal registrations, applicable penalties and interest fees shall be collected based on the annual due date of January 1. 
(b)  The business license herein provided for shall be issued by the county manager or his designee, and, if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a business license shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation subject to this chapter, without having first obtained said business license, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 18-18 below. 
(c)  In addition to the above remedies, the county manager or his designee may proceed to direct the Habersham County Code Enforcement Officer or the Habersham County Sheriff to collect such fee or tax in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-117) ) 
Sec. 18-18. - Violation of chapter; penalty. 
(a)  In addition to other remedies available to the county for the collection of special taxes, occupation taxes and regulatory fees due the county from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the officer charged with the collection of the tax or fee shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: 
(1)  The amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due. 
(2)  Any penalty imposed by subsection 18-17(a) of the Official Code of Habersham County, Georgia. 
(b)  The court of competent jurisdiction (Habersham County Magistrate Court) for the enforcement of ordinances of the local government which has levied the tax or imposed the fee may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee. Such a civil fine shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(c)  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or State Court of Habersham County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Habersham County, Georgia for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-118) ) 
Sec. 18-19. - Business inspectors. 
The Habersham County code enforcement officer and any duly designated assistants or their successors shall be classified as deputy business inspectors with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-119) ) 
Sec. 18-20. - Businesses not covered by chapter. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. chapter 3 of title 46. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-120) ) 
Sec. 18-21. - Occupation tax inapplicable where levy prohibited or exempted by law. 
This occupation tax is not levied upon the number of employees of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-121) ) 
Sec. 18-22. - Date when occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be due and payable to the said county, at the business license office of the county on January 1 each year, and delinquent if not paid within 30 days from the due date. In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 1, in any year, the tax shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date of the commencement of the business. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-122) ) 
Sec. 18-23. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the unincorporated area of Habersham County in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from the commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid as provided in section 18-5. When any person commences business on or after July 1, in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year and shall be due and payable within 30 days from the commencement of the business. The administrative fee and the regulatory fee shall not be reduced. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-123) ) 
Sec. 18-24. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case, the county manager or his designee, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business upon which the applications are made. The county manager or his designee shall have the right to inspect the books or records of the business for which the application was made in the county, and upon demand of the county manager or his designee such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the business license currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in Habersham County, Georgia, for examination by the county manager or his designee at his discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional one percent of the deficiency for each month or fraction thereof that the deficiency was due and unpaid shall be assessed. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-124) ) 
Sec. 18-25. - Revocation of business license for failure to pay tax, file returns, or permit inspection of books. 
Except for a person whose qualifications to practice his or her profession are determined by the general laws of the State of Georgia, upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent as above provided, any business license granted by the county under this chapter permitting the owner of said business to do business in the county for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business license shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-125) ) 
Sec. 18-26. - Effect of noncompliance; continuing in business after business license revocation. 
Any person, or their manager, agent or employee, who does business in the county after the business license for said business has been revoked as herein provided; any person, or their manager, agent or employee, who is hereby required to make returns showing the number of employees and who fails to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the correct information, or who shall make false returns; and any person, or their manager, agent or employee, who refuses to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officer(s), agent(s), employee(s) or representative(s) of the county request such inspection, during normal business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 18-18 of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-126) ) 
Sec. 18-27. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the tax commissioner of Habersham County, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax, all as provided by the resolutions of Habersham County, Georgia, and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff of Habersham County upon the property of the person liable for said tax, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the resolutions of Habersham County and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the resolutions of Habersham County and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the tax commissioner of Habersham County, Georgia, against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-127) ) 
Sec. 18-28. - Amendments. 
Subject to the provisions of section 18-32, this chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the board of commissioners to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the county of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-103) ) 
Sec. 18-29. - Payment of tax or assessment levied under prior ordinance or resolution. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance or resolution heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance or resolution have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances and/or resolutions heretofore and hereafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances or resolutions, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or resolution, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-129) ) 
Sec. 18-30. - Enforcement of chapter. 
It is hereby made the duty of the county manager or his designee, the Habersham County Code Enforcement Officer, and the Habersham County Sheriff's Department to see that the provisions of this chapter relating to business occupation taxes and regulations are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the magistrate court of Habersham County or the state court of Habersham County. It is hereby made the further duty of the county manager or his designee, the Habersham County Code Enforcement Officer and/or the sheriff, and their designees and assistants, to inspect all business licenses issued by the county, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary, to determine whether the business license held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-130) ) 
Sec. 18-31. - Provisions of chapter to remain in effect until amended by board of commissioners. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the board of commissioners. All provisions hereof relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-131) ) 
Sec. 18-32. - Public hearing required before adoption of tax. 
The board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any resolution which will affect the occupation tax as set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-132) ) 
Sec. 18-33. - Authority to establish exemption or reduction in tax. 
(a)  The board of commissioners may by subsequent resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed by one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. 
(b)  Exemptions or reductions in occupation tax pursuant to subsection (a) of this section may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Absolute dollar amount limitations on the total amount of tax, either by criterion or combination of criteria used for classification or for businesses and practitioners, provided that a jurisdiction which provides an absolute dollar amount limitation on the total amount of tax shall levy and collect such maximum tax only once on each business entity or practitioner even if a business or practitioner has more than one office or location within the jurisdiction; 
(2)  Tax credits for the retention or creation of jobs, or for jobs of a specific description, including but not limited to entry level jobs or jobs with compensation of a specified range; 
(3)  Tax credits for other taxes paid to the local government, including but not limited to ad valorem taxes; 
(4)  A tax exemption or a lower rate of taxation for sales to customers outside the jurisdiction of Habersham County; 
(5)  A credit or rebate to businesses or practitioners who paid occupation taxes in the previous year; 
(6)  A limitation on the dollar or percentage amount of increase in tax from a base year to a subsequent year, provided that the limitation is made applicable to new businesses or practitioners by imputing the number of employees of the subsequent year to the base year in calculating tax for the base year, tax for the subsequent year and the increase in tax; and 
(7)  A credit or reduction as an adjustment for seasonal fluctuations in the number of employees, other fluctuations in the number of employees, increases or decreases in the number of employees, or temporary employees. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-133) ) 
Sec. 18-34. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-134) ) 
Sec. 18-35. - Public hearing on use of increased revenue. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year in Habersham County, one or more public hearings shall be held by the board of commissioners of Habersham County as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 1(18-135) ) 
Secs. 18-36—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Regulatory fee certificate or business license means a document issued by the county acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permits fees or by any other name, which are required by the county to approximate the cost of regulatory activity by the county. The regulatory fee does not include an administrative fee or registration fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) other costs or conditions of zoning or land development or local alcoholic beverage license fees authorized by Title 2 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-201) ) 
Sec. 18-62. - General authority to impose regulatory fees. 
(a)  Business regulatory fees shall be levied, assessed, collected and paid on and by those individuals, firms or corporations doing business or practicing a trade in the unincorporated area of Habersham County, Georgia in such sums and in such categories as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b) and in section 18-83 of this article. The fees and taxes imposed herein and the categories of business and trade upon which such fees and taxes are imposed may be modified or changed by subsequent resolution of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the county on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the county, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any county law enforcement officer or other code enforcement officer charged with enforcing this article upon request. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-202) ) 
Sec. 18-63. - Regulatory fee exemptions. 
The following groups shall be exempt from paying regulatory fees: 
(1)  Disabled veterans of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the United States armed forces was involved, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
(2)  Blind persons; 
(3)  Veterans of peacetime service in the United States armed forces who have a disability that was incurred during the time of service; 
(4)  A local board of education; 
(5)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization or vendor acting pursuant to a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair; 
(6)  Any other business or practitioners of professions and occupations which local governments are not authorized to subject to regulatory fees. Examples of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.  Lawyers; 
b.  Physicians licensed under Article 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
c.  Osteopaths licensed under Article 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
d.  Chiropractors; 
e.  Podiatrists; 
f.  Dentists; 
g.  Optometrists; 
h.  Psychologists; 
i.  Veterinarians; 
j.  Landscape architects; 
k.  Land surveyors; 
l.  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
m.  Public accountants; 
n.  Embalmers; 
o.  Funeral directors; 
p.  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers; 
q.  Architects; 
r..  Marriage and family therapists, social workers and professional counselors; 
s.  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622; 
t.  Owners or operators of bona fide coin operated amusement machines as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9; 
u.  Merchants or dealers as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
v.  Any other business, profession or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law unless the state law regulating such business, profession or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-203) ) 
Sec. 18-64. - Date due; penalty and interest. 
(a)  Regulatory fees authorized by this article shall be paid before commencing business or the practice of a profession as a condition precedent for transacting business or practicing a profession. 
(b)  Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health and safety of one or more individuals; 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the local government within 30 business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession. 
(c)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due, shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the fee due and interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-204) ) 
Sec. 18-65. - Business license transfer. 
The business license shall not be transferable to another person, firm or corporation in the same location. The business license may be transferred from one business location to another provided the ownership of the business remains the same and application is made hereunder for approval of such new location prior to re-location. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-205) ) 
Sec. 18-66. - Business license application; investigation; action by county manager or his designee; restrictions. 
All applications for a business license shall be on forms prepared by the county manager or his designee. 
(1)  The application shall include: 
a.  The name of the business; 
b.  The location of the business; 
c.  The mailing address of the business; 
d.  The name and address of the owner of the business and, if a corporation, the name of the person responsible for corporate affairs in unincorporated Habersham County; 
e.  The name of the manager at the business location; 
f.  The nature of the business or businesses; 
g.  The mapping district classification of the premises to be occupied; and 
h.  Such other information as may be required to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Upon completion of the application and the payment of the fees, the county manager or his designee shall make such investigations and require such reports as necessary to carry out this article. Upon receipt of the necessary reports and investigations, the county manager or his designee shall either issue the business license or refer the application to the board of commissioners. If the application is referred to the board of commissioners, the applicant shall be notified in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(3)  The limited hours of operation, restrictions and other special circumstances pertaining to the operation of a business licensed by the county shall be entered directly onto the business license before the same is issued and delivered over to the business license applicant. 
(4)  Business owner must be a citizen of the United States or a legal alien. In the case of a legal alien, the owner must furnish current alien registration card or picture identification and documentation from the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service authorizing the legal alien to work in the United States. 
(5)  All business owners must be 18 years of age when applying for a business license. 
(6)  All sole proprietor business owners must show a photo ID when applying for a business license. If the ownership of the business is a partnership, then photo ID must be provided on all partners associated with the business. If the ownership of the business is a corporation or LLC, then ID must be provided on the president, CEO or managing member of the business as is indicated by the Georgia Secretary of State's office. Businesses who indicate ownership by a corporation or LLC must additionally provide evidence that the corporation is registered with the Georgia Secretary of State's office and that the corporation is current and in compliance with the Georgia Secretary of State's office. All foreign corporations must also register with the Georgia Secretary of State's office. 
(7)  All delinquent and current state and county ad valorem taxes assessed against the business, whether such business is a proprietorship, general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability/limited partnership, limited liability company or corporation, shall be paid prior to the issuance of a business license. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-206) ) 
Sec. 18-67. - Issuance of business license by board of commissioners. 
Whenever an application is referred to the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners shall make such investigation and hold such hearings as it shall determine. The board of commissioners may issue the business license, issue the business license with conditions or deny the business license, as necessary, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare and security of the county. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-207) ) 
Sec. 18-68. - Special requirements for licensing of certain businesses. 
(a)  The power to issue a business license to a tourist camp, cabin camp, tourist house, road house, public dance hall or similar establishment as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 43-21-50 and 31-28-1 shall be reserved specifically to the board of commissioners. Licenses issued to astrologers, clairvoyants, fortune tellers, palmists, phrenologists and related occupations shall also be reserved by the board of commissioner. 
(b)  The power to issue a business license for the operation of a flea market, outdoor exhibition, outdoor performance, outdoor musical festival or other places of outdoor public assembly shall be reserved specifically for the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall make such investigations and hold such hearings as necessary to assess the impact of the businesses set forth in this section upon the health, safety and general welfare and security of the county. The application for a business license for any of the businesses set forth in this section shall set forth conclusive evidence: 
(1)  That the applicant shall provide sufficient security people, at the expense of the applicant, to control the public and enforce all laws within the area occupied by the business and/or event; 
(2)  That the applicant shall provide adequate emergency medical facilities, at the expense of the applicant, to provide sufficient emergency medical care for members of the public who patronize the business and/or event; 
(3)  That the applicant shall provide adequate maintenance personnel to clean the area occupied by the business as well as those areas which are adjacent to the area occupied by the business and which are littered as a result of the business, event and/or its patrons; 
(4)  That a study has been prepared establishing the adequacy of the business facility for the use as applied for and further establishing the adequacy of the public roads to handle the access to the business facility for the number of anticipated patrons; 
(5)  That the applicant shall provide adequate toilet facilities such that a minimum of one toilet fixture per 100 patrons is provided; 
(6)  That the applicant shall provide adequate drinking water for the members of the public who patronize the business and/or event. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may issue the business license, issue the business license with conditions or deny the business license as necessary, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare and security of the county. 
(e)  The failure of the applicant for a business license for a business set forth in this section to make the required application in sufficient time for the board of commissioners to consider the application at two successive regular meetings of said board of commissioners prior to the beginning of the operation of the business shall result in the automatic denial of the business license; provided, however, that a renewal of a business license for a business set forth in this section may be considered and acted upon in one regular meeting if no objections to the issuance of the renewal business license are raised. However, if any objections are raised, the renewal must be considered at two successive regular meetings of the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Businesses permitted under this section shall not operate on Sundays between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 (noon), ending activity at 7:00 p.m. on Sundays and at midnight on other nights. (This does not apply to non-noisemaking activity.) 
(g)  The specifically enumerated requirements set forth in subsections (c)(1) through (c)(6) of this section shall not apply to any business and/or event when the anticipated attendance is less than 1,000 people. 
(h)  (1)  Subject to the provisions of this section, the board of commissioners may issue a special events business license to an applicant who intends to conduct one or more outdoor exhibitions, outdoor performances, outdoor musical festivals or other events involving an outdoor public assembly. The procedure for the issuance of the business license shall be the same as the procedure for the issuance of other business licenses under this section. The applicant for a special events business license shall include in his application a list of the events he anticipates conducting during the term of the business license. 
(2)  Prior to conducting an event, a special events business licensee must notify the county manager or his designee in writing of the event. The county manager or his designee will determine whether the planned event is of a character or type similar to those listed in the licensee's application. In making this determination, the county manager or his designee shall consider the number of persons expected to attend, the noise or other disruptions associated with the event, the impact on the area surrounding the licensed premises, the adequacy of facilities (medical, toilets, drinking water, etc.) at the licensed premises and any and all other matters relevant to the determination. Failure to have listed the specific planned event on the application does not preclude the county manager or his designee from determining that the planned event is of a same or similar character to those listed on the application. If the county manager or his designee determines that the event is of a same or similar character to those listed on the application, he will authorize the event. If the county manager or his designee determines that the event is not of a same or similar character to those listed on the application, he will deny the licensee the authority to conduct the event. If the county manager or his designee is unable to make a determination, he will refer the matter to the board of commissioners, who will review the matter and make a decision at the first regular meeting following referral of the matter to them. If the county manager or his designee makes a determination adverse to the licensee, the licensee may request that the matter be referred to the board of commissioners and the board of commissioners will review the matter and make a decision at the first regular meeting following referral of the matter to them. 
(3)  The special events business license shall only authorize events by the licensee at the licensed premises. The business license shall not authorize events by persons renting or leasing the licensed premises from the licensee. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-208) ) 
Sec. 18-69. - Grounds for denial of business license. 
The board of commissioners may deny a business license to any business engaged in an unlawful activity or operated in such a manner as to violate lawful ordinances or resolutions adopted by the board of commissioners of the county. Unlawful activity shall include, but not be limited to, activities in violation of the zoning regulations and the electrical, health, building and fire codes of the county. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-209) ) 
Sec. 18-70. - Going-out-of-business sales and similar sales. 
(a)  All persons shall secure from the county a special business license pursuant to the provisions of this section before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds: 
(1)  Going-out-of-business sales; 
(2)  Removal of business sales; or 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
(2)  Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjustors, adjustment, alteration, assignee's, bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustee's, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out, forced out-of-business, insolvent's last days, lease expire, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's quitting business and other like sales. 
(3)  Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this section. 
(4)  Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the county or will then continue business from other existing locations in the county. 
(c)  A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this section shall make a written application to the county, setting forth and containing the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale; 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold, the price therefor and, if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; 
(3)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held; 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy; 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement; 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. Such inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
a.  All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
b.  Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within ten days before the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character. 
(d)  Any applicant for a business license under this section shall submit to the county a business regulatory fee of $100.00 with his application. 
(e)  Any person who has not been the owner of the business advertised or described in the application for a business license under this section for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a business license except upon the approval of the county commissioners; provided that, upon the death of a person doing business in this county, his heirs, devises or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a business license under this section. 
(f)  Where a person applying for a business license under this section operates more than one place of business, the business license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application. No other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale. Nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(g)  A business license issued under this section shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than three calendar months following the issuance thereof; provided that a longer period shall be designated by the county commission upon good cause shown, but not to exceed 30 additional days. 
(h)  A business license issued under this section shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(i)  Any business license provided for or by this section shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(j)  Upon being issued a business license under this section for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the county all other business licenses he may hold at the time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a business license under this section. 
(k)  Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this section, at the location stated in the application, within one year last past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license, except upon the approval of the county commission. 
(l)  A business license issued under this section shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(m)  A licensee under this section shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license; 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising; 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto; 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request; and 
(5)  Segregate non-inventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and out of the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
(n)  It is unlawful for any person to advertise by newspapers, radio, posters or otherwise and represent that he is operating, offering or maintaining fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, closing-out or going-out-of-business sales and similar businesses, whereby the public is led to believe that it is being offered merchandise at reduced rates on account of fire, wrecks, bankruptcies, closing out or discontinuance of business, when in fact such sales are not bona fide, but are fakes and frauds, and the advertisement and representations are untrue and false. 
(o)  It is unlawful for any person to advertise by sign, posters, handbills or otherwise that he or any business entity is operating, offering or maintaining fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, closing-out or going-out-of-business sales or similar sales for more than a four-month period. In the event such advertising is continued for a period of time in excess of four-months, such shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section; provided, however, any individual or business entity having just cause or reason requiring the extension of such sales for more than the four-month period may, prior to expiration of the four-month period, petition the county commission for a continuance of time within which to complete such sales, and the county commission, in its discretion, upon a showing of good cause, may but shall not be required to grant an extension of time. The commission's decision on whether or not to grant such additional time for the advertising and the conducting of the sales shall be final. 
(p)  It is also unlawful for any person, conducting any sale, except judicial sales, whether the same is by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise which are claimed to be or have been in or damaged by fire, or which are claimed to be or have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been or which are claimed to be the property of any bankrupt person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment, or is or has been in voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale in such sale any goods, wares or merchandise not so affected or damaged or to add to or to permit to be added to or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or any building in the county, for the purpose of adding to such goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected and which are on hand in any such store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at such sale. 
(q)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction; or 
(4)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this section have not been complied with. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-210) ) 
Sec. 18-71. - Failure to pay regulatory fee; collection of delinquent fees. 
Any person, firm or corporation required to pay a regulatory fee and who fails to do so during the required period of collection shall be deemed to be delinquent. When any fee becomes delinquent under this article, collection and penalties shall be as provided for hereinafter. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-211) ) 
Sec. 18-72. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the code enforcement officer to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the magistrate court. The code enforcement officer may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for fees which are due and owing any penalty and interest imposed by this article. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes or fees which are due and owing, penalties or interest. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the code enforcement officer of the county upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the county and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the county and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the fee or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the county and the laws of the state in regard to executions. 
(c)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make available truthful and accurate information the county requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such regulatory fee shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1000.00 and/or 90 days incarceration. 
(d)  All persons subject to the regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining business for such person, business or practitioner shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain the required certificate or make a return for or pay the applicable regulatory fee. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-212) ) 
Sec. 18-73. - Grounds for revocation of business license. 
The board of commissioners shall have the right, after notice and hearing, to revoke any business license issued hereunder on the following grounds: 
(1)  Violation of this article. 
(2)  a.  Violation of other laws and resolutions of the county pertaining to the carrying on of such business as would affect the health, safety, and welfare of the public or the county. 
b.  Violation of a law of the United States or the State of Georgia, which affects the public health, welfare and safety. 
(3)  Fraudulent business practices. 
(4)  Failure of a licensee for a business which is so required by Section 18-68 to provide the following enumerated items: 
a.  Sufficient security people, at the expense of the licensee, to control the public and enforce all laws within the area occupied by the business and/or event. 
b.  Adequate emergency medical facilities, at the expense of the licensee, to provide sufficient emergency medical care for members of the public who patronize his business and/or event. 
c.  Adequate maintenance personnel to clean the area occupied by the business as well as those areas which are adjacent to the area occupied by the business and which are littered as a result of the business, event, and/or its patrons. 
d.  Adequate toilet facilities such that a minimum of one toilet facility per 100 patrons is provided. 
e.  Adequate drinking water for members of the public who patronize his business and/or event. 
(5)  The business constitutes a nuisance. For the purposes hereof, a nuisance is defined as follows: A nuisance is anything that works hurt, inconvenience or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-213) ) 
Sec. 18-74. - Preliminary investigation on revocation of business license. 
Where it is reported to the county manager or his designee that a holder of a county business license is engaged in any activity which could form the basis for a revocation of said business license under section 18-73, a preliminary investigation shall be conducted by the county manager or his designee in order to determine whether or not there is a basis for the reports. If the county manager or his designee's preliminary investigation reveals that there may be a basis for revocation or suspension of the business license, the business license holder will be notified to appear before the board of commissioners for a hearing under the provisions of section 18-76. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-214) ) 
Sec. 18-75. - Seizure of business license. 
(a)  If the sheriff of the county shall find that a business of a certain category listed below is in violation of a law of the State of Georgia or in violation of a law or resolution of the county and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of the county, the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the business license of the business. The sheriff shall deliver the business license to the clerk of the board of commissioners upon the next working day of the clerk. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall then schedule a special hearing of the board of commissioners to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the clerk of the board of commissioners received the business license from the sheriff. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall be limited to the following businesses: 
(1)  Tourist camps, cabin camps, tourist houses, roadhouses, public dance halls or similar establishments as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1, et seq.; 
(2)  Flea markets, outdoor exhibitions, outdoor performances, outdoor musical festivals or other places of outdoor public assembly; 
(3)  Auctions of property other than real estate, billiard rooms, game rooms, canvassers and solicitors, second hand sales, pawn brokers, precious metal dealers, private detectives and detective agencies, carnivals, circuses, traveling shows, taxi services, limousine services, and bounty hunters. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-215) ) 
Sec. 18-76. - Hearing on revocation of business license. 
(a)  When a matter is transmitted by the county manager or his designee or the sheriff to the clerk of the board of commissioners for possible suspension or revocation, the chairman of the board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall make such investigations as it deems necessary and shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. 
(b)  The licensee shall be notified in person or by mail at his business address of the date and time of the hearing. The licensee may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
(1)  Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Issue a warning to the licensee; 
(3)  Suspend the business license and probate the suspension; 
(4)  Revoke the business license and probate the revocation; 
(5)  Suspend the business license; 
(6)  Revoke the business license; or 
(7)  Take any other appropriate action regarding the license. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-216) ) 
Sec. 18-77. - Appeal of decision of administrative official. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation may appeal any action, order, decision or determination of the county manager or his designee or any other administrative official to the board of commissioners. The appeal is limited to an alleged error of the official from which the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The appeal shall be filed in writing with the clerk of the board of commissioners within 15 days following the date on which the alleged error was made. Upon receiving the appeal, the clerk shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners and notify all parties to the appeal by mail at their business address of the time and date of the appeal hearing. 
(c)  All parties to the appeal may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall enter an order making a finding of fact and shall have all the powers of the official from which the appeal was taken. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-217) ) 
Sec. 18-78. - Board of commissioners' decisions final. 
Any decision, order, requirement or determination of the board of commissioners of the county shall be a final administrative determination. Any application for relief from an official action of the board of commissioners shall be as set forth in section 18-86 of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-218) ) 
Sec. 18-79. - Requirements for businesses exempted from fees. 
Even though a person, firm or corporation may be exempt under Section 18-63 from paying an administrative fee or regulatory fee, such person, firm or corporation shall apply to the county manager or his designee for a free business license to engage in or carry on any business, occupation or use provided for herein and shall submit proper credentials showing that the applicant is entitled to exempt status. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of this article and all other rules, regulations and resolutions of the county and upon failure to do so shall be subject to the penalties of this article or any other appropriate resolution of the county. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-219) ) 
Sec. 18-80. - Right of entry. 
The county manager or his designee, the code enforcement official, the sheriff or their authorized representatives shall have the power to enter any premises during the normal business hours of the business for the purpose of enforcement of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-220) ) 
Sec. 18-81. - Background investigation required for operators of certain businesses. 
(a)  Persons, firms or corporations engaged in the following businesses, trades or professions shall be investigated prior to the issuance of a business license: 
(1)  Operators of tourist camps, camp cabins, tourist houses, roadhouses, public dance halls or similar establishments as defined under O.C.G.A. §§ 43-12-50 and 31-28-1. 
(2)  Operators of flea markets, outdoor exhibitors, outdoor performances, outdoor musical festivals, and outdoor public assemblies as defined in Section 18-68; and 
(3)  Auctioneers of property other than real estate, owners and/or operators of billiard rooms or game rooms, canvassers and solicitors, clairvoyants, fortune tellers, palmists, phrenologists and such related occupations, second hand sales, pawn brokerages, precious metal dealers, carnivals, circuses, traveling shows, taxi services, limousine services, tattoo artists, tattoo operators and bounty hunters. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any business type listed in paragraph A. to any person or business where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder or licensee, whether such interest is direct or indirect, or beneficial or absolute, has been convicted or has taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years for conviction involving moral turpitude, or five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal or county ordinance which would have any effect on the applicant's ability to properly conduct such a business, except traffic offenses. The term "conviction" as used in this section shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(c)  The board of commissioners on appeal, may waive any conviction as a disqualification if it finds that it would have no material effect upon the applicant's ability to properly conduct its business if such license were granted. Upon payment by the applicant of a fee in the amount of $100.00 the county manager or his designee shall schedule a hearing before the Habersham County Board of Commissioners for its consideration as to whether a license be granted. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-221) ) 
Sec. 18-82. - Prohibited businesses. 
No person shall practice any of the following trades, occupations or professions in the county: 
(1)  Bookmaking or bookmaking services, gambling or gambling establishments, games of chance and other such occupations as prohibited by law. 
(2)  The sale of drug consumption paraphernalia or drug enhancement paraphernalia (head shops) by persons other than those legally licensed as a pharmacist. 
(3)  No business activity listed in section 18-68 shall be conducted within the unincorporated areas of Habersham County prior to being approved in accordance with section 18-68. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-222) ) 
Sec. 18-83. - Amount of regulatory fees. 
The regulatory fees set forth herein shall apply to the following businesses or portions thereof: 
(1)  Sheriff approval or background checks: $15.00 each. 
(2)  Identification badges: $10.00 each. 
(3)  Address change or business name change requiring reissuance of business license: $5.00. 
(4)  Permits requiring board of commissioners' approval: 
a.  New applications: $100.00. 
b.  Renewal applications: $50.00. 
c.  Going-out-of-business sale: $100.00. 
(5)  Registration and regulatory fees shall be non-refundable after the fact. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-223) ) 
Sec. 18-84. - Additional restrictions on certain businesses. 
(a)  Door to door canvassers or solicitors shall be limited to daylight hours only and must display badges issued by Habersham County while canvassing or soliciting. 
(b)  All food sales or merchandise sales from vehicles require written permission from the property owner. 
(c)  Flea markets: No public sales before noon on Sundays; before noon operations limited to loading and unloading. 
(d)  Establishments permitting public dancing must close by 12:30 a.m. weeknights, except Thursday and Friday nights, when they may remain open until 2:00 a.m. There will be no Sunday operation. 
(e)  Race tracks: Racing is prohibited between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 (noon) on Sundays, ending racing activity at 7:00 p.m. on Sunday and at midnight on other nights. There will be a 1:00 a.m. extension for an unforeseen delay only due to extenuating circumstances. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-224) ) 
Sec. 18-85. - Amendments. 
This article may be amended from time to time and all persons, businesses, occupations, trades and uses subject to this article shall be subject to such amendment. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-225) ) 
Sec. 18-86. - Appeal of decisions of board of commissioners. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the board of commissioners may appeal from any final decision of the board of commissioners to the superior court of Habersham County by filing with the clerk of the court a notice of appeal in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the decision of the board of commissioners is rendered. A copy of the notice of appeal shall be served on the clerk of the board of commissioners. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the clerk of the superior court shall give immediate notice thereof to the clerk of the board of commissioners, and within 30 days from the time of such notice the clerk of the board of commissioners shall cause to be filed with the clerk of the superior court a duly certified copy of the minutes of the proceedings had before the board of commissioners and the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  In the event of an appeal to the superior court, the appellants shall bear the cost of preparing the necessary documents as required by the court. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 2(18-226) ) 
Secs. 18-87—18-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-101. - Purpose. 
The intent of the Habersham County Board of Commissioners in enacting this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values, on the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. Instead, this article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-301) ) 
Sec. 18-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, printed material, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or in any way relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section of the store, comprising five percent of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material, or an establishment with five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business: Any establishment which is either expressly specified in this article, or which is other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or which offers its patrons a service or entertainment of any type which is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment: Any business or establishment where employees or dancers display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, or any establishment which features live performances by entertainers or employees where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment: Any adult theater, adult bookstore, or adult dancing establishment operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of profit or loss, and whether licensed or unlicensed. An establishment with an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. An establishment possessed of an occupational business license is presumed to be operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. 
Adult material: Any one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel: Any motel, hotel, boardinghouse, rooming house, or other place of temporary lodging which advertises the presentation of or presents films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult motel" is included within the term "adult theater." 
Adult theater: Any establishment which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or a part of an enclosed building, or an open-air area used by persons for the viewing of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult motels and establishments which have adult booths are both considered to be adult theaters. 
Adult video store: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of this [its] stock in trade, videotapes, or movies, or other reproductions, whether for sale or for rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or any establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Alcoholic beverage: Any beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. 
Bathhouse: An establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or on specified anatomical areas. 
Board of commissioners: The board of commissioners of Habersham County, Georgia. 
Church: Any place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Conviction: Any adjudication or determination of guilt resulting from a plea, trial, or forfeiture of bond when charged with a crime, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether the imposition of a sentence was suspended. This definition shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Department: The section of the Habersham County government set aside for the issuance of business licenses and permits. 
Display: Any exposing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion revealing to any person in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision by view from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any portion of the person's store or property when items and material other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
Disseminate: To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration. 
Distance and measurement: The measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of any adult entertainment establishment or adult business (or, if not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point at ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of customer entry which is perpendicular to ground level) to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital, as required by this article. 
Distribute: Any transfer of possession, whether with or without consideration. 
Educational institution: Any premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and/or course of study. Included in the definition of the term "educational institution" are nursery schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools, or any special institution of learning. The term does not include any premises or site upon which there is a vocational institution, professional institution, or institution of higher education, including community colleges, junior colleges, four-year colleges, or universities. 
Employee: A person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether such person is paid a salary or wage. 
Escort bureau: Any business, person, or agency who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish the names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes, or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Establishment: A site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or operations are conducted for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of actual profit or loss. A site or premises shall be presumed to be an establishment where it is in possession of an occupational business license. 
Furnish: To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or otherwise provide. 
Good moral character: A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of any felony or any non-felony involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. For the purposes of this definition, conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with either a felony, or a non-felony involving moral turpitude. 
Inspector: An employee or officer of the health department, the county manager or his designee, building inspection department, zoning department, sheriff, fire department or fire and rescue department who inspects premises licensed under this article and takes or requires the actions authorized by this article in case of violations being found on licensed premises, or who inspects premises seeking to be licensed under this article or who takes or requires corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on the premises. 
Lingerie modeling: Means entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments. 
Lingerie modeling studio: Means any place or commercial establishment wherein the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments. 
Minor: Any person who has not attained the age of 18 years of age. 
Nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Obscene: Any material or performance which, after applying contemporary community standards, is found to predominantly appeal to prurient interest in sex; to be, as a whole, a depiction or description of sexual conduct which is patently offensive to the average person in the community; and when taken as a whole is found to lack serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
Park: Any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled, or managed by any county, city, or federal government, or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities occur, or upon which places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public, or which is kept or maintained for ornament and/or recreation. 
Performance: Any play, motion picture, film, videotape, dance, or exhibition performed before an audience. 
Religious institution: Any premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious activities. 
Residence: A house, apartment, mobile home, boarding or rooming house, duplex, condominium or other multi-family housing for human dwelling or any property zoned therefor. 
School: Any state, county, city, church, or other school, public or private, as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high school learning centers, kindergartens, and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Sadomasochistic abuse: Any flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
Sexual conduct: Any actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or the breast of a female in any act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse; or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
Specified sexual activities: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship including sadomasochistic abuse, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, lesbianism, zooerastia; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Specified anatomical areas: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-302) ) 
Sec. 18-103. - Violations; penalty; additional remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this article as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Habersham County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Habersham County, Georgia. 
(b)  The county is hereby authorized to punish violations of this article under the provisions of the Official Code of Habersham County. 
(c)  Any adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of any other penalties or remedies, the county may commence an action or actions to enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be considered due cause for the suspension or revocation of any licenses issued by the county to the offending party. Such revocation or suspension shall occur by way of a hearing before the board of commissioners as provided by this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-303) ) 
Sec. 18-104. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity to engage in, operate, conduct, or carry on in or upon any premises an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store without first having complied with the provisions of this article, or without a currently valid Habersham County license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued hereunder shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States, or under any other ordinance, rule, or regulation of Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-304) ) 
Sec. 18-105. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, licensee, or other adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store to admit or permit the admission of minors into the premises of their adult business or adult establishment, or to allow a minor to remain within the licensed or unlicensed premises of such a business or establishment. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-305) ) 
Sec. 18-106. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, exchange, trade, give, or offer to sell, barter, exchange, trade, or give to any minor any entertainment, service, material, device, or thing offered, for sale or otherwise, at an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-306) ) 
Sec. 18-107. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall conduct any illegal activity in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store. 
(b)  No adult entertainment licensee shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or semi-nude where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between patron and employee. 
(c)  No adult entertainment licensee shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this article. 
(d)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for private personal hygiene. 
(e)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation or, in the case of females, fondling of the breasts. 
(f)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(g)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in or simulate bestiality. 
(h)  No employee or person, while on the premises of any adult entertainment licensee, shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage or female breast in a lewd or obscene fashion or be permitted to do so by the licensee or its employees. 
(i)  No employee or person, while on the premises of an adult entertainment licensee, shall dance or perform nude or semi-nude in such manner as to simulate sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee, or other person, or be permitted to do so by the licensee or its employees. 
(j)  No person, while on the premises of an adult entertainment licensee, shall, while nude or semi-nude, sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap, or body of any patron, spectator, employee, or other person therein, or engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by said patron, spectator, or other person. 
(k)  No licensee shall suffer or permit the use of any areas on the premises of such establishment for sexual contact or private dancing performance or entertainment. 
(l)  No licensee shall suffer or permit any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces, or promotes conduct or activities proscribed by this article. 
(m)  No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, possessed, or consumed on the premises except in full compliance with the Habersham County Malt Beverages and Wine Ordinance [Chapter 5.30] and any applicable state or federal laws. 
(n)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed, or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein, and each licensee shall be required to provide for adequate security procedures and personnel to insure an orderly operation of such establishment. 
(o)  No adult entertainment establishment, as defined by this article, shall be open for business between the hours of 12:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day, nor shall such establishment operate after the hour of 12:45 a.m. on Sunday or on Christmas Day. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-307) ) 
Sec. 18-108. - Minimum distance from certain uses. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store shall be located within the following distance and measurement as defined and stated herein: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any residence; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of a church, school, educational institution, religious institution, governmentally owned or operated building or structure, library, civic center, public park, park, hospital, community club, or prison; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any establishment or business regulated or defined hereunder; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages other than the licensed establishment. 
Each application for license hereunder for which there are no existing Habersham County licenses for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment or business then in effect shall include a blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, 8½ inches by 11 inches in size, with a scale of one inch per 200 feet, showing the proposed location and the location of all customer entries in relation and distance, measured as provided in this article, to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the above distance requirements, together with the zoning classifications and present uses of all real property and the proposed location. 
Each application for a location which has not previously been occupied for other than residential purposes or on which there is or is to be new construction shall also include a copy of a site plan approved by the Habersham County Department of Planning Commission. 
After issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building on the premises or customer entry locations shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance requirements of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-308) ) 
Sec. 18-109. - Existing establishments. 
All existing adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, bathhouses, escort bureaus, and adult video stores shall obtain a license and comply with all the terms of this article within 30 days of its adoption. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-309) ) 
Sec. 18-110. - Employees. 
(a)  Employees of adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, bathhouses, escort bureaus, and adult video stores shall be not less than 18 years of age, and shall be of good moral character. 
(b)  No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers, and musicians, who has been convicted anywhere in the United States, or in federal court, within five years immediately prior to the application for employment, of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture, sale, or distribution of intoxicating liquors, or any other felony or crime involving moral turpitude, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. "Be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises and elsewhere than on the licensed premises, for compensation or otherwise. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store to file with the Habersham County Sheriff's Department the names of all employees with their home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the Habersham County Sheriff's Department within seven calendar days from the date of any such changes. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-310) ) 
Sec. 18-111. - License generally; application for license. 
(a)  All licenses awarded under this article shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, and shall be subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code, and other ordinances and resolutions of the county which may relate to such businesses. 
(b)  All licenses awarded under this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provision of the ordinances of Habersham County, Georgia." 
(c)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to any person who is less than 18 years of age or, in the instance where alcohol is served or proposed to be served upon the premises, 21 years of age. 
(e)  Application for a license shall be written and on forms supplied by Habersham County at the county's business license office. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners, if a corporation, the names of the officers and shareholders, or if another business entity, then the names of all [persons] holding any ownership or managerial interest therein; and such other reasonable information as may be required by the supervisor of the inspections and permits division of Habersham County, or by the Habersham County Sheriff's Department, and must be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(f)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information, and records which the county may request of them, and failure to furnish such data within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the applicant's application. By the filing of an application, applicants agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the county or the county attorney, and who may be considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts as to such license. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(g)  For the purposes of this article, the term "applicant" shall include a person or persons, and shall also include all partners, officers, directors, principals, and shareholders of any partnership or corporation. 
(h)  Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(i)  All applicants for licenses shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated, and, when needed, refurbished so as to be aesthetically pleasing, rather than dilapidated. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, steel, stone, or wood, but shall not be constructed of concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all zoning, building, health, and similar county codes. All applicants shall obtain and file with their application a certification of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant plans to operate the business is zoned for the appropriate category as provided herein. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-311) ) 
Sec. 18-112. - License fee; penalty for late payment. 
(a)  The annual license fee shall be $3,500.00 as set by the board of commissioners and as from time to time may be amended by resolution. Said fee is a non-refundable fee and shall be paid upon submission of the application for license hereunder. Licenses shall be issued for a period of 12 months only and not for any partial year. No license shall be issued or renewed until and unless all fees and penalties due to the county are first paid. 
(b)  In addition to and not in the alternative to any other penalty which may be provided herein, any licensee, person, or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax, or other payment due to the county of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax, or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax, or other charge, for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full, including penalties. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-312) ) 
Sec. 18-113. - Qualifications of applicant for license. 
No license hereunder shall be granted where the application or the evidence on a hearing shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  That the applicant is not of good moral character, or has a poor reputation in the community, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)  That the applicant has previously had revoked or suspended any license issued under the police powers of any county or governmental entity. 
(3)  That the applicant, as a previous holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, any business license issued by Habersham County for any special purpose, or any adult entertainment license, has violated any law, resolution, or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  That any applicant, or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner, or managing agent is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to Habersham County or the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-313) ) 
Sec. 18-114. - Investigation of license applications. 
All applications required by this article shall be investigated by the Habersham County Sheriff's Department, which shall report its findings and recommendations to the county business license office, or any committee or board created by the board of commissioners for the purpose of making recommendations as to any application. No further action shall be taken by Habersham County or by any applicant with respect to any application until completion by the sheriff's department of its investigation. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-314) ) 
Sec. 18-115. - Citizenship and residence requirements for licensees. 
(a)  Where the applicant is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either (1) the majority shareholder thereof, or (2) a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the corporation. Each of the said persons must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either (1) the managing general partner thereof, or (2) a person employed full time by the partnership in a managing capacity. Each of the said persons must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
(c)  Where the applicant is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed full time by the sole proprietor in a managing capacity. Each of the said persons must be U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the words "managing capacity" shall mean the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or the managing or general partner of a partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietary, or other ownership entity. 
(e)  The licensee shall notify the county in writing, and shall keep said notification current, of the name, address, and telephone number of the licensee and the agent of the licensee or any other person under whose name the license is issued, for the purpose of receiving communications and notices required under this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-315) ) 
Sec. 18-116. - Action on license application; appeals. 
(a)  All applications shall be acted upon by the Habersham County Manager or his designee (the "department") within 45 days of the date of the filing of the application with all required documentation. 
(b)  If the department fails to act on the application within 45 days of the date of the filing of the application, the applicant has the right to begin operating his/her business unless and until the department notifies the applicant of a denial of the application. 
(c)  The department shall act on any application after an appearance at a date, time and place established by the department upon at least five days' notice to the applicant. 
(d)  The applicant shall be required to personally appear before the department on the date and time as set forth in the notice. 
(e)  Any decision of the department shall be final unless an appeal is filed with the clerk to the Habersham County Board of Commissioners (the "commissioners") by any aggrieved party on or before ten days from the date of the decision by the department. 
(f)  A hearing before the commissioners shall be scheduled within 20 days of the date of the filing of the appeal and notice thereof shall be provided to the appellant and other interested parties. 
(g)  The hearing on the appeal shall be held and a decision made on the appeal within 45 days of the date of the filing of the appeal unless the appellant agrees in writing for a hearing date to be held more than 45 days from the date of the filing of the appeal. 
(h)  If the commissioners fail to act on the appeal within 45 days of the date of the filing of the appeal, the applicant has the right to begin operating his/her business unless and until the commissioners notifies the appellant that it has sustained the decision of the department. 
(i)  Upon the hearing of such appeal, the commissioners shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the appellant, from interested parties and from county staff and enforcement officers. 
(j)  The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule, or modify the action complained of. 
(k)  The decision of the commissioners shall be final. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-316) ) 
Sec. 18-117. - Restrictions on transferability of license and addition of additional partners or shareholders. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be sold, given, transferred, or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or entities. Any such sale, gift, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, gift, transfer, or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license, and who wish to carry on the business by their service in a managing capacity, may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and, in such case, the new licensee shall immediately notify the county manager or his designee. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of such a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred, or assigned. 
(b)  No licensee shall change the name or location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-317) ) 
Sec. 18-118. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an absolute interest or a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the establishment either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, or his spouse, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application of any felony or misdemeanor of any state, of any law of the United States, or of any municipal ordinance, with the exception of traffic offenses, or for whom an outstanding warrant exists on which no service has been perfected. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, or violation of a county or municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the business license department or the board of commissioners if appeal is filed, after hearing, may, after investigation of the charges involved, waive the same as a disqualification. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-318) ) 
Sec. 18-119. - Additional licensing standards. 
With respect to the issuance, renewal, or retention of licenses issued hereunder, or any right to retain or have approved an application for a license or renewal, the following standards shall apply in addition to standards stated elsewhere herein: 
(1)  Where there is evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance requirements set forth herein, the type or number of schools or number of churches or other facilities in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area. 
(2)  Where there is evidence that the location or type of structure would create difficulty in police supervision. 
(3)  Where there is evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or where there is evidence that the proposed area is already adequately supplied with such licenses. 
(4)  Where there is evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(5)  Where there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles. In addition to compliance with any other parking space requirements of Habersham County and the State of Georgia, a licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(6)  Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to intoxicated persons or to a minor. 
(7)  Where there is evidence that the conduct of the business by the licensee or potential licensee would violate the law or this Code, create a disturbance, create a congregation of intoxicated or unruly persons or minors, or allow minors to be on the premises or to purchase, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises, or where there is evidence that illegal activities have occurred on or in connection with the premises or establishment, or where the police have been caused to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises or area. 
(8)  In addition to the above and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.  If the applicant is a previous holder of any special license under Chapter 18, or is a holder of an alcoholic beverage license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
c.  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
d.  If applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or "front" to obtain a license. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-319) ) 
Sec. 18-120. - Interest in license by county officials or employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or appointed official, employee of the county, or employee of any elected official of the county who receives all or part of his salary from Habersham County, or his or her spouse or minor child, to have any whole, partial, or beneficial interest in any license issued hereunder. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-320) ) 
Sec. 18-121. - Issuance of license. 
Except as provided for in Section 18-123 herein, when a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the department the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-321) ) 
Sec. 18-122. - Causes of mandatory denial of license. 
No license shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
(1)  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of the ordinance applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection related to the location itself. 
(2)  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
(3)  That applicant has withdrawn, without permission of the board or the department, an application at any time within seven days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the board or department, unless at least one year shall have expired from such withdrawal. 
(4)  When any application for a license to transact any business within the control of the police powers is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause by the board of commissioners. 
The one-year waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of a lack of qualifications on the part of the applicant. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-322) ) 
Sec. 18-123. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
If the building where the adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau is to operate is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be approved for such location provided the plans for the proposed building or renovation show clearly a compliance with all provisions of this article. No business shall be conducted therein until the premises have been completed in accordance with the plans, and the building is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article, the Official Code of Habersham County, and all laws and regulations of the state or federal government, and the license has been issued. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-323 )) 
Sec. 18-124. - Forfeiture of license for nonuse. 
Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized by the license, but who shall for a period of 30 days thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized by the license, shall, upon completion of said 30-day period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action on the part of the county. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-324) ) 
Sec. 18-125. - Annual renewal of license required. 
(a)  All licenses hereunder shall be issued for a period of one calendar year, the same being January 1 through December 31 of each year. All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms provided by the county, with the annual renewal fee for any such license being $3,500.00. 
(b)  Any license holder upon the date of adoption of this ordinance [article] or any application for renewal of license on an existing licensed location shall not be required to meet the distance requirements herein set forth. An application for renewal shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this article for the granting of a new license. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-325) ) 
Sec. 18-126. - Revocation and suspension of license; hearing. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, on the basis of citations by, or charges brought on behalf of, the director of the business license department, the code enforcement officer, the zoning officer, a law enforcement official, the county attorney, or any other authorized representative of the county, shall have the right to suspend and/or revoke any license issued under this article whenever the licensee shall violate any county code, rule, regulations, or ordinance or any state or federal code, rules, regulation, ordinance, or statute pertaining to such business. 
(b)  Upon notice to the county that an alleged violation has occurred which may require the suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment license, a hearing shall be scheduled before the board of commissioners to consider the proposed suspension or revocation of said license. The licensee whose license is the subject of the aforesaid hearing shall be given adequate written notice by the county of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to legal representation, and shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine any witnesses presented by the county. No hearing provided for herein shall be conducted sooner than ten days from the date of issuance of the citation. The board of commissioners shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted hereunder. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(c)  Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, the board of commissioners shall have the sole discretion as to whether to suspend or revoke the license of a licensee thereby halting the operation of that licensee's adult entertainment establishment, adult bookstore, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau for the violation of the provisions of any ordinance of Habersham County, or for the violation of any law, rule, or regulation of the State of Georgia. Further, the board of commissioners may, at their discretion, set terms and conditions upon suspension of a license which must be followed by the licensee in order to have the license removed from suspension, or may place the licensee on probation for a period of time during which time the licensee may continue to operate his business. During the period of such probation as established after hearing by the board of commissioners, in the event of any subsequent violation of the laws and regulations of Habersham County or the State of Georgia, the board of commissioners may thereafter either suspend the license, continue the period of probation, or revoke the violator's adult entertainment license. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may choose to revoke such a license at the first hearing following any alleged violation. Neither probation nor suspension is a procedural precondition to revocation of a license issued under this article. The action of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-326) ) 
Sec. 18-127. - Removal of signs upon revocation or suspension of license. 
When any license issued under this article is revoked, all signs indicating that such business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises, both outside and inside the building, during the period of revocation or suspension. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-327) ) 
Sec. 18-128. - Falsified license applications. 
Any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original or renewal application for a license under this article shall be unlawful, shall be cause for a denial thereof, and shall be punishable as a violation of a county ordinance. If any such license has previously been granted under the above circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of same. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-328) ) 
Sec. 18-129. - Special provisions for adult dancing establishments. 
The following provisions shall apply to adult dancing establishments in addition to all other provisions of this article: 
(1)  The licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers or entertainers. 
(2)  All dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(3)  No dancing or entertaining shall occur closer than ten feet from any person. 
(4)  No dancer or entertainer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(5)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(6)  No dancer or entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-329) ) 
Sec. 18-130. - Zones where establishments permitted. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau shall be located on any premises unless the location has been mapped H-I under the laws of Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-330) ) 
Sec. 18-131. - Design and maintenance of premises. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted, operated, or licensed if the adult entertainment activity on the interior is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(b)  No booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such establishment so as to prevent a clear view through the premises, except to separate offices, kitchens, rest rooms, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(c)  All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. Each premises shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment, and supplies on the premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or more frequently if necessary to prevent accumulation. 
(d)  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau shall have any interior connections or door with any other place of business or with any place where gambling or other illegal activity is conducted, or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation, delivery, or dealing in of alcoholic beverages or illegal substances such as narcotics or marijuana. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-331) ) 
Sec. 18-132. - Display of license and license number. 
Each licensee shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription, "Habersham County License No. ____________, ____________ Licensee" in uniform letters not less than three inches in height. The license itself shall be conspicuously displayed at all times within the premises. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-332) ) 
Sec. 18-133. - Lighting. 
All premises shall be fully lighted, both inside and outside, except during hours when the establishment is not open for business. Interior lighting shall be at least 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-333) ) 
Sec. 18-134. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by this article, any applicable state statute, or any applicable local ordinance. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-334) ) 
Sec. 18-135. - Regulation of obscenity. 
It is not the intent of the board of commissioners that this article legislate or regulate with respect to matters of obscenity. The regulation of obscenity is a matter of state law, and is accomplished by O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-80—16-12-83. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-335) ) 
Sec. 18-136. - Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed under Article III of Chapter 18 of the Official Code of Habersham County after March 1, 2015, shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. 
(b)  This section shall not apply nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a license, which derive less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 3(18-336) ) 
Secs. 18-137—18-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 18-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Depository financial institutions means state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 4(18-401) ) 
Sec. 18-172. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 2015, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 4(18-402) ) 
Sec. 18-173. - Minimum annual tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 18-172 shall be $1,000.00. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 4(18-403) ) 
Sec. 18-174. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-9(c), each depository financial institution subject to tax under this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in such return. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 4(18-404) ) 
Sec. 18-175. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied by this article shall be due no later than 30 days after the filing of the return prescribed by section 18-174 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 4(18-405) ) 
Sec. 18-176. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the board of commissioners to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the county of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 4(18-406) ) 
Secs. 18-177—18-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 18-201. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2) are prohibited in the county, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (j). 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-501) ) 
Sec. 18-202. - Gambling places prohibited. 
Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the county, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-502) ) 
Sec. 18-203. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A, § 16-25-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
• Pinball machines; 
• Console machines; 
• Video games; 
• Crane machines; 
• Claw machines; 
• Pusher machines; 
• Bowling machines; 
• Novelty arcade games; 
• Football or table soccer machines; 
• Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
• Target or shooting gallery machines; 
• Basketball machines; 
• Shuffleboard machines; 
• Kiddie ride games; 
• Skeeball machines; 
• Air hockey machines; 
• Roll down machines; 
• Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; and 
• Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
• Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
• Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
• Gas and electric meters; 
• Pay telephones; 
• Pay toilets; 
• Cigarette vending machines; 
• Coin-operated vending machines; 
• Coin-operated scales; 
• Coin-operated gumball machines; 
• Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
• Coin-operated massage beds; and 
• Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
Location means a business within the county that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the county relating to occupation taxes and business licenses. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-503) ) 
Sec. 18-204. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained a license and without first having paid the applicable occupation tax required under this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-504) ) 
Sec. 18-205. - Issuance of license. 
Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the county shall be made to the county clerk upon a form to be supplied by the county clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the county; 
(5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the county held by the applicant. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the county official or employee shall provide the license with a copy of the ordinance from which this article derives. The county shall not require a fee for licensure or registration of an amusement game room. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31st of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with article I of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the county. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-505) ) 
Sec. 18-206. - Occupation tax required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate form paid the required occupational tax and without first having obtained the license required under this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-506) ) 
Sec. 18-207. - Distance. 
Every amusement game room in the county shall comply with the proximity provision for business licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. After a hearing, the board of commissioners may waive the application of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. 
Every amusement game room in the county shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to sell alcohol as set out in section 3-34 of the Code of Ordinances of the county. After a hearing, the board of commissioners may waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served at such location. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-507) ) 
Sec. 18-208. - Number of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the county shall offer to the public more than nine bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. After a hearing, the board of commissioners may, after consideration of the nature and character of the business, waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-508) ) 
Sec. 18-209. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines and from business. 
Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by county officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. Income from the amusement game or games shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the income from the location. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of income requirement. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-509) ) 
Sec. 18-210. - Notice requirements. 
Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or similar words: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the county conspicuously and permanently. The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-510) ) 
Sec. 18-211. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the county only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2(a.1) and (b). The county official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2 or § 48-17-9. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-511) ) 
Sec. 18-212. - Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
In addition to penalties set out in the O.C.G.A. provisions for failure to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (i), the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, and a hearing before the board of commissioners, may be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First offense: Suspension for not more than six months of the owner or proprietor's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred. 
(2)  Second offense: Suspension for not more than 12 months of the owner or proprietor's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred. 
(3)  Third offense: Suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or proprietor/operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the county for not more than six months. 
Penalties for violation of the provisions of any sections of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the magistrate court of the county are as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second offense: Fine not to exceed $750.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three months, or both. 
(3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the county for not more than six months, or any combination of these penalties. 
The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the magistrate court of the county. Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the county may be imposed by the board of commissioners after a hearing. 
Offering one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the magistrate court of the county, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-512) ) 
Sec. 18-213. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated machines in violation of law or ordinances. 
The magistrate court of the county is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-513) ) 
Sec. 18-214. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement center hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devices to be in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The sheriff shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and shall inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licenses to operate an amusement center to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place; 
e.  Shirt and shoes required. All proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-514) ) 
Sec. 18-215. - Revocation of license. 
In the event that it comes to the attention of the board of commissioners that an amusement center has created a nuisance to the surrounding community or the operator or proprietor has violated any provision of this section, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)  The county clerk shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the amusement center in question is alleged to be a nuisance or alleged to be in violation of any provision of this section. The county clerk will then notify the proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the board of commissioners. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the county clerk. 
(2)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the operator, the proprietor and the county clerk or other witnesses may be heard. Thereafter, the board of commissioners shall issue a notice of decision which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this section. 
(3)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decision and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be binding upon the proprietor and operator of the amusement center under consideration, subject to appeal to the proper court. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-515) ) 
Sec. 18-216. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin-operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current license issued by the county. 
(b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the county. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the county. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-516) ) 
Sec. 18-217. - Enforcing officer. 
The sheriff or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 5(18-517) ) 
Secs. 18-218—18-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 18-251. - Purpose; authority. 
(a)  This article is enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, and establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of dealers in precious metals and gems. 
(b)  This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-135. The requirements of this article shall be cumulative to the requirements of Title 44, Chapter 12, Article 3, Part 5 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-601) ) 
Sec. 18-252. - Compliance with division required. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating a dealership in precious metals and gems, as herein defined, shall first file an application with the county development service center for a permit to conduct such business, shall receive such permit, and shall comply with all requirements of this article. This article shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-602) ) 
Sec. 18-253. - Territorial applicability of article. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all unincorporated portions of Habersham County, except as provided for in section 18-271 hereof. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-603) ) 
Sec. 18-254. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purpose of this article. 
Dealer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, from persons or sources other than manufactures, manufactures' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or a person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufactures' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
"Dealer" is not intended to apply to any person engaged in the acceptance of precious metals or gems on a consignment basis where there is no payment for acceptance of the precious metal or gem until such time as an end-user purchases the items from the person engaged in the consignment business. 
Gems mean any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Person means and individual, partnership, limited partnership, Limited Liability Company, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-604) ) 
Sec. 18-255. - Application. 
All persons 21 years of age or older desiring to obtain a permit required under this article shall make written application to the county permitting office upon forms to be prepared by the county permitting office. Such application shall state the name and the address of the applicant, the place where the proposed business is to be located, the nature and character of the business to be carried on, if a corporation, the names of the officers and stockholders, if a partnership, the names of the partners, if a limited liability company, the names of the members, and such other information as may be required by the county permitting office, all sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. Permitted businesses will be required to also comply with the occupation tax requirements of the County Code. Applicants may appeal the denial of a permit within 30 days in writing to the county permitting office, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedures set forth in section 18-260 below. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-605) ) 
Sec. 18-256. - Citizenship. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted hereunder to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  If the applicant is a partnership, at least one general partner must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(d)  If the applicant is a limited liability company, at least one member must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-606) ) 
Sec. 18-257. - General information; application restrictions. 
No application for any permit hereunder shall be granted where the application shows or the county permitting office finds any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant has previously had any pawnbroker permit issued by any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked for cause after a hearing. 
(2)  The applicant, as the previous holder of a permit to operate as a dealer, has been convicted of violation any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business within a one-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  The applicant has supplied false information upon his application. 
(4)  The applicant has failed to pay any fee or tax owed to the county. 
The permit shall be issued: if an individual or sole proprietorship, to the individual; if a corporation, to the corporation and the majority stockholder; if a partnership, to the partnership and all partners; if a limited liability company, to the limited liability company and all members. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-607) ) 
Sec. 18-258. - Transfers. 
No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable, except upon application to the county permitting office in the same form, manner and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. When permission for transfer has been granted, either the original permittee or the transferee shall cause the permit to be delivered to the county permitting office, who shall record such transfer and provide the permit to the transferee, and the transferee shall pay the fee required for an original permit as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the permit. Applicants may appeal the denial of a permit transfer within 30 days in writing to the county permitting office, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedure set forth in section 18-260. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-608) ) 
Sec. 18-259. - Revocation and suspension of permit. 
Subject to the provisions of the following section 18-260, the board of commissioners may suspend, revoke, or place on probation (either with or without conditions), any permit issued under this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-609) ) 
Sec. 18-260. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)  No permit issued under this article shall be suspended (except as provided for in subsection (b)), revoked, or placed on probation, except for due cause as defined in subsection (c) hereof, and after a hearing before the board of commissioners upon reasonable notice to the permittee of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing and of the reason why the permit should be suspended or revoked. At least seven days' written notice shall be deemed reasonable. 
(b)  The chairman of the board of commissioners may suspend a permit immediately or given seven days' written notice that such permit is subject to suspension when there is caused to believe that grounds exist for suspending the permit prior to the conduct of a hearing before the board of commissioners. This action shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners at its next regular meeting, or, at the request of the permittee, a special meeting of the board of commissioners may be called within seven days after such request is filed with the county permitting office, and the board of commissioners may either affirm or overturn the suspension after the hearing of evidence. A permit shall not be revoked or placed on probation, except upon action by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  "Due cause" for the suspension, revocation, or placement on probation of any permit shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)  Violation of any law, regulation, ordinance, or resolution regulation the permittee. 
(2)  The permittee's provision of false information to the county permitting office, regardless of when the county permitting office shall have become aware of the falsity of such information. 
(3)  The permittee has failed to obtain, or has suffered suspension or revocation of, any paper, permit or other document necessary in pursuance of its business, as may be required by any officer, agency, authority, or department of the county, state or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance, or resolution of the county, state or United States. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may specify conditions of operation of the permit holder during any period of probation. Such conditions shall be on file with the county permitting office. No probation shall extend over a period of more than 12 consecutive calendar months. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-610) ) 
Sec. 18-261. - Permit fees to be set by board of commissioners; refund. 
(a)  The original permit fee and annual renewal permit fee for a permit issued hereunder shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for less than a calendar year period and in cases of the revocation, suspension or surrender of such permit before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever of all or any portion of the permit fee. 
(c)  All permits shall be issued for the calendar year beginning January 1, and the fee prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be paid in full by each person prior to issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Any permit issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for which it was issued. 
(e)  No permit fee shall be prorated for any business commenced after January 1 of any calendar year, and the full amount of the annual permit fee as prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be payable for any business, whether commenced on or after January 1 of any calendar year. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-611) ) 
Sec. 18-262. - Permit to authorize conduct of one place of business. 
Each permit issued hereunder shall authorize the conduct of business at one location only, and persons doing business at more than one location within the county shall obtain a separate permit, requiring a separate fee, for each such location. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-612) ) 
Sec. 18-263. - Change of location. 
Any person moving a business permitted hereunder from one location to another shall notify the permitting office of such move and of the new address in writing, on a form provided by the county permitting office, no later than within one day of moving. A new permit shall be issued upon payment of a reasonable fee if the new location conforms to all applicable ordinances, resolutions, and the county's zoning and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-613) ) 
Sec. 18-264. - Permit to be displayed. 
All permits issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business for which the permit is issued along with a posting of the price of gold "per ounce." 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-614) ) 
Sec. 18-265. - Time limit for commencement of business in permitted establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of permits hereunder must, within three months after approval of the permit, open for business the establishment referred to in the permit; unless a time extension is granted by the board of commissioners. Failure to open the permitted establishment within such three-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused permit, and no refund of permit fees shall be made to the permit holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a permit hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the permit, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the permit, shall upon completion of such three-month period automatically forfeit the permit, which permit shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any action of the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-615) ) 
Sec. 18-266. - Renewal. 
Any dealer permitted under this article shall register with the county permitting office, apply for renewal of the existing permit, and pay the annual permit renewal fee no later than February 15 of each calendar year in which it does business. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-616) ) 
Sec. 18-267. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All dealers shall keep books in compliance with state law, wherein there shall be entered an accurate description of all articles sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; and 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers on the article; and 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material of which the article is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom the article was deposited or sold; and 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made immediately upon the completion of each transaction. 
(d)  Such books, and the articles themselves so pledged or sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
Any person engaged in business as a dealer who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section, or who shall make false entries in such books, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and of the articles pledged with or sold to them shall be in violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-617) ) 
Sec. 18-268. - Reporting. 
(a)  Dealers will make daily reports to the sheriff's office in the manner prescribed by the sheriff or his designee. 
(b)  The dealer shall capture an image, with a digital camera, of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the article. The image shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(c)  The dealer shall obtain from each person selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person selling the article. 
The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature shall be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person sells any article. 
(d)  A digital image shall be made, with a digital camera, at the time of acquisition of any article and of the article's serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(e)  All persons who enter a dealership business and attempt to sell an article must provide proper photo identification. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a United States driver's license, a state I.D. card, or a government identification card (military I.D.). In the event on of the mentioned identifications cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(f)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person selling the article to the dealer, shall be made by the dealer and stored on premises for inspection by the sheriff or his designee. 
(g)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person selling the precious metal or gem to the dealer, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the dealer's possession. 
(h)  To the extent that the dealer utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintained for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the sheriff's office as requested. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-618) ) 
Sec. 18-269. - Precious metals/gems not to be disposed of for thirty days. 
Dealers must hold all precious metals and gems for 30 days prior to sale, assignment, trading, or other disposal of same. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-619) ) 
Sec. 18-270. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any dealer, his agents or employees, to receive gems or precious metals from a minor. For the purposes of this section, a minor is any individual 17 years of age or under. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-620) ) 
Sec. 18-271. - Enforcement of division. 
This article shall be enforced by the Habersham County Sheriff or his designee. This article shall not apply to incorporated portions of the county, unless it is expressly adopted by the applicable local municipal governing authority. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-621) ) 
Sec. 18-272. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the dealer or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the Magistrate Court of Habersham County, Georgia and shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as provided for in the Code of Ordinances, Habersham County, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 6(18-622) ) 
Secs. 18-273—18-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWN SHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 18-301. - Purpose; authority. 
(a)  This article is enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, and establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of pawnbrokers or similar places where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn. 
(b)  This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-135. The requirements of this article shall be cumulative to the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 44, chapter 12, article 3, part 5. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-701) ) 
Sec. 18-302. - Compliance with article required. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operation as a pawnbroker, as herein defined, shall first file an application with the county permitting office for a permit to conduct such business, shall receive such permit, and shall comply with all requirements of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-702) ) 
Sec. 18-303. - Territorial applicability of article. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all unincorporated portions of Habersham County, except as provided for in section 18-324 below. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-703) ) 
Sec. 18-304. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this article. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods. Or engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property form person or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. 
Person means an individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property (other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness), including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this article, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with the law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-704) ) 
Sec. 18-305. - Application. 
All persons 21 years of age or older desiring to obtain a permit required under this article shall make written application to the county permitting office upon forms to be prepared by the county permitting office. Such application shall state the name and the address of the applicant, the place where the proposed business is to be located, the nature and character of the business to be carried on, if a corporation, the manes of the officers and stockholders, if a partnership, the names of the partners, if a limited liability company, the names of the members, and such other information as may be required by the county permitting office, all sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. Permitted businesses will be required to also comply with the occupation tax requirements of the County Code. Applicants may appeal the denial of a permit within 30 days in writing to the county permitting office, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedures set forth in section below. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-705) ) 
Sec. 18-306. - Background investigation. 
All persons filing an application for an initial permit or the renewal of a permit, as well as all proposed employees at the time of such application of any pawnbroker, shall complete a waiver in order to be checked by the state crime information center or by other criminal background verification methods to determine their record of any arrests and/or convictions on an annual basis. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-706) ) 
Sec. 18-307. - Citizenship. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted hereunder to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  If the applicant is a partnership, at least one general partner must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(d)  If the applicant is a limited liability company, at least one member must meet the citizenship requirements of subsection (a) above. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-707) ) 
Sec. 18-308. - Issuance of permits to persons with prior convictions prohibited; exceptions. 
No permit hereunder shall be issued to any person convicted of a felony, which includes, but is not limited to, burglary, theft by receiving stolen property, or any crime involving moral turpitude, unless said person has had their rights restored, in which event they must provide to the county permitting office documentations confirming the restoration of their rights. The term "conviction" shall include and adjudication of guilt by admission, conviction or otherwise, a plea of "nolo contendere" or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-708) ) 
Sec. 18-309. - General information; application restrictions. 
No application for any permit hereunder shall be granted where the application shows or the county permitting office finds any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant has previously had any pawnbroker permit issued by any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked for cause after a hearing. 
(2)  The applicant, as the previous holder of a permit to operate as a pawnbroker, has been convicted of violation any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business within a one-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  The applicant has supplied false information upon his application. 
(4)  The applicant has failed to pay any fee or tax owed to the county. 
The permit shall be issued: if an individual or sole proprietorship, to the individual; if a corporation, to the corporation and the majority stockholder; if a partnership, to the partnership and all partners; if a limited liability company, to the limited liability company and all members. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-709) ) 
Sec. 18-310. - Transfers. 
No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable, except upon application to the county permitting office in the same form, manner and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. When permission for transfer has been granted, either the original permittee or the transferee shall cause the permit to be delivered to the county permitting office, who shall record such transfer and provide the permit to the transferee, and the transferee shall pay the fee required for an original permit as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the permit. Applicants may appeal the denial of a permit transfer within 30 days in writing to the county permitting office, and such appeals shall be heard pursuant to the hearing procedure set forth in section 18-312 below. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-710) ) 
Sec. 18-311. - Revocation and suspension of permit. 
Subject to the provisions of the following Section 18-312, the board of commissioners may suspend, revoke, or place on probation (either with or without conditions), any permit issued under this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-711) ) 
Sec. 18-312. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)  No permit issued under this article shall be suspended (except as provided for in subsection (b), revoked, or placed on probation, except for due cause as defined in subsection (c) hereof, and after a hearing before the board of commissioners upon reasonable notice to the permittee of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing and of the reason why the permit should be suspended or revoked. At least seven days' written notice shall be deemed reasonable. 
(b)  The chairman of the board of commissioners may suspend a permit immediately or given seven days' written notice that such permit is subject to suspension when there is caused to believe that grounds exist for suspending the permit prior to the conduct of a hearing before the board of commissioners. This action shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners at its next regular meeting, or, at the request of the permittee, a special meeting of the board of commissioners may be called within seven days after such request is filed with the county permitting office, and the board of commissioners may either affirm or overturn the suspension after the hearing of evidence. A permit shall not be revoked or placed on probation, except upon action by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  "Due cause" for the suspension, revocation, or placement on probation of any permit shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)  Violation of any law, regulation, ordinance, or resolution regulation the permittee. 
(2)  The permittee's provision of false information to the county permitting office, regardless of when the county permitting office shall have become aware of the falsity of such information. 
(3)  The permittee has failed to obtain, or has suffered suspension or revocation of, any paper, permit or other document necessary in pursuance of its business, as may be required by any officer, agency, authority, or department of the county, state or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance, or resolution of the county, state or United States. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may specify conditions of operation of the permit holder during any period of probation. Such conditions shall be on file with the county permitting office. No probation shall extend over a period of more than 12 consecutive calendar months. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-707) ) 
Sec. 18-313. - Permit fees to be set by board of commissioners; refund. 
(a)  The original permit fee and annual renewal permit fee for a permit issued hereunder shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for less than a calendar year period and in cases of the revocation, suspension or surrender of such permit before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever of all or any portion of the permit fee. 
(c)  All permits shall be issued for the calendar year beginning January 1, and the fee prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be paid in full by each person prior to issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Any permit issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for which it was issued. 
(e)  No permit fee shall be prorated for any business commenced after January 1 of any calendar year, and the full amount of the annual permit fee as prescribed by the board of commissioners shall be payable for any business, whether commenced on or after January 1 of any calendar year. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-713) ) 
Sec. 18-314. - Permit to authorize conduct of one place of business. 
Each permit issued hereunder shall authorize the conduct of business at one location only, and persons doing business at more than one location within the county shall obtain a separate permit, requiring a separate fee, for each such location. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-714) ) 
Sec. 18-315. - Change of location. 
Any person moving a business permitted hereunder from one location to another shall notify the permitting office of such move and of the new address in writing, on a form provided by the county permitting office, no later than within one day of moving. A new permit shall be issued upon payment of a reasonable fee if the new location conforms to all applicable ordinances, resolutions, and the county's zoning and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-715) ) 
Sec. 18-316. - Permit to be displayed. 
All permits issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business for which the permit is issued. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-716) ) 
Sec. 18-317. - Time limit for commencement of business in permitted establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of permits hereunder must, within three months after approval of the permit, open for business the establishment referred to in the permit; unless a time extension is granted by the board of commissioners. Failure to open the permitted establishment within such three-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused permit, and no refund of permit fees shall be made to the permit holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a permit hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the permit, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the permit, shall upon completion of such three-month period automatically forfeit the permit, which permit shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any action of the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-717) ) 
Sec. 18-318. - Renewal. 
Any pawnbroker permitted under this article shall register with the county permitting office, apply for renewal of the existing permit, and pay the annual permit renewal fee no later than February 15 of each calendar year in which it does business. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-718) ) 
Sec. 18-319. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers shall keep books in compliance with state law, wherein there shall be entered an accurate description of all articles pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; and 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers on the article; and 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material of which the article is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom the article was deposited or sold; and 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made immediately upon the completion of each transaction. 
(d)  Such books, and the articles themselves so pledged or sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person engaged in business as a pawnbroker who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section, or who shall make false entries in such books, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and of the articles pledged with or sold to them shall be in violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-719) ) 
Sec. 18-320. - Consignment sale prohibited. 
Under no circumstances will any pawnbroker receive articles from another individual for the purpose of selling the article for the individual and remitting a portion of the sale prices to said individual. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-720) ) 
Sec. 18-321. - Pawn tickets and daily reports. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers will make daily reports to the sheriff's office in the manner prescribed by the sheriff or his designee. 
(b)  Pawnbrokers shall capture an image, with a digital camera, of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the article. The image shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(c)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. 
The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the article. 
The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature shall be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any article. 
(d)  A digital image shall be made, with a digital camera, at the time of acquisition of any article and of the article's serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. 
If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(e)  All persons who enter a pawnbroker business and attempt to sell or pawn an article must provide proper photo identification. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a United States driver's license, a state I.D. card, or a government identification card (military I.D.). In the event on of the mentioned identifications cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(f)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person pawning the article to the pawnbroker, shall be made by the pawnbroker and stored on premises for inspection by the sheriff or his designee. 
(g)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person pawning the article to the pawnbroker, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the pawnbroker's possession. 
(h)  To the extent that the pawnbroker utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintained for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the sheriff's office as requested. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-721) ) 
Sec. 18-322. - Pawned merchandise not to be disposed of for forty days. 
(a)  Regarding any and all articles not redeemed by the person who pawned the article by the maturity date (30 days), the pawnbroker must hold the pawned article for an additional ten-day grace period before disposing of the article or placing the article in public view for sale. 
(b)  In the event the pawnbroker purchases the article instead of the pledge, then the pawnbroker is required to hold the article for 30 days before disposing of the article or placing the article in public view for sale. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-722) ) 
Sec. 18-323. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, pledge or sale, goods of any character or description from a minor. For the purposes of this section, a minor is any individual 17 years of age or under. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-723) ) 
Sec. 18-324. - Enforcement of article. 
The article shall be enforced by the Habersham County Sheriff or his designee. This article shall not apply to incorporated portions of the county, unless it is expressly adopted by the applicable local municipal governing authority. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173(b), firearms shall not be regulated pursuant to this article. However, pawnbrokers must comply with all requirements, including but not limited to record-keeping requirements for firearms as specified in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132, of title 44, chapter 12, article 3, part 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and shall be subject to all applicable criminal penalties under state law for any violation of same. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-724) ) 
Sec. 18-325. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the pawnbroker or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the magistrate court of Habersham County, Georgia and shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as provided for in the Code of Ordinances, Habersham County, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015, § 7(18-725) ) 
Chapter 20 - DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 20, 2016 supplied provisions to be added to this Code as Ch. 12, §§ 12-1—12-26. In order to preserve the style of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 20, §§ 20-1—20-26 to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 20-1. - Intent. 
The safe operating of motor vehicles, and the need to minimize potential nuisance factors resulting from conflicts between commercial or industrial traffic utilizing streets designed for residential traffic, are issues which directly relate to the public health, safety, and welfare of residents in the county. The appropriate design and location of driveways can significantly lessen the adverse effects related to these issues. The establishment of reasonable design standards and administrative procedures included herein shall aid in protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-2. - Purpose of design standards. 
The purpose of this chapter is: 
(1)  To ensure that vehicles leave or join the roadway traffic at a proper angle and in conformity with the rules of the road. 
(2)  To reduce hazard to vehicles by reducing areas of conflict and points of conflict between vehicles. 
(3)  To increase the capacity of roads and intersections by reducing areas of conflict between vehicles. 
(4)  To provide sufficient space for the installation of traffic control devices, utilities and crosswalks. 
(5)  To reduce hazard to pedestrians by reducing areas of possible conflict between pedestrians and vehicles, and to define such areas. 
(6)  To provide reasonable assurance against the hazardous and indiscriminate use of highway right-of-way through encroachment. 
(7)  To provide a maximum practical sight distance, especially at intersections. 
(8)  To provide uniform and impartial consideration in all cases where access is required by abutting property owners. 
(9)  To reduce the possibility of conflicts between commercial/industrial traffic generators and residential areas. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following definitions apply to the standards set forth in these regulations and figures included as examples of driveway types: 
Buffer areas means the border area along the frontage between the traveled way and the right-of-way line and within the frontage boundary lines; areas (1), (2), (3), (4) in figures 1 and 2 of section 20-23. 
Buffer island means the area between the frontage right-of-way line and a line parallel to and a minimum of a four-foot distance from the right-of-way line extended away from the right-of-way line; area (5) in figures 1 and 2 in section 20-23. 
Common access driveway means the primary means of access to a public street, shared by and connecting three but no more than five parcels, tracts, lots, building sites or structures. 
Corner clearance (C) means, at an intersecting street or highway, the dimension measured along the edge of the traveled way between the frontage boundary line opposite the intersection of the two right-of-way lines and the tangent projection of the nearest edge of the driveway; see figure 3, section 20-23. 
Distance between double driveways (D) means the distance measured along the right-of-way line between the tangent projection of the inside edges of two adjacent driveways to the same frontage; D in figure 2 of section 20-23. 
Driveway angle (Y) means the angle of 90 degrees or less between the driveway centerline and the edge of the traveled way; see figures 1 and 2 of section Sec. 20-23. 
Driveway width (W) means the narrowest width of the driveway measured parallel with the edge of the traveled way; see figures 1 and 2 of section 20-23. 
Edge clearance (E) means the distance measured along the edge of the traveled way, between the frontage boundary line and the tangent projection of the nearest edge of the driveway; see figures 1 and 2 of section 20-23. 
Frontage means the length along the highway right-of-way line of a single property tract of roadside development area between the edges of the property; the distance between (1) and (2) in figures 1 and 2 of section 20-23. 
Frontage boundary line (abbreviated as FB line) means a line perpendicular to the highway centerline, at each end of the frontage lines, extending from the right-of-way to the edge of the through-traffic lane; line (1)—(4) or (2)—(3) in figures 1 and 2 of section 20-23. 
Inside radius (U) means the inside or smaller curve radius on the edge of the driveway, used when Y is substantially less than 90 degrees; see figures 2 and 3 of section 20-23. 
Outside radius (R) means the outside or larger curve radius on the edge of the driveway; see figures 1, 2 and 3 of section 20-23. 
(b)  For simplicity, the above definitions are stated in terms of single radius curves of the edge of driveways or intersecting highways. Where compound curves or tapers are used, an equivalent single radius curve may be used as a control guide. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-4. - Application for permit. 
Application for a permit to construct or alter a driveway or curb cut occurring on or abutting a county road right-of-way shall be made to the building official of the county under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When such driveway(s) or curb cut(s) are incidental to the development of a new structure or the development of previously undeveloped property, the driveway permit shall constitute a part of the building permit. 
(2)  When such driveway or curb cut construction constitutes a separate action apart from any other construction on the same site, a driveway permit shall be secured from the building official. 
(3)  When property abutting a county road right-of-way changes from one use to another and driveways and/or curb cuts have previously been extended across or to a county road right-of-way, or when the type of use or the volume of use of an existing and/or previously approved driveway is substantially changed, application for review shall be submitted and a driveway permit secured from the building official. The occupancy permit may be withheld until such driveway improvements have been approved. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-5. - Issuance or denial of permit; appeals. 
Upon  reviewing an application for a driveway permit in any of the aforementioned circumstances, the building official shall take one of the following courses of action: 
(1)  Issue the permit if the standards correspond with the requirements as outlined in the regulations. 
(2)  Submit the application to the public works director and/or the planning director for their review, such review not to exceed five working days. The public works director and/or the planning director shall: 
a.  Recommend approval of the permit to the building official; 
b.  Recommend disapproval of the permit unless certain modifications are made which they shall delineate in writing to the building official. 
(3)  Issue the permit if the applicant agrees to follow the recommendations of the public works director/planning director. 
(4)  Deny the permit application. 
(5)  If the driveway permit is denied by the building official, the applicant can appeal the building official's decision to the planning commission, who shall hear testimony from the applicant. The planning commission may either approve or deny the application. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-6. - General design standards. 
The location, design and construction of the driveway shall be in accordance with the following standards. These standards are in no case to be modified unless specifically authorized by the building official: 
(1)  A driveway shall be located and restricted as to width as necessary driveway and its appurtenances are contained within the frontage along the highway of the property served. At public highway intersections a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the public highway intersection area and shall not encroach on or occupy areas of the roadway or right-of-way deemed necessary for effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals. A driveway shall be so located and constructed that vehicles approaching or using it will have adequate sight distance in both directions along the highway. 
(2)  The number of driveways permitted serving a single property frontage shall be a maximum of two unless more are deemed necessary by the public works director for reasonable service to the property without undue impairment of safety, convenience, and utility of the highway. 
(3)  If the property has frontage on more than one street, and a driveway permit is requested, the building official may request a recommendation from the public works director, planning director, or planning commission as to the potential adverse effects which may result. If it is determined that it would cause a nuisance to the surrounding area, or a traffic hazard, or unduly congest traffic, then the permit may be denied. 
(4)  The island area on the right-of-way between successive driveways or adjoining a driveway and between the highway shoulder and right-of-way line shall remain unimproved for vehicular travel or parking. Such areas shall be considered as restricted and may be filled in or graded down only as hereinafter provided in subsection (8) of this section. 
(5)  The surface of the driveway connecting with rural type highway sections shall slope down and away from the highway shoulder a sufficient amount and distance to preclude ordinary surface water drainage from the driveway area flooding onto the highway roadbed. 
(6)  The driveway shall not obstruct or impair drainage in side ditches or roadside areas. Driveway culverts, where necessary, shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the roadway and in no case less than the equivalent of 15-inch diameter pipe. The distance between culverts under successive driveways shall be not less than ten feet except as such restricted area is permitted to be filled in under the provisions of subsection (8) of this section. All driveway culverts shall be constructed of the following materials and meet Georgia Department of Transportation (D.O.T.) specifications: 
a.  Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), D.O.T. approved Class III or better. 
b.  Corrugated metal pipe, D.O.T. approved, type II aluminized steel. This material is prohibited in live stream applications. 
c.  High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe, D.O.T. approved, dual walled. 
(7)  Driveways connecting to "L" back curb and gutter must be constructed by removing the curb and gutter and pouring a valley gutter. When curb and gutter is removed for constructing a driveway, the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway or valley gutter surface shall connect with the highway pavement and sidewalks, if any, in a neat workmanlike manner. In no case shall the driveway construction impair the flow of water in the gutter. Figures 7 and 8 depict the proper details for constructing a valley gutter. 
(8)  Driveways connecting to rolled curb and gutter may be constructed by either pouring the driveway directly up to the back of the curb or by removing the curb and gutter and pouring a valley gutter. When curb and gutter is removed for constructing a driveway, the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway or valley gutter surface shall connect with the highway pavement and sidewalks, if any, in a neat workmanlike manner. In no case shall the driveway construction impair the flow of water in the gutter. Figures 7 and 8 depict the proper details for constructing a valley gutter. 
(9)  Any activities that impair the flow of water in a curb and gutter are prohibited. These prohibited activities include, but are not limited to: The filling in of curb and gutter with concrete or asphalt, or the removal of curb and gutter without providing an acceptable valley gutter as described in [subsections] (7) and (8) above. 
(10)  The restricted area between successive driveways may be filled in or graded down only when the following requirements are fully complied with: 
a.  The filling or grading down shall be to grades approved by the public works director; and, except where drainage is by means of curb and gutter, water drainage of the area shall be directed away from the highway roadbed in a suitable manner. 
b.  Culvert extension under the restricted area shall be of like size and equivalent acceptable material of the driveway culvert, and intermediate manholes adequate for clean-out purposes may be required where the total culvert length exceeds 100 feet. 
c.  Where no side ditch separates the restricted area from the roadbed, permanent provision may be required to separate the areas from the highway roadbed, to prevent its use for driveway or parking purposes, by construction of a border, curb, rail or posts deemed adequate by the public works director. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-7. - Specific design standards. 
The following specific design standards in sections 20-9 through 20-16 shall apply to driveways requiring permits as set forth in these regulations. The items are driveway width, angle of entry and exit, return radius of curb, maximum percent of frontage for driveway use, distance to side property lines, island areas, intersection clearance, parking and storage areas and driveway grade. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-8. - Driveway widths. 
Measured parallel to the roadway, [driveway widths shall be as follows]: 

 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-9. - Angle of entry and exit. 
Driveway angles [shall be as follows]: 
(1)  Residential, 60 to 90 degrees, or parallel to property line; 
(2)  Apartments, 70 to 90 degrees for two-way driveways or 45 to 90 degrees for one-way streets; 
(3)  Commercial, 70 to 90 degrees for two-way driveways or 45 to 90 degrees for one-way on divided roadway or 60 to 90 degrees for one-way ramp on non-divided roadway; 
(4)  Industrial, 90 degrees, or as close as practicable, for two-way, or 45 degrees, one-way access on one-way street; 
(5)  Rural, land access only, 60 to 90 degrees. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-10. - Return radius of curb. 
[Return radius of curbs shall be as follows:] 

 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-11. - Maximum percentage of frontage for driveway use. 
(a)  Each single driveway shall have a maximum width of 30 percent of the property frontage. Where two or more driveways are permitted, no more than 60 percent of property frontage shall be used as driveways. 
(b)  No approval for a curb cut will be given where it is apparent that the intent is not to provide access but to provide parking only. A driveway approach must provide access to something definite on private property such as a parking area considerably greater in extent than the width of the driveway, or provide access to a driveway, or to a door at least eight feet wide intended for the entrance of vehicles, etc. (not applicable for residential driveways). 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-12. - Distance to side property lines. 
(a)  The area within five feet of a frontage boundary line shall be a restricted area on which no driveway may be developed on public right-of-way (E). 
(b)  A minimum of 1½ feet of pavement edge or curb shall be left undisturbed adjacent to each frontage boundary line to serve as an island area. This distance shall be measured between the FB line and the point of tangency of the driveway radius and the edge of the pavement measured along the edge of the pavement. 
(c)  Subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall apply, whichever is more restrictive. 
(d)  These requirements may be waived when a single driveway is approved to serve two adjacent lots. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-13. - Island areas. 
(a)  Minimum island dimensions. 
(1)  Distance between double driveways (D), ten feet minimum at narrowest point; 
(2)  Minimum island depth, four feet where parking abuts street right-of-way line. 
(b)  Treatment of island or buffer area. In the development of private property and the construction of driveways thereto, it may be necessary to regrade the buffer area by cutting or filling. Such work shall be done in a manner to insure adequate sight distance for traffic operations, proper drainage, suitable slopes for maintenance operations, and good appearance. The buffer area outside the driveways shall be treated to prevent use by vehicles. This may be accomplished by grading, or use of curbs, rails, guide posts, low walls, low shrubs, etc., in a manner which will not impair clear sight across the area. 
(c)  Visibility clearance. No landscaping, fences, terraces, or other natural or artificial features adjacent to any street shall be of a nature impairing visibility from or of approaching vehicular traffic where such visibility is important to safety, nor shall such features in any way create potential hazards to pedestrians. In particular, at vehicular entrances and exits, no off-street parking, landscaping, or other material impediment to visibility between the height of three feet and ten feet, measured from the roadway level, shall be permitted within triangular areas defined by lines connecting points described as follows: 
a.  Nonresidential use. Beginning at a point where the midline of the entrance or exit intersects the public right-of-way, thence to a point of 35 feet along the right-of-way in the direction of approaching traffic, thence to a point of 25 feet toward the interior of the lot along the midline of the entrance or exit, and thence to a point of beginning. (See figure Sec. 20-13 A [Sec. 20-23 5A].) 
b.  Multifamily residential use. Beginning at a point where the midline of the entrance or exit intersects the public right-of-way, thence to a point of ten feet along the right-of-way in the direction of approaching traffic, thence to a point of ten feet toward the interior of the lot along the midline of the entrance or exit, and thence to the point of beginning. (See figure Sec. 20-23 B [Sec. 20-23 5B].) 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-14. - Intersection clearance. 
The length, width and shape of corner island areas will vary for different locations. The angle of intersection, angle of driveways, width of the right-of-way on both approaches, channelization radii, and other conditions will influence the location of driveways at intersections. The location and angle of an approach in relation to the highway intersection shall be such that a vehicle leaving the service facility may be merged in the lane of traffic moving in the desired direction before crossing the intersection, and that a vehicle entering the facility from the intersection may do so in an orderly and safe manner with a minimum of interference to through traffic. 
The following conditions may be applicable in most instances: 
(1)  No driveway shall be allowed to encroach upon pavement edge radii. 
(2)  The following minimum distances from the intersection right-of-way line (C) shall apply where there is no conflict with the foregoing conditions: 
a.  Traffic volume A.D.T. of 1,500 or less, 20 feet; 
b.  Traffic volume A.D.T. over 1,500 but less than 10,000, 35 feet; 
c.  Traffic volume A.D.T. over 10,000 but less than 15,000, 50 feet; 
d.  Traffic volume A.D.T. over 15,000, 65 feet. 
The public works director shall have the authority to increase these distances if in his opinion such action is necessary for the protection of traffic. The public works director may also modify these requirements if justifiable on the basis of site conditions. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-15. - Parking and storage areas. 
(a)  Each roadside business establishment, when providing off-street parking or storage space, shall provide such parking or storage space off the right-of-way to prevent the storage of vehicles on the driveway or the backing up of traffic on the travel way. This is particularly needed for businesses where a number of vehicles will be leaving and entering at the same time. 
(b)  Particular attention will be paid to drive-in facilities such as banks, minute car washes, drive-in restaurants, drive-in bill paying facilities, and other service facilities where motorists are served while in their vehicles, to insure that queues of vehicles will not extend out onto the public streets. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-16. - Driveway grade. 
(a)  Residential driveways: The maximum grade which shall be permitted is 17 percent. 
(b)  Apartment, commercial and industrial driveways: The maximum grade which shall be permitted is eight percent. 
(c)  Grades within the right-of-way shall be controlled by existing shoulder slope or existing and future sidewalk elevations. 
(d)  When driveways are intended for special use vehicles, the underside clearance and/or break over angle of the subject vehicle shall dictate the maximum driveway. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-17. - Common access driveways; general provisions. 
The following specific design standards shall apply to common access driveways requiring permits as set forth in these regulations. Even though a common access drive may provide access to parcels or lots, each resultant parcel, tract, or lot must still meet the minimum public street frontage requirements for the zoning district in which it is located unless otherwise exempted as a lot of record. Parcels, tracts, lots, or building sites for which building permits are requested or upon which there is a proposed subdivision of land that will not have separate and individual driveway access to a public street within the limits of the property itself, but is proposed to be served by a common access driveway, shall install such a driveway in conformance to the following standards in sections 20-18 through 20-22. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-18. - Common access driveways; submission of plans. 
Any [person seeking an] (a) building permit or occupancy permit requested for lots of record, or (b) proposed subdivision of land, whereby three but not more than five parcels or lots are to be served by a common access driveway, shall, at the time of the permit application or proposed subdivision of property, submit all necessary plans as required by the county engineer indicating the proposed location and construction specifications for the proposed common access driveway. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-19. - Common access driveways; construction prior to plat approval or issuance of occupancy permit. 
New common access driveways shall be constructed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for lots of record or prior to the approval and recording of a final plat for the proposed subdivision of land. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-20. - Common access driveways; plats and required statements. 
Plats indicating the location of common access driveway easements and lots to be served shall be recorded with the clerk of superior court of the county. The plats shall include: 
(1)  A statement to the effect that the driveway easement shown on the plat is not to be dedicated as a public road and not to be maintained by the county, but shall be privately maintained; and 
(2)  A statement signed by the surveyor, a registered engineer or a registered landscape architect that the driveway has been constructed in accordance with the minimum standards of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-21. - Common access driveways; previously existing driveways. 
Any existing easements or common driveways which have been recorded prior to the effective date of this amendment [chapter] may continue to serve existing lots which were also recorded prior to the effective date of the resolution codified in this chapter. Any new driveways which would propose access to three or more undeveloped lots of record must conform with the standards for a common access driveway in accordance with this amendment. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-22. - Common access driveways; minimum standards. 
Construction of common access driveways shall conform to the following minimum standards. Please see Figure 6 for a cross-section detail: 
(1)  Easement width, 30 feet, 30 feet radius easement in cul-de-sac; 
(2)  Roadbed width 20 feet; 
(3)  Shoulder width, two feet; 
(4)  Base width, 18 feet; 
(5)  Pavement width, 16 feet; 
(6)  Minimum radius at cul-de-sac transition and intersections, 20 feet; 
(7)  Pavement type: 
a.  Plant mix, one inch thick over graded aggregate four inches thick (except within the public right-of-way, which shall be six inches thick); 
b.  Concrete, four inches thick (except within the public right-of-way, which shall be six inches thick); 
(8)  If a common access driveway terminates in a dead end, the termination shall be either a cul-de-sac with a paved radius of 25 feet, or another termination method that allows for vehicles to turn around safely and is acceptable to county engineering; 
(9)  If a common access driveway is a cul-de-sac, the maximum length of the cul-de-sac shall be 1,000 feet; 
(10)  Individual driveways joining the common driveway must be placed entirely on the property that they serve; 
(11)  Individual driveways joining the common driveway may only serve one lot; 
(12)  Ditches: Front slope, maximum 2:1 ratio; rear slope, maximum 2:1 ratio; 1½ foot minimum depth; 
(13)  Maximum finished driveway grade, 17 percent; driveway grades up to 20 percent may be approved by the county engineer in extreme conditions; 
(14)  Pavement crown, ¼-inch per foot; 
(15)  All slopes and shoulders to be grassed; 
(16)  Minimum crossdrain pipe size, 18 inches; 
(17)  The driveway must intersect the public road at an angle of 65 degrees or greater; 
(18)  The driveway must enter the public road at least 65 feet from any intersection of another common access driveway as measured from centerline to centerline. The driveway must enter the public road at least 65 feet from another public road intersection as measured from the centerline of the common access driveway to the closest point of right-of-way intersection; 
(19)  Intersection sight distance shall be as specified in the sight distance table in appendix A § 1220 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-23. - Example figures. 
The following figures may be used in conjunction with the standards and definitions set forth in this chapter as examples of typical driveway types: 








(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-24. - General conditions of approval; rights of county. 
The following conditions shall apply to all approvals for driveway construction on public right-of-way: 
(1)  The applicant shall represent all parties with a property interest in the proposed driveway and shall certify that any driveway or approach constructed by him is for the bona fide purpose of securing access to his property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing vehicles, or for advertising, storage, or merchandising of goods on the county right-of-way. 
(2)  The applicant shall furnish all materials, do all work, and pay all costs in connection with the construction and maintenance of the driveway and its appurtenances on the right-of-way unless the county agrees otherwise. The applicant shall arrange for and bear the entire cost of moving poles, trees, signs, hydrants, catch basins, and other existing installations which may interfere with the proposed driveway. Materials used and type and character of work shall be suitable and appropriate for its intended purpose, and the type of construction shall be as designated by and subject to approval of the public works director. The time-table for installation shall be approved by the building official and/or public works director. The applicant shall make the installation without jeopardy to or interference with vehicular traffic using the highway or pedestrian traffic using the adjacent sidewalk. Street surfaces, shoulders, ditches and vegetation disturbed shall be restored to equivalent or original condition by the applicant. 
(3)  No revisions or additions shall be made to the driveway or its appurtenances on the right-of-way without the written permission of the building official. 
(4)  The county reserves the right to make such changes, additions, repairs and relocations within statutory limits to the driveway or its appurtenances on the right-of-way as may at any time be considered necessary to permit the relocation, reconstruction, widening and maintaining of the highway or to provide proper protection to life and property [on] or adjacent to the street. The county shall make all reasonable attempts to comply with all provisions of this resolution [chapter]. 
(5)  The applicant, his successors or assignees agree to hold harmless the county and its duly appointed agents and employees against any action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the exercise of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(6)  Whenever an existing road is improved by reconstruction or maintenance work, existing entrances to the road may be altered by the county to conform to the spirit and intent of the policy and standards set forth in this chapter. 
(7)  Whenever the public works director determines that inadequate or indiscriminate access or long stretches of paved or unpaved accesses result in an undue hazard to the motoring public on the thoroughfare, existing entrances may be required to be altered or reduced in extent to conform with the spirit and intent of this policy and upon approval of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-25. - Conflict with other laws. 
Should any requirement or design standard conflict in any manner with any other law, rule or regulation of any local, state or federal governmental body or administrative agency, then the stricter law, rule, or regulation shall be applied. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or premises than is imposed or required by other resolutions, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 20-26. - Severability; penalty; additional remedies. 
(a)  Validity. Should any article, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part hereof being declared severable. 
(b)  Remedies. In case any driveway is (or is proposed to be) constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any driveway is (or is proposed to be) used, in violation of any provision of this chapter, the building official, county attorney, or [other appropriate official may, in addition to] other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use [or] to correct or abate such violation. Where a violation of these regulations exists, the county building official may, in addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and county service departments of such violation and request that service be withheld therefrom until such time as there is no longer a violation of these regulations. 
(c)  Penalties for violations. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Habersham County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Habersham County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2016 ) 
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Ambulance service to Tallulah Falls city limits. 
(a)  Purpose. Provide guidelines for appropriate ambulance response to the City of Tallulah Falls, Georgia, by way of an agreement between Rabun County and Habersham County Ambulance Services. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Any call received from lower Rabun County that is determined to be within the city limits of Tallulah Falls will be considered in the Habersham County response area. 
(2)  Should assistance be needed on any given call, back up support may be requested from either Habersham County or Rabun County Ambulance Services. 
(3)  Should a patient request to be transported to a hospital other than H.C.M.C., their request will be honored provided their condition is stable. If the patient's condition is unstable, based on the EMT/paramedic's findings, they will then be transported to the nearest facility capable of treating the emergency. 
(4)  Calls in Rabun County outside the Tallulah Falls city limits will continue to be handled by the mutual aid agreement between Habersham and Rabun Counties. 
(Ord. No. 92-11, §§ A, B, 12-7-1992) 
Secs. 22-2—22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY 911 SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number "911" Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-21. - Central dispatch department created. 
The county central dispatch department is created. 
(Res. of 7-2-1990) 
Secs. 22-22—22-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNTY EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-46. - Short title. 
This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Habersham County Emergency Communications Service District Resolution." 
(Res. No. 1-91, § I, 1-7-1991) 
Sec. 22-47. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
District means the corporate boundaries, including its municipalities, of Habersham County, Georgia, providing an emergency telephone number 911 system. 
Emergency 911 system means a local telephone exchange service which facilitates the placing of calls by persons in need of emergency services to a public safety answering point by dialing the telephone number 911 and under which calls to 911 are answered by public safety answering points established and operated by the local government subscribing to the 911 service. The term "emergency 911 system" also includes "enhanced '911' service," which means an emergency telephone system that provides the caller with emergency 911 system service and, in addition, directs 911 calls to appropriate public safety answering points by selective routing based on the geographical location from which the call originated and provides the capability for automatic number identification and automatic location identification features. 
Exchange access facilities means the access from a particular telephone subscriber's premises to the telephone system of a service supplier. Exchange access facilities include service supplier provided access lines, PBX trunks, and centrex network access registers, all as defined by tariffs of telephone companies as approved by the Georgia Public Service Commission. Exchange access facilities do not include service supplier owned and operated telephone pay station lines, wide area telecommunications service (WATS), foreign exchange (FX) or incoming other lines. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of Habersham County. 
911 charge means a contribution to the local government for the 911 service start-up equipment costs, subscriber notification costs, addressing costs, billing costs, nonrecurring and recurring installation, maintenance, service and network charges of a service supplier providing the 911 service pursuant to this chapter, and costs associated with the hiring, training and compensating of dispatchers employed by the local government to operate said 911 system at the public safety answering points. 
Public agency means the state and any city, county, city and county, municipal corporation, chartered organization, public district or public authority located in whole or in part within this state which provides or has authority to provide firefighting, law enforcement, ambulance, medical or other emergency services. 
Public safety agency means a functional division of a public agency which provides firefighting, law enforcement, emergency medical, suicide prevention, civil defense, poison control, drug prevention, child abuse, spouse abuse or other emergency services. 
Service supplier means a person or entity who provides local exchange telephone service to a telephone subscriber. 
Tariff rate means the rate billed by a service supplier as stated in the service supplier's tariffs and approved by the Public Service Commission that represent the service supplier's recurring charges for exchange access facilities exclusive of all taxes, fees, licenses or similar charges whatsoever. 
Telephone subscriber means a person or entity to whom local exchange telephone service, either residential or commercial, is provided and in return for which the person or entity is billed on a monthly basis. When the same person, business or organization has several telephone access lines, each exchange access facility shall constitute a separate subscription. 
(Res. No. 1-91, § II, 1-7-1991) 
Sec. 22-48. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the district is to plan, acquire, construct, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and maintain an emergency telephone number 911 system to support the district public safety agencies in the provision of emergency services and law enforcement services, resulting in the saving of life, a reduction in the destruction of property, quicker apprehension of criminals and ultimately the saving of moneys. 
(Res. No. 1-91, § III, 1-7-1991) 
Sec. 22-49. - Establishment and funding of district. 
(a)  Establishment. The government authority herewith establishes an emergency telephone number 911 system district and levies an emergency telephone service charge in an amount not to exceed the total district operating budget of the emergency telephone number 911 system divided by the total number of exchange access facilities within the district. Any district service charge shall have uniform application and shall be imposed throughout the entire district to the greatest extent possible in conformity with the availability of such service in any area of the district. The funds generated by the service charge shall be utilized by the county solely to defray the actual costs of the emergency telephone 911 system as those costs are defined at O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(e). The governing authority may, by resolution, amend the service charge rate to an amount adequate to fund the district. 
(b)  Service charge. 
(1)  The government authority may impose the emergency telephone service charge provided for in subsection (a) of this section in an amount not to exceed $1.50 per month per exchange access facility provided to telephone subscriber. 
(2)  Every billed telephone subscriber shall be liable for any service charge imposed under this section until it has been paid to the service supplier. The duty of the service supplier to collect any such service charge shall commence upon the date of its implementation as set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section. Any such emergency telephone service charge shall be added to, and stated separately in, the bill by the service supplier to the service user. 
(c)  Collection. 
(1)  The service charge shall be collected at the same time as the tariff rate in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier; provided, however, that no such charge be levied or collected prior to 30 days following the date the emergency telephone number 911 system becomes fully operational. 
(2)  The service supplier shall have no obligation to take any legal action to enforce the collection of any emergency telephone service charge. The service supplier shall provide the governing authority with the name and address of each telephone subscriber who has notified the service supplier in writing of such telephone subscriber's refusal to pay the emergency telephone service charge. The service supplier shall so notify the governing authority within 60 days of receipt of such notice by the user. A collection action may be initiated by the county and reasonable costs and attorneys' fees associated with that collection action may be awarded to the county. 
(3)  Good faith compliance by the service supplier with this provision shall constitute a complete defense to any legal action or claim which may result from the service supplier's determination of nonpayment or the identification of telephone subscribers in connection therewith. 
(d)  Revenue. 
(1)  The amounts collected by the service supplier attributable to any emergency telephone service charge shall be due quarterly to the district. The amount of service charge collected in one calendar quarter by the service supplier shall be remitted to the district no later than 60 days after the close of a calendar quarter. Said amounts shall be deposited and accounted for in a separate special revenue fund maintained by the county and known as the Emergency Telephone System Fund. The county may invest the money in the same manner as other moneys of the county may be invested, and any income earned from such investment shall be deposited into the Emergency Telephone System Fund. 
(2)  On or before the 60th day after the close of a calendar quarter, a return, in such form as may be mutually agreed to by the county and the service supplier, shall be filed with the county, together with a remittance of the amount of service charge collected payable to the district. 
(3)  The service supplier shall maintain records of the amount of the service charge collected for a period of at least three years from date of collection. The county may, at its expense, require an annual audit of the supplier's books and records with respect to the collection and remittance of the service charge. 
(4)  The service supplier shall be entitled to retain as an administrative fee an amount equal to three percent of the gross receipts to be remitted to the district. 
(e)  Additional funding. In order to provide additional funding for the district, the county may receive federal, state, municipal, or private funds which shall be expended for the purposes of this division. 
(f)  Tax exemption. The emergency telephone service charge is not subject to state and local tax. 
(g)  Exemption. The service charge does not apply to exchange access facilities provided to federal, state and local governments. 
(Res. No. 1-91, § IV, 1-7-1991) 
State Law reference— 911 fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133. 
Secs. 22-50—22-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY 911 SYSTEM ADVISORY BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— 911 advisory board required, O.C.G.A. § 45-5-136. 

Sec. 22-72. - Duties. 
The duties of the 911 advisory board shall be to assist the county with: 
(1)  Reviewing and analyzing the progress by public safety agencies in developing 911 system requirements; 
(2)  Recommending steps of action to effect the necessary coordination, regulation and development of a 911 system; 
(3)  Identifying mutual aid agreements necessary to effect the 911 system; 
(4)  Assisting in the promulgation of necessary rules, regulations, operating procedures, schedules and other such policy and administrative devices as shall be deemed necessary and appropriate; and 
(5)  Providing other services as may be deemed appropriate by the local government. 
(Res. of 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 22-73. - Members. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-136, the county board of commissioners shall appoint the sheriff and the following representatives listed below, from other public safety agencies, which respond to emergency calls under the 911 system, and individuals knowledgeable of emergency 911 systems and the emergency needs of the citizens of the county. Individuals listed below, except for the sheriff, shall be public officials or representatives appointed by said public officials provided those selected are knowledgeable of emergency 911 systems and the emergency needs of all local governments, businesses and citizens within the county: 
(1)  Sheriff; 
(2)  County fire chief; 
(3)  EMS director; 
(4)  911 director; 
(5)  EMA director; 
(6)  City of Clarkesville governmental representative; 
(7)  City of Baldwin governmental representative; 
(8)  City of Cornelia governmental representative; 
(9)  Town of Alto governmental representative; 
(10)  City of Demorest governmental representative; 
(11)  Town of Mount Airy governmental representative; 
(12)  Town of Tallulah Falls governmental representative; 
(13)  County citizen. 
(b)  The 911 advisory board, at no time, shall exceed 13 appointed members; and, such terms shall be for the public officials term of office, except each citizen shall serve for a three-year term. 
(c)  Members of the 911 advisory board shall not be compensated. 
(Res. of 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 22-74. - Officers. 
The 911 advisory board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from within its membership, and the position of secretary shall be filled by the clerk of the county commission. 
(Res. of 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 22-75—22-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROAD NAMES AND PROPERTY NUMBERS 

Sec. 22-92. - System established. 
There is hereby established a uniform system for road naming and for numbering property and buildings on all roads, streets and public ways in the county; and all buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, art. I, 3-1-1993) 
Sec. 22-93. - Road naming. 
The following shall apply to the naming of roads: 
(1)  No new road names shall duplicate or be similar, either phonetically or by spelling, to another road name in the county, regardless of the road name suffix (see subsection (c) of this section). 
(2)  Existing duplicate road names. Where necessary to maintain the order and uniformity sought by this article, existing duplicate road names may be changed by resolution of the board, upon receipt of recommendations from the planning commission and/or public hearing. All new road names shall be approved by the board of commissioners, with the exception of new subdivision roads and streets which is governed by the county subdivision regulations. 
(3)  A master list of the names, including pertinent suffixes, of all roads and streets within the county shall be maintained by the office of planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, art. II, 3-1-1993) 
Sec. 22-94. - Property numbering. 
A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter: 
(1)  All buildings north of east/west roads and east of north/south roads shall bear even numbers, and likewise all buildings on the south side of east/west roads and west of north/south roads shall bear odd numbers. Roads running more nearly north/south shall be numbered as north/south roads and all roads running more nearly east/west shall be numbered as east/west roads. 
(2)  All numbers shall be assigned in a manner so agreed upon by the county and the U. S. Postal Service. 
(3)  Principal building or structure, shall have its own number. A building number shall be assigned for each separate unit. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, art. III, 3-1-1993) 
Sec. 22-95. - Assignment of numbers. 
(a)  Existing numbers shall be changed only where it is necessary in the judgment of the land development administrator in order to maintain the order and uniformity sought by this chapter. 
(b)  Effective upon the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the county office of planning and development shall begin assigning any and all developing structures located on any road, street or public way in the jurisdiction of this chapter its respective number under the uniform system provided for in this chapter. A copy of the correctly numbered plat will be returned to the developer as well as a copy being sent to the central dispatch office. 
(c)  Written notification of the proper address of each building shall be given to the owner, occupant or agent of each building in all instances where a new number is assigned under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, art. IV, 3-1-1993) 
Sec. 22-96. - Placement of numbers. 
(a)  When each principal building or structure has been assigned its respective number, the owner, occupant or agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each principal building or structure controlled by him, the number assigned under the uniform system as provided in this article, or by the county's consultant. 
(b)  Such numbers shall be placed on existing principal building or structure within 45 days after the date of notification of proper number assignment. 
(c)  Each one-family and two-family dwelling unit shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the road or street providing general public access, the address of such dwelling unit in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. 
(d)  Each multifamily (three or more dwelling units) shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the building, visible from the parking lot or street providing general public access, the address or number of the building in figures of at least three inches high on a contrasting background and each individual apartment/unit within the building shall be marked on or about its main entrance with the individual apartment/unit number and/or address in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. In addition to the above, where a multifamily building has more than one exterior entrance, each such entrance shall be marked in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background, with the number and/or address of each and every individual apartment/unit to which access is provided through that common entrance. 
(e)  Each business or other nonresidential building shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing public access, the address of such building in figures at least four inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. If the numbers are not placed within 15 feet of the back of the street curbing or edge of street surface, then such figures shall be at least six inches high. 
(f)  Numbers shall be put in a conspicuous place immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door so that the number is clearly visible from the road or street line. In cases where the building or structure is situated more than 50 feet from the road or street line, the building number shall be placed near the walk, driveway, or common entrance to the building, and upon the front of mailbox, gate post, fence, curb or other appropriate place so as to be clearly visible from the road or street line. When the number is placed on the front of mailbox, the height of numbers may be reduced to 2½ inches in height. Also, a double faced number sign may be used, and placed perpendicular to the road or street, when the building or structure is located more than 50 feet from the road or street line. 
(g)  Cost of numbers and installation shall be the responsibility of the property owners, except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, art. V, 3-1-1993) 
Sec. 22-97. - Administration and implementation. 
(a)  Whenever any house, building or structure shall be erected or located in the area of the jurisdiction of this chapter after March 10, 1993, it shall be the duty of the land development administrator to inform any party applying therefore, of the number belonging to or embraced within the limits of any lot or property as provided in this chapter. In case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned, the land development administrator shall determine the number of such principal building or structure. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner to secure the correct number as designated by the office of planning and development for said property and attach said number so assigned on said building as provided by this chapter. 
(c)  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any principal building or structure until the owner has obtained the assigned number from the office of planning and development. 
(d)  Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be withheld by the county building official until permanent and proper numbers have been attached or fastened to said structure. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, art. VI, 3-1-1993) 
Secs. 22-98—22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JOINT CITY/COUNTY GOVERNMENT ORDINANCE REGARDING EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-151. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin" ... "These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services [public safety]; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; [nuclear. power] plant protection; temporary restoration of public service utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
( Ord. of 2-16-09, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, as amended December 1992, Chapter 3, Article 1, 38 3-3. 
Sec. 22-152. - Local organization for emergency management. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is herby established the Habersham County Emergency Management Agency. The chairperson of the Habersham County Commissioners, with the concurrence of officials of the cities within the county, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the Habersham County Emergency Management Agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the Habersham County Emergency Operations Plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Emergency Operations Plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Habersham County and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Habersham County emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities, etc. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Habersham County Emergency Operations Center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the Habersham County emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of Habersham County/cities governing officials. 
( Ord. of 2-16-09, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 22-153. - Habersham County Emergency Management Agency. 
The Habersham County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions, (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as follows: 
(Department/Agency assignment listed below are examples only. It is the responsibility of local governments to make assignments based upon local capabilities.) 

 
(Ord. of 2-16-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-154. - [Duties of chairperson.] 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the citizens of Habersham County, the chairperson of the Habersham County Commissioners separately, or jointly with the Mayor of Alto, Baldwin, Clarkesville, Cornelia, Demorest, Mt. Airy and Tallulah Falls City(ies), or in their absence their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
( Ord. of 2-16-09, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A., Georgia Emergency Management Act 1981 as amended Chapter 3, Article 2, 38-3-27. 
Sec. 22-155. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of Habersham County, performing emergency functions pursuant to this resolution/ordinance, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
( Ord. of 2-16-09, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
State Law reference— Chapter 3, Article 2, 38-3-35. 
Sec. 22-156. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided for in section 1-7 herein. 
( Ord. of 2-16-09, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 22-157. - Liberality of construction. 
This resolution/ordinance shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
( Ord. of 2-16-09, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 22-158. - Effective date. 
This resolution/ordinance is effective immediately and where the provisions of this resolution are in conflict with existing local laws, the provisions of this resolution/ordinance will govern and such provisions of existing laws which are in conflict, are hereby rescinded. 
( Ord. of 2-16-09, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Secs. 22-159, 22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 22, 2010, § 1(Exh. A), supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 22-115—22-199. In order to maintain the existing numbering system of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have redesignated as §§ 22-161—22-205, to read as set out herein. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-161. - Preamble, purpose, intent and enactment clause. 
The health, safety and welfare of the citizens and property of Habersham County may be jeopardized during an emergency, disaster or imminent threat thereof, by the presence of looters, vandals, thieves and others who would take advantage of the confusion and devastation that accompanies such an event; and 
The health, safety and welfare of the citizens and property of Habersham County may be jeopardized during an emergency, disaster or the subsequent recovery period by the inability for the local governing authority to act expediently without regard to certain formalities; and 
The health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Habersham County depend upon the availability and affordability of certain essential goods, materials, services and housing; and 
During and following periods of emergency resulting from natural or manmade disaster, the public is at risk from unscrupulous building contractors and repair services, scams and other unconscionable activities related to constructing, repairing, renovating and making improvements to buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster; and 
The local governing authority of Habersham County is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 38-3-27(b)(2) and 38-3-28 to take actions necessary to provide for the health and safety of persons and property during periods of emergency or disaster, provided that such actions are not inconsistent with any orders, rules, or regulations promulgated by the governor or his delegatee; and 
The powers and functions exercised by the local governing authority necessary to conduct the business and affairs of Habersham County during an emergency or disaster proclaimed as such by the appropriate state official may continue without the regard to compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54; and 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 36-10-4(c)(5) and 36-4-63(6), certain formalities concerning public works contracts may be waived when necessitated by emergency; and 
The Habersham County Board of Commissioners believes that it is desirable to have legislation in place authorizing the board to waive certain formalities and procedures as necessary in case of emergency, natural disaster or the subsequent recovery period; and 
The Habersham County Board of Commissioners believes that it is desirable to have legislation in place authorizing the board to enact a curfew when it is determined necessary to maintain order and to protect either the citizens or their property during an emergency or disaster in certain areas of the county. 
The governing authority of Habersham County enacts the following article, divisions, and sections. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Secs. 22-162—22-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEWS 

Sec. 22-166. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Habersham County. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-115) ) 
Sec. 22-167. - Definitions. 
(a)  Curfew. A 'curfew' is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
(b)  Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, 'exempt individuals' include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to Habersham County Ordinance No. ("Ordinance to Require Registration and Licensing of Building and Repair Services during a State of Emergency"), performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
(c)  State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-116) ) 
Sec. 22-168. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Habersham County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-117) ) 
Sec. 22-169. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in chapter 1, section 1-7 herein. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-118) ) 
Sec. 22-170. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-119) ) 
Sec. 22-171. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon adoption by the local governing authority of Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-120) ) 
Secs. 22-172—22-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SUSPENSION OF CODE AND OTHER FORMALITIES 

Sec. 22-176. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of Habersham County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of Habersham County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Habersham County. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Habersham County, or any portion thereof, where: (a) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; (b) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and (c) such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Habersham County Health Department and Habersham County Building and Inspections Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-140) ) 
Sec. 22-177. - Definitions. 
(a)  Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
(b)  State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)  Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Habersham County. 
(d)  Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations a particular zoning district. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-141) ) 
Sec. 22-178. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void by any competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-142) ) 
Sec. 22-179. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon adoption by the local governing authority of Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-143) ) 
Secs. 22-180—22-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIAL, SERVICES AND HOUSING 

Sec. 22-186. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Habersham County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Habersham County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-164) ) 
Sec. 22-187. - Definitions. 
(a)  Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. 
The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(b)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-165) ) 
Sec. 22-188. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punishable as provided in chapter 1, section 1-7 herein. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-166) ) 
Sec. 22-189. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not the remainder of the article. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-167) ) 
Sec. 22-190. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted but shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-168) ) 
Secs. 22-191—22-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 22-196. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Habersham County, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-190) ) 
Sec. 22-197. - Definitions. 
(a)  Building contractor. As used in this article the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, and renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
(b)  Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this article if: (a) he has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or (b) he performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
(c)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(4)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-191) ) 
Sec. 22-198. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of Habersham County during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-192) ) 
Sec. 22-199. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-193) ) 
Sec. 22-200. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this article to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in chapter 1, section 1-7 herein. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-194) ) 
Sec. 22-201. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-195) ) 
Sec. 22-202. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-196) ) 
Sec. 22-203. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-197) ) 
Sec. 22-204. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not affect the remainder to the article. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-198) ) 
Sec. 22-205. - Effective date; expiration. 
This article shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted and shall apply to all building contractors doing business in the unincorporated areas of Habersham County on that date and doing business on any date thereafter. However, this article and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
( Ord. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A, § 22-199) ) 
Secs. 22-206—22-219. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 16, 2012 , deleted the former Art. II, §§ 26-19—26-30, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to erosion and sedimentation control and derived from §§ I—X of an ordinance adopted Oct. 4, 2004. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-19. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Habersham County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-20. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 511.4.C. of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in 26-22(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 100 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 100 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 26-23(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority, the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General Provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections B and C. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES General Permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections B and C shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land- disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in (C) 15 and 16, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection B(2); 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 100 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections B and C. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-23. - Application; permit; process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. Habersham County shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of Habersham County. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Habersham County without first obtaining a permit from the Planning and Development Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in Section 511.5 C. of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections B and C will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by one copy of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a Local Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction. A fee, in the amount published on a fee schedule by the Habersham County Commissioners shall be charged for each acre or any fraction thereof in a project area. Regardless of the acreage disturbed, all commercial and industrial sites will be required to obtain a land disturbing permit. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, Habersham County shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to Habersham County. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections (C) 15 and 16 have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (B) 6, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if Habersham County and the district have entered into an agreement which allows Habersham County to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. Habersham County with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of Habersham County with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised Plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, Habersham County may deny the permit application. 
(6)  Habersham County may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, Habersham County may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of Habersham County with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 511.4 B. & C. of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by Habersham County of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by Habersham County unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and Habersham County has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by Section subsections C. 15 and 16 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection B. 6. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of Habersham County are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by Habersham County, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (f) (1). 
(7)  No permit shall be interpreted to relieve any person of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all codes, ordinances, and other regulations of Habersham County. Any permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of an adopted code, ordinance, or regulations of Habersham County shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The planning and development department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, Habersham County shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  Habersham County must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The planning and development department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of Habersham County, the commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of Habersham County which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a Habersham County's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (e), the Division shall notify Habersham County in writing. Habersham County is so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of Habersham County as a Local Issuing Authority. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of Habersham County. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the Director or Habersham County shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Director or Habersham County shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or Habersham County shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or Habersham County shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by Habersham County or by the Director or his or her Designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by Habersham County or by the Director or his or her Designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section 511.5 B.6. Habersham County may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)  Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of Habersham County and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $2,500.00, per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail, or both a fine and jail or work alternate. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and each responsible party or other person assisting in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(3)  a.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; and 
b.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection a. 
1.  The court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with the requirements of this article and the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
2.  In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used or activities are undertaken in violation of this article or any amendment thereto adopted by the board of commissioners, the county, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
3.  Issuance of certificates. Certificates of development conformance (CDC), certificates of occupancy (CO) or certificates of completion (CC) shall not be issued for any building unless all erosion control measures as shown on the approved plans and or BMPs shall have been completed in accordance with this article, and stabilization achieved. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-26. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-27. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by Habersham County upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Habersham County Planning Commission within 31 days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Local Issuing Authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-28. - Liability. 
Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Local Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016 , § 1) 
Secs. 26-29—26-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATERING 

Sec. 26-51. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purpose of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground covers, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratties, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable Habersham County ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of graywater in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide and reclaim wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
( Ord. of 1-3-2011 ) 
Sec. 26-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The Habersham County Code Enforcement shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this article may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
( Ord. of 1-3-2011 ) 
Chapter 28 - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

Sec. 28-01. - Schedule of fees. 
A schedule of fees charged by the county for building permits, development services, plumbing permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, animal control fees, recreational fees, occupational taxes, alcohol taxes and other applicable fees as set forth in the Habersham County Code of Ordinances, and any update or amendment thereto, shall be adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall review the schedule of fees annually for reasonableness during the county's budgetary process to determine if any adjustment to the schedule of fees is necessary to reflect actual costs of services provide by the county. The county clerk shall maintain the schedule of fees and make it available to the public upon request. The schedule of fees shall also be made available electronically on the county website. 
(Ord. of  7-16-2018 , § 1) 
Sec. 28-02. - Amendments. 
This chapter may be amended from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners and all persons, businesses, occupations, trades and uses subject to this chapter shall be subject to such amendment. 
(Ord. of  7-16-2018 , § 1) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Open burning, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-90. 

Sec. 30-19. - General requirements. 
(a)  All burning operations shall comply with "Rules for Air Quality Control," chapter 391-3-1 as written and as amended by the Environmental Protection Division, air protection branch unless specifically amended by this article. 
(b)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning in any area of the county except as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural fires (permit/no fee). Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops. Contact Georgia Forestry prior to burning. 
(2)  Forest lands (permit/no fee). The burning over of any forestland by the owners of such land. Contact Georgia Forestry prior to burning. 
(3)  Residential property maintenance (permit/no fee). Reduction of leaves, trees, downed trees and parts thereof, pine straw and sticks on the premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises. 
(4)  Recreational/cooking fire (no permit/no fee). For recreational purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption, e.g., camping fires in designated camping areas and "barbeque" grills. 
(5)  Firefighter training fires (no permit/no fee). Fires set for the purpose of training firefighting personnel. 
(6)  Open flame equipment (no permit/no fee). Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blowtorches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used. 
(7)  Warming fires (no permit/no fee). Small warming fires at construction sites in clean metal containers with spark arrestors. 
(8)  Bonfires (permit/no fee). A permit is required for bonfires. Prior approval of combustibles, site, life safety, etc., will be required by the county fire and rescue services. 
(9)  Land clearing (permit/fee). Burning in residential areas for the purpose of land clearing for construction or road right-of-way construction/maintenance. (Permit is $250.00 per ACD (Air Curtain (burner) Destructor.) 
(10)  Packaging materials (permit/no fee). Disposal of all packaging materials previously containing explosives in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulation. 
(c)  Fires will be authorized between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and one hour before sunset as announced by the local news media. All fires are to be completely extinguished by the specified time unless special conditions exist and prior authorization has been granted. It is the responsibility of the party requesting the permit to notify the issuing agency of the special conditions when the permit is being issued. 
(d)  No open burning will be authorized when weather conditions (wind, humidity, temperature, mixing level, overcast, etc.) may jeopardize the safety of life and property as determined by the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) based on the daily weather forecast obtained from the state forestry commission or other weather forecasting resource. 
(e)  No burning of any material that produces a smoke opacity greater than 40 percent. Determination of compliance will be at the discretion of the inspector. 
(f)  No open burning will be authorized during an air pollution episode or when restrictions are imposed by a state or federal agency for other reasons. 
(g)  All required permits will be issued by the county fire chief or his designee. 
(h)  Permits may be revoked at any time by the issuing agency or its representing agency if conditions or permit restrictions require such. 
(i)  Permits are valid for date of issuance unless otherwise noted. 
(j)  The burning of household garbage is not authorized under this article and is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005(2)) 
Sec. 30-20. - Open burning on privately owned, residential property. 
Homeowners or residents of single-family residential property are authorized to have open fires provided all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The fire must be on the property occupied by the person receiving the permit. 
(2)  Only natural vegetation can be destroyed by burning. The term "natural vegetation" includes sticks, tree parts six inches and less in diameter, grass, pine straw, hedge trimmings, etc. Burning of poison oak, poison ivy and any other vegetation, which produces severe respiratory damage, is not allowed. Burning of cardboard, treated wood, materials containing petroleum products, i.e., tires, plastics, wire insulation, roofing shingles, etc., is not allowed. 
(3)  No vegetation pile shall be larger than six feet in diameter by two feet in height. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum of ten feet between vegetation piles. 
(5)  No burning is allowed within 50 feet of a structure. 
(6)  No burning is allowed within 25 feet of a wooded area, pine island, or other lightweight class A fuel. 
(7)  No fire shall be within 25 feet of the adjacent property line. 
(8)  All open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person 16 years of age or older to monitor and control such burning. A rake, shovel or similar hand tool, and charged water hose that will reach to the most remote point of the burn material is to be immediately available. 
(9)  No more than two burning piles are allowed at any one time. 
(10)  Failure to comply with these rules which results in an uncontrolled fire or a valid complaint by nearby property owner or resident that requires the response of the county fire and rescue service will result in the fire being extinguished immediately. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005(2)) 
Sec. 30-21. - Construction site burning. 
(a)  Only small warming fires using untreated wood or lumber are allowed. These fires are to be in suitable, metal containers such as a clean 55-gallon metal drum with a spark arrestor. No open fires are allowed. 
(b)  Fires incidental to the construction operation, i.e., tar kettle, welding torch, etc., are allowed. 
(c)  The developer/general contractor/land owner in control of the property is responsible for compliance with this article and the rules established by EPA/EPD. 
(d)  Natural vegetation for land clearing may be burned on-site if approved by the fire chief or his designee. The use of an air curtain destructor is required. Approval must be required prior to lighting any fire. The requirements under the following section regarding land clearing burning must be followed. 
(e)  All open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person 18 years of age or older to monitor and control such burning. A rake, shovel or similar hand tool, and charged water hose that will reach to the most remote point of the burn material is to be immediately available. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005(2)) 
Sec. 30-22. - Agricultural, land clearing, or right-of-way burning. 
(a)  Permits for agricultural, land clearing or right-of-way burning in other than predominately residential areas will be issued if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population. 
(2)  The location of the burning is not within 1,000 feet from any structure or not within 300 feet of any street, road or highway open to the public. 
(3)  The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimal. 
(4)  Petroleum oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any material other than plant growth are not being burned. 
(5)  An air curtain destructor (ACD) is utilized and no more than one ACD is used for each ten acres of areas with at least 1,000 feet between ACD's. 
(6)  The ACD is operated in accordance with the guidelines established by EPD. 
(b)  Permits may be issued for open burning of agricultural land where the use of an ACD is not practical, i.e., burning of pasture land or hay fields. 
(c)  The company/contractor/landowner in control of the property is responsible for compliance with the requirements of this article and the rules established by EPA/EPD. 
(d)  All open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person 18 years of age or older to monitor and control such burning. A rake, shovel or similar hand tool, and charged water hose that will reach to the most remote point of the burn material is to be immediately available. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005(2)) 
Sec. 30-23. - Emergency burning. 
(a)  Burning of storm debris on-site may be authorized by the fire chief or his designee when there is no adequate disposal facility reasonably available or other arrangements cannot be made in a reasonable time frame. 
(b)  The requirements for the use of an ACD, weather conditions and population density in the affected area will apply. 
(c)  All open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person 18 years of age or older to monitor and control such burning. A rake, shovel or similar hand tool, and charged water hose that will reach to the most remote point of the burn material is to be immediately available. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005(2)) 
Sec. 30-24. - Enforcement. 
The fire chief or his designee shall be responsible for enforcement of this article. The chief or his designee shall be authorized to issue a citation returnable to the magistrate's court for violation of this or any other fire safety ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005(2)) 
Chapter 34 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - County smoke free air regulation. 
(a)  Purpose. The county is authorized to adopt ordinances or regulations to govern and protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens; and numerous studies over the years have documented the detrimental effects of subjecting nonsmokers to second hand smoke; and nonsmokers should not be forced to inhale the secondhand smoke of others on property owned, leased or operated by the county due to documented ill effects, such as asthma attacks, heart attacks, strokes in adults and sudden infant death syndrome, middle ear infections, bronchitis, asthma, pneumonia and low birth weight in children; and normal ventilation cannot eliminate the health risks; and it should be the goal of every elected official and department head to make Habersham County, Georgia, a safe, healthy, and attractive place to work and play; and the purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of county employees and members of the public by providing a smoke free environment. 
(b)  Definitions. 
County building means any enclosed, indoor area which is owned, leased, or controlled by the county, including, but not limited to, rooms, offices, work areas, restrooms, and sports and recreational facilities. 
County vehicle means any motor vehicle owned, leased or controlled by Habersham County, Georgia. 
County sports and recreational facilities means buildings or structures such as, but not limited to pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, and swimming pools, leased, owned or controlled by the county where members of the general public assemble. 
Outdoor public facility means any outdoor recreation area owned, leased or operated by the county, including, but not limited to ballfields, parks, amphitheaters, tennis centers, tennis courts and swimming pools. 
Smoking is defined as holding, lighting, inhaling, burning, carrying, emitting or exhaling of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed or plant of any kind. 
(c)  Application to county facilities and property. 
(1)  Smoking is prohibited in all buildings owned or building spaces leased or operated by Habersham County, Georgia Government, except in Habersham County detention facilities where the smoking policy is determined by the Sheriff of Habersham County, Georgia. 
(2)  Smoking is prohibited in all county vehicles at all times. 
(3)  Smoking shall be prohibited within 25 feet of facility/building entrances and exits. 
(4)  Smoking is prohibited at the entry steps and landing areas for a reasonable distance outside of an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited so as to ensure that tobacco does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or other means. 
(5)  County sports and recreational facilities and outdoor public facilities: Smoking shall be prohibited within all county sports and recreational facilities and outdoor public facilities, with the exception of a designated smoking area within the fairgrounds. 
(d)  Advertising and posting of signs. Signs shall be posted at each public entrance to county buildings and outdoor county sports and recreational facilities providing notice to employees and the public at large that smoking is prohibited. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, smoking is prohibited as set forth herein whether or not posted. 
(e)  Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by authorized designees of the county in the Magistrate Court of Habersham County. 
(2)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited shall be guilty of such infraction and punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or incarceration not to exceed 60 days. 
(3)  Each activity involving smoking shall be considered a separate offense and multiple smoking activities occurring at the same time or setting shall be considered separate offenses. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005(2), §§ 1—4; Ord. of 10-17-2011, §§ 2, 3, 5 ) 
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-2, 31-12A-1 et seq. 
Secs. 34-2—34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 20, 2009, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as Ch. 35, §§ 35-1—35-14. In order to preserve the style of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 34, Art. II, §§ 34-21—34-33 to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 34-21. - State promulgated rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health, including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, and which are expressly incorporated herein, are hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein. 
(1)  Control of Rabies, Rules and Regulations § 511-4-2. 
(2)  Food Service, Rules and Regulations § 511-6-1. 
(3)  Tourist Accommodations, Rules and Regulations § 511-6-2. 
(4)  On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Rules and Regulations. § 511-3-1. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Drinking Water Supply, Rules and Regulations § 511-3-3. 
(7)  Solid Waste, Rules and Regulations § 511-3-4. 
(8)  Public Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks, Rules and Regulations § 511-3-5. 
(9)  Special On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Rules and Regulations § 511-3-6. 
(10)  The Georgia Smoke-free Air Act, Rules and Regulations § 511-3-7. 
Copies of those DHR rules and regulations are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular county operating hours. 
(Ord. of 4-18-2016 ) 
Sec. 34-22. - Local board of health enactments. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq., in addition to the above-referenced rules and regulations of the Georgia DHR, the following rules and regulations have been enacted by the Habersham County Board of Health and are hereby adopted by the Habersham County Board of Commissioners in accordance with State law, and are further hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(1)  Rules and regulations concerning body art, enacted by resolution dated February 9, 2009, which are hereby set forth verbatim herein and adopted by the board of commissioners upon lawful adoption of this article. 
(2)  Rules and regulations concerning rabies control, enacted by resolution dated February 9, 2009, which are hereby set forth verbatim herein and adopted by the board of commissioners upon lawful adoption of this article. 
Copies of those rules and regulations enacted by the Habersham County Board of Health and having been adopted by ordinance of the board of commissioners are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, where the same are available for inspection and by the public during regular county operating hours. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-3) ) 
Sec. 34-23. - Minimum lot size. 
In addition, the rules and regulations concerning minimum lot sizes for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems, having been enacted by resolution dated February 9, 2009, by the Habersham County Board of Health are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set out at length herein. The Habersham County Board of Commissioners may, however, require larger minimum lot sizes for utilization of on-site sewage management systems in zoning or land use districts providing for septic service, and in the event there is a conflict between the minimum lot size(s) established by the Habersham County Board of Health and that established by the Habersham County Board of Commissioners, the larger lot size(s) established by the board of commissioners shall control and take precedence. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-4) ) 
Sec. 34-24. - Fee schedule. 
A fee schedule for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above referenced state promulgated rules and regulations and local board of health enactments, including permit and inspection fees, has been established by the Habersham County Board of Health, and is hereby approved and adopted by the Habersham County Board of Commissioners. A copy of this fee schedule, including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and is available for inspection and copying by the public during regular county operating hours. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-5) ) 
Sec. 34-25. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement and prosecution of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of Habersham County and the Habersham County Board of Health, and their authorized designee(s) or agent(s), and all law enforcement personnel of Habersham County. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-6) ) 
Sec. 34-26. - Failure to comply. 
It shall be unlawful for any natural person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, to violate any of the above-identified rules and regulations, and/or to fail or refuse to pay any fee established by the Habersham County Board of Health, and approved and adopted by the Habersham County Board of Commissioners, for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-7) ) 
Sec. 34-27. - Penalties. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, any person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, violating any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days, or both. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-8) ) 
Sec. 34-28. - Continuing offenses. 
Each day during which a violation of any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this article shall constitute, and shall be considered, a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-9) ) 
Sec. 34-29. - Magistrate court jurisdiction. 
The Habersham County Magistrate Court shall have original jurisdiction upon any offense charged pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-10) ) 
Sec. 34-30. - Other remedies available. 
In addition to the rights and remedies set forth herein, or as otherwise authorized by law, Habersham County and the Habersham County Board of Health retain and reserve the right to seek equitable relief, injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action or proceeding to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Failure or refusal to pay any fee approved for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees, may result in suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued by the Habersham County Board of Health. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-11) ) 
Sec. 34-31. - Procedural matters. 
Violations of all DHR promulgated rules and regulations and all local board of health enactments identified herein may be prosecuted by an accusation or citation with or without a prosecuting attorney in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, and any successor statute; and the Habersham County Board of Commissioners authorizes the county attorney or his designee to prosecute violations of this article, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-66, and any successor statute. In addition, the solicitor of the county and his or her assistants shall also have the authority to prosecute all citations or accusations issued for violation of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this article. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-12) ) 
Sec. 34-32. - Remedies not cumulative. 
This article, and the enforcement and prosecution of this article by Habersham County and the Habersham County Board of Health, and their authorized agent(s) or designee(s), does not in any way effect, estop, prescribe, regulate, limit, or in any way control or prohibit the Georgia DHR, and its agent(s) or designee(s), from initiating or undertaking any action or proceeding to enforce compliance with its rules and regulations. 
( Ord. of 4-20-2009, § 1(Exh. A, § 35-13) ) 
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20; county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - Adoption of jail construction and staffing act. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92, the board of commissioners adopts this section placing in effect the provisions of the state Jail Construction and Staffing Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-21-90 et seq.). 
(b)  There shall be created a special account, to be known as the county jail fund, into which all proceeds collected under the terms of this section are to be deposited, and from which these sums are to be paid for the construction, operating and staffing of the county jail and correctional institute. 
(Res. of 12-18-1989) 
State Law reference— Jail Construction and Staffing Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-90 et seq. 
Sec. 38-2. - Payment of witness fees to law enforcement officers. 
It shall be the policy of the board of commissioners to pay off-duty police officers and sheriff's deputies who are required by writ of subpoena to attend any superior court, or other courts having jurisdiction to enforce the penal laws of this state as provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21, juvenile court, grand jury, or hearing or inquest held or called by a coroner, or magistrate court involving any criminal matter, as a witness on behalf of the state during any hours except the regular duty hours to which the officer is assigned. Such officers and deputies shall be paid for such attendance at a rate fixed by the court, but at a rate not less than the per diem paid grand jurors in the preceding term of the superior court of the county or $20.00 per diem, whichever is greater. The claim for the witness fees shall be endorsed on the subpoena, showing the dates of attendance and stating that attendance was required during hours other than the regular duty hours to which the claimant was assigned. The claimant shall verify this statement. The dates of attendance shall be certified by the judge or the prosecuting attorney of the court attended. The county sheriff, city police chief or city manager shall certify that the claimant has been paid no additional compensation and has not been given any time off on account of such service. The amount due shall be paid by the board of commissioners, which is authorized to dispense public funds for the operation of the court. However, no such officer may claim or receive more than one witness fee per day for attendance in any court or before the grand jury, regardless of the number of subpoenas which the officer may have received requiring him to appear in such court or before the grand jury on any one day. 
(Ord. of 10-19-1987) 
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 42-19. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of the citizens of Habersham County, Georgia, through the reduction, control and prevention of loud and raucous noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 42-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County manager means the county manager of Habersham County, Georgia, or the county manager's designee. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actually caused or threatened by an emergency, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Noise sensitive area means, but is not limited to, a posted area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, public library or similar institution is located. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a government entity. 
Public space means any real property or structures on real property, owned by a government entity and normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to parks and other recreational areas. 
Residential area means any real property which contains a structure or building in which one or more persons reside, provided that the structure or building is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for residential use in accordance with the terms and maps of the county's land use ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 42-21. - Findings. 
(a)  Loud and raucous noise degrades the environment of the county to a degree that it: 
(1)  Is harmful to the health, welfare and safety of its inhabitants and visitors; 
(2)  Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property; 
(3)  Interferes with the well being, tranquility, and privacy of the home; and 
(4)  Both causes and aggravates health problems. 
(b)  Both the effective control and the elimination of loud and raucous noise are essential to the health and welfare of the county's inhabitants and visitors, and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life, including recreation, work, and communication. 
(c)  The use of sound amplification equipment creates loud and raucous noise that may, in a particular manner and at a particular time and place, substantially and unreasonably invade the privacy, peace and freedom of inhabitants of, and visitors to, the county. 
(d)  Certain short-term easing of noise restrictions is essential to allow the construction and maintenance of structures, infrastructure, and other elements necessary for the physical and commercial vitality of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 42-22. - Scope. 
This article applies to the control of all sound originating within the unincorporated areas of Habersham County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 42-23. - General prohibition. 
(a)  No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any: 
(1)  Unreasonably loud or raucous noise; 
(2)  Noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity, within the unincorporated areas of the county; or 
(3)  Noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any persons within the neighborhood from which said noises emanate, or as to unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators or customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect such residences or places of business. 
(b)  Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud and raucous include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether residential or commercial; 
(2)  The land use, nature and zoning of the area from which the sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived; 
(3)  The time of day or night the sound occurs; 
(4)  The duration of the sound; and 
(5)  Whether or not the sound is recurrent, intermittent or constant. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 42-24. - Prohibited noises. 
The following acts are declared to be violations of this article. This enumeration does not constitute an exclusive list: 
(1)  Unreasonable noise. The unreasonable making of, or knowingly and unreasonably permitting to be made, any unreasonably loud, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or vibration in any boarding facility, dwelling, place of business or other structure, or upon any public street, park, or other place or building. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises, commotion or vibration incidental to the operation of these places when conducted in accordance with the usual standards of practice and in a manner which will not unreasonably disturb the peace and comfort of adjacent residences or which will not detrimentally affect the operators of adjacent places of business are exempted from this provision. 
(2)  Vehicle horns, signaling devices and similar devices. The sounding of any horn, signaling device or other similar device, on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any right-of-way or in any public space of the county for more than 20 consecutive seconds. The sounding of any horn, signaling device or other similar device, as a danger warning is exempt from this prohibition. 
(3)  Nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting sounding any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place more than 20 consecutive seconds in any hourly period. The reasonable sounding of such devices by houses of religious worship, ice cream trucks, seasonal contribution solicitors or by the county for traffic control purposes are exempt from the operation of this provision. 
(4)  Emergency signaling devices. The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device including fire, burglar, civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar emergency signaling device, except in an emergency or except as provided in subsections (4)a. and (4)b. of this section. 
a.  Testing of an emergency signaling device shall occur between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed three minutes. Testing of the emergency signaling system shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. 
b.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm, shall terminate within three minutes of activation unless an emergency exists. If a false or accidental activation of an alarm occurs more than once in a calendar month, the owner or person responsible for the alarm shall be in violation of this article. 
(5)  Radios, televisions, boom boxes, phonographs, stereos, musical instruments and similar devices. The use or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo, musical instrument or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors and passers-by, or is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from any person in a commercial, industrial area or public space. The use or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo, musical instrument or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors in residential or noise sensitive areas, including multifamily or single-family dwellings. 
(6)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers, public address systems and similar devices. The unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system or other device for producing or reproducing sound between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays in the following areas: 
a.  Within or adjacent to residential or noise-sensitive areas; 
b.  Within public space if the sound is plainly audible across the real property line of the public space from which the sound emanates, and is unreasonably loud and raucous. This shall not apply to any public performance, gathering, or parade for which a permit has been obtained from the county. 
(7)  Yelling, shouting and similar activities. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing in residential or noise sensitive areas or in public places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities. 
(8)  Animals and birds. Unreasonably loud and raucous noise emitted by a domestic animal or bird for which a person is responsible. A person is responsible for an animal if the person owns, controls or otherwise cares for the animal or bird. Sounds made by animals or birds in animal shelters, kennels, veterinary hospitals, pet shops or pet kennels, licensed under and in compliance with licensing and permitting provisions set forth in this Code are exempt from this subsection. This section shall not apply to horses, livestock, poultry or other farm animals emanating from a legitimate farming operation or use on property zoned for agricultural use. 
(9)  Loading or unloading merchandise, materials, equipment. The creation of unreasonably loud, raucous, and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle at a place of business or residence. 
(10)  Construction or repair of buildings, excavation of streets and highways. The construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways other than between the hours of 30 minutes before sunrise and 30 minutes after sunset. In cases of emergency, construction or repair noises are exempt from this provision. In non-emergency situations, a building inspector/local government manager may issue a permit, upon application, if the building inspector/local government manager determines that the public health and safety, as affected by loud and raucous noise caused by construction or repair of buildings or excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 30 minutes before sunrise and 30 minutes after sunset will not be impaired, and if the building inspector/local government manager further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to a party in interest. The permit shall give permission in nonemergency cases for a period of not more than ten days. The permit may be renewed for a period of 30 days or less. This section shall not apply to the construction or repair of residential buildings and related structures by the homeowner unless such noises disturbs the comfort or repose of any person of normal sensibilities typically residing in the vicinity. 
(11)  Noise sensitive areas; schools, courts, churches, hospitals and similar institutions. The creation of any unreasonably loud and raucous noise adjacent to any noise sensitive area while it is in use, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the institution or which disturbs the persons in these institutions; provided that conspicuous signs delineating the boundaries of the noise sensitive area are displayed in the streets surrounding the noise sensitive area. 
(12)  Blowers and similar devices. In residential or noise sensitive areas, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, provided that the noise is unreasonably loud and raucous and can be heard across the property line of the property from which it emanates. 
(13)  Commercial establishments adjacent to residential property. Unreasonably loud and raucous noise from the premises of any commercial establishment, including any outdoor area which is part of or under the control of the establishment, between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. which is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from any residential property. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 42-25. - Exemptions. 
Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the prohibitions set out in section 42-24 and are in addition to the exemptions specifically set forth in section 42-24: 
(1)  Motor vehicles on traffic ways of the county provided that the prohibition of section 42-24(2) continues to apply. 
(2)  Repairs of utility structures which pose a clear and immediate danger to life, health or significant loss of property. 
(3)  Sirens, whistles or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity or imminent danger, provided that the prohibition contained in section 42-24(4) continues to apply. 
(4)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(5)  Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the county, the state or the federal government, between the hours of 30 minutes before sunrise and 30 minutes after sunset, when public welfare and convenience renders it impractical to perform the work between said hours. 
(6)  Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including but not limited to school athletic and school entertainment events. 
(7)  Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting events and other similar outdoor events, provided that a permit has been obtained from the appropriate permitting authority. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 42-26. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The following individuals shall enforce this article. The county code enforcement officer and/or sheriff's department will have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained herein. Nothing in this article shall prevent the county code enforcement officer or sheriff's department from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice or education. 
(b)  If a person's conduct would otherwise violate this article and consists of speech or communication; of a gathering with others to hear or observe speech or communication; or of a gathering with others to picket or otherwise express in a non-violent manner a position on social, economic, political or religious questions; the person must be ordered to, and have the opportunity to, move, disperse or otherwise remedy the violation prior to arrest or a citation being issued. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2005) 
Secs. 42-27—42-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRODUCTION 

Sec. 42-51. - Motion picture, television, and photographic production ordinance. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  No person shall use any public or private property, building, facility or residence for producing, taking or making any motion picture, television production or photographic production without first applying for and receiving a county filming permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Regulations by this article shall not apply to: 
a.  Amateur photographers. 
b.  Reporters or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio or television broadcasting station engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting, reporting or photographing of news of general public interest. The exception is not to include magazine or documentary programs. 
c.  Productions which are conducted by the county or any county board or commission. 
(c)  Permit administrator. 
(1)  The county manager is hereby appointed as the permit administrator and shall issue permits as provided for in this article. The county manager may designate a county employee(s) to fulfill any or all of the duties assigned hereby to the county manager. 
(d)  Application for permit. 
(1)  Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this article shall make application on the approved form provided by the county. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreement and insurance certificates required by this article before any permit will be considered for approval. 
(2)  Filming permit applications shall be submitted at least five working days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct an activity for which a permit is required. 
(e)  Issuance of permits; conditions; appeals. 
(1)  The county manager shall issue a permit as provided for in this article, when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he finds that: 
a.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Seventy-two hours advance notice of any street closure request shall be provided. 
b.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal government or county operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property or result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the county incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant. 
c.  At the determination of the county manager that such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all safety precautions will be taken as determined necessary by the county manager. 
(2)  The decision of the county manager to issue, conditionally issue or deny a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision to the board of commissioners. 
(3)  The board of commissioners shall render a decision to issue, conditionally issue or uphold the denial of a permit at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. The decision of the board of commissioners will be final. 
(f)  Bond, issuance, hold harmless and indemnification. 
(1)  As a condition of issuing such a permit, the applicant shall furnish a bond, insurance or both in the amount to be determined by the county manager, but in no event an amount less than $500,000.00 to protect the county against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the county for damage to county property arising out of the permittee's activities. 
(2)  A minimum of $5,000,000.00 of such bond, general liability insurance coverage or both shall be required in the event aircraft, helicopters, pyrotechnics or automobile chase scenes are used in activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general liability special endorsement from mandated by this article. The county shall be listed as additional insured and the applicant shall have primary coverage. 
(3)  The applicant shall execute an indemnity and hold harmless agreement as provided by the county prior to the issuance of any permit that shall hold the county harmless against any claims, liability or judgments arising out of the permittee's activities. 
(g)  Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(1)  The county manager shall have the authority, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, to suspend or revoke any permit issued hereunder where the terms and conditions of said permit have been violated or ignored, including the timely payment of all required fees and deposits, or suspend or revoke any permit where the public safety or welfare is endangered by the permitted activity. Provided, however, that whenever there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare from activities conducted by the permittee to the extent that immediate action is necessary to protect the public, the county manager shall have the authority to suspend a permit pending a hearing. 
(h)  Fees and costs of additional services. 
(1)  Each application shall be accompanied by the following non-refundable fees: 
a.  A processing fee in the amount of $150.00 will be submitted to the county at the time of application. 
b.  Upon approval of an application for a county filming permit, the county manager shall provide the applicant with a statement of estimated cost of providing law enforcement, public works and other county employees and services for public safety for the production. The cost of such services shall be paid to the county prior to the conducting of a production. The amount of such fees shall be based on the county's actual cost of providing the required number of law enforcement officers and other county employees and services necessary to ensure the safety of both the participants of the production and the community. 
c.  If the actual cost of public services for the production is less than the estimated cost pursuant to subsection b., the permittee shall promptly be refunded the difference by the county. If the actual cost for public services is more that the estimated cost pursuant to subsection b. the difference shall become due and payable to the county immediately upon the permittee's receipt of a statement of actual costs by the county. 
d.  All fees may be waived by the county manager for wholly charitable or educational purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly. Tax exempt and nonprofit organizations must qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and proof of such status must be provided to the city in order for said fees to be waived by the county. 
(i)  Regulations and conditions. 
(1)  The applicant shall: 
a.  Maintain a copy of the production permit on-site at all times. 
b.  Comply with any and all conditions or restrictions the county may impose as a condition to issuing a permit. No changes to the conditions or restrictions shall be made without the written approval of the county manager. 
c.  Have nonexclusive use of facilities and public right-of-way unless otherwise granted in writing. 
d.  Provide advanced notification of 48 hours in a form approved by the county manager to adjacent properties for any production. 
e.  Comply with the noise regulations as set forth in article II of chapter 42 of the Habersham County Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  The county manager may promulgate and enforce additional regulations as necessary and appropriate in the implementation and enforcement of this article. 
(j)  Filming on private property. 
(1)  An applicant is required to obtain the property owner's permission, consent and/or lease for the use of property not owned or controlled by the county. Written permission of the property owner must be presented at the time of the permit application. 
(2)  An applicant is required to minimize interference with the normal activities of a neighborhood or commercial area, including access to private or public property. 
(k)  Filming at county facilities or on the public right-of-way. 
(1)  In the event that the applicant desires to locate their production event at a facility owned or managed by the county or on the public right-of-way, the county shall charge a daily fee in an amount determined by the county manager not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. If an existing facility charge has been established by the county at a facility owned or managed by the county, that fee will be charged to the applicant. 
(l)  Traffic control. 
(1)  The county retains the right and the authority to regulate traffic and require vehicles to be moved or towed at the owner's expense in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(m)  Faithful performance bond; clean up and restoration. 
(1)  To ensure the clean-up and restoration of any site on public property or public right-of-way used by the permittee within the unincorporated areas of the county, said permittee may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (amount to be determined by the county manager) at the time the application is submitted. Upon completion of the production and upon the finding by the county that the site has been satisfactorily cleaned up and restored, the bond may be returned to the permittee. 
( Ord. of 6-18-2012, § 1 ) 
Sec. 42-52. - Production or filming for adult entertainment. 
Any production or filming for the purposes of adult entertainment is subject to all state and local regulations thereof prior to the issuance of any permit. 
( Ord. of 6-18-2012, § 2 ) 
Chapter 46 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 46-19. - Creation. 
The board of commissioners hereby establishes the county planning commission, to be governed by the provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 11-20-1972) 
Sec. 46-20. - Membership; term of office; compensation of members. 
The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the county and shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. The terms of the members shall be for three years, except that, in the appointment of the first planning commission under the terms of this article, the first two members shall be appointed for a term of one year, the third member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and the fourth and fifth members shall be appointed for a term of three years, beginning January 1, 1973. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of commissioners, which shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Res. of 11-20-1972, § 1) 
Sec. 46-21. - Officers, rules, staff and finances. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the county. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(b)  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work, and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 11-20-1972, § 2) 
Sec. 46-22. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the county. 
(Res. of 11-20-1972, § 3) 
Chapter 50 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq. 

Sec. 50-1. - Road maintenance and improvement policy. 
(a)  New roads and streets constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the county subdivision regulations, as amended, and any other applicable ordinances, resolutions and specifications, and located within properly dedicated public rights-of-way, shall be accepted and maintained by the county; however, the county assumes no obligation to improve the quality or character of the roadway or street above that which was accepted for maintenance. 
(b)  Existing county roads and streets located within dedicated rights-of-way accepted by the county shall be maintained at a reasonable level of service so as to provide egress and ingress to abutting property owners; however, the county shall not be obligated to widen, pave or make other improvements to such roads and streets which increase the value of the abutting property. 
(c)  Existing roads and streets which have become public through the operation of prescriptive rights of the public users, and on which maintenance work has been historically performed by the county, shall continue to be maintained by the county to a level of service that will provide reasonable egress and ingress to abutting properties; however, the county shall not make substantial improvements on such roads and streets until appropriate rights-of-way have been granted, accepted and properly filed for record. 
(d)  Existing private roads, streets and driveways shall not be maintained by the county, nor shall new private roads and streets be constructed by the county. However, safety of the traveling public is a high priority, therefore, from time to time it may be desirable in the interest of safety to perform a limited amount of maintenance to provide positive drainage and sight distance at private road, street, and driveway approaches. This act shall not obligate the county to perform future maintenance at these locations. 
(e)  With respect to road and street improvements, the county recognizes its responsibility to expend public funds for road and street improvement on roads which are primarily intracounty traffic conductors. With respect to the improvement of residential streets and other roads primarily residential in nature, it shall be the policy of the county to assign priority to those roads and streets where the benefiting property owners substantially contribute to the payment of the cost of improvements. 
(Res. of 4-18-1983, §§ 1—5; Res. of 3-5-1990, §§ 1—5) 
Sec. 50-2. - Installation of driveway pipe by county. 
It shall be the policy of the county to furnish and install appropriate driveway pipe, where needed, for access from a county road to a construction site for a new residence or for a new mobile home installation, subject to the following conditions that: 
(1)  Budgeted funding is available. 
(2)  The proposed new residence or mobile home installation is not for speculative or resale purposes. 
(3)  The property owner or his authorized agent makes written application on forms provided by the county. 
(4)  For new construction, the owner has a valid building permit, with the number thereof shown on the application for such pipe installation. 
(5)  In the case of mobile homes, the mobile home has a current valid ad valorem tax decal affixed thereon and the number thereof is furnished in the application. 
(6)  The scheduling of such driveway pipe installation is subject to the priority of public road maintenance as determined by the road superintendent. 
(Res. of 3-2-1987(2)) 
Sec. 50-3. - Use of right-of-way by utility companies. 
(a)  Permit required. All utility companies wishing to use county rights-of-way for the construction, maintenance or repair of utility lines, poles, stations and other equipment must first make application for and be granted a permit for such use of county rights-of-way. Such applications are available in the office of the planning commission. 
(b)  Standards for use. All utilities granted a permit for use of county rights-of-way must conform to the current edition of utility accommodation policy and standards, as published by the state department of transportation, office of utilities, a copy of which is on file in the office of the planning commission, which is adopted by reference as part of this section. Amendments of the utility accommodation policy and standards are hereby declared to be amendments to this section. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. Approval of applications and granting of permits under this section shall be the administrative responsibility of the development coordinator, office of the planning commission, under the direction of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Violations; penalty. Violation of this section in any manner is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor, and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. Each day such violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Res. of 12-27-1983) 
State Law reference— Power to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 
Sec. 50-4. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The resolution adopted March 3, 1985, which identifies as public roads all the roads shown on the 1982 map of the county prepared by the state department of transportation, as modified by the county highway department, is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Adoption of solid waste management plan. 
The board of commissioners hereby officially adopts the solid waste management plan for the county and the cities of Alto, Baldwin, Clarkesville, Cornelia, Demorest, Mount Airy and Tallulah Falls, dated May 1992, prepared by Hodges, Harbin, Newberry & Tribble, Inc. 
(Res. No. 92-10, 11-16-1992) 
Sec. 54-2. - Landfill regulations. 
(a)  Supervision of waste disposal; disposal at landfill required. 
(1)  The disposal of solid waste in the county is placed under the supervision of the landfill supervisor, who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  All persons who desire to dispose of solid waste within the county must use the sanitary landfill located off 4900 Dicks Hill Parkway, Mt. Airy, GA 30563. Any person disposing of solid waste in any place other than this shall be guilty of violation of this section, and shall be punished as provided in this section. 
(b)  Hours. 
(1)  The sanitary landfill will be open six days per week in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  Monday through Friday, 6:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
b.  Saturday, 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. 
c.  Sundays and holidays, closed. 
(c)  Place of disposal: acceptance of burning waste. 
(1)  No person shall dispose of any solid waste in or around the sanitary landfill other than in a container provided at the landfill, or in such place in the sanitary landfill as directed by a landfill employee. 
(2)  Incoming vehicles will be observed, and if found to be carrying burning waste they will be routed to a clear and remote area to be emptied, or such vehicles may be turned away at the sole discretion of the sanitary landfill employee. If the burning material is accepted, it will be spread, and the fire extinguished. After the fire is extinguished the matter shall be covered with dirt to smother the fire completely. "No burning" signs will be posted on the site. 
(d)  Inspection of waste; regulations for specific material. 
(1)  All solid waste brought to the landfill area will be directed through the main gate and inspected prior to the vehicle being allowed to proceed to an active area of the landfill. 
(2)  All traffic will stop at scale house and wait for specific instructions from attendant on duty before proceeding to specified locations. 
(3)  The following loads of mixed waste will not be accepted: 
a.  Household and kitchen furniture and furnishings. 
(4)  The acceptance of heavy equipment and off road tires will be at the discretion of the landfill operator. 
(5)  No dangerous waste will be accepted, such as volatile, flammable, or radioactive waste. For purposes of this section, the term "hazardous waste" shall be defined as any industrial, commercial, institutional or residential waste which contains hazardous solids, semi-solids, liquids, explosives, pathological waste, pesticides, toxic, highly flammable or corrosive substances, sewage treatment residue, screenings from grit chambers, septic tanks, sludge and any other item prohibited by the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States or state law. 
(6)  No dead animals larger than dogs or cats will be accepted at the landfill, except as approved by the landfill operator. All animals must be at the landfill by 3:00 p.m. 
(7)  No automobiles of any type will be accepted at the landfill. 
(8)  Major appliances and all scrap may be required to be dumped in an area designated for scrap metal. 
(9)  Liquid waste, either bulk or containerized, shall not be placed in the landfill except as provided in this subsection. If liquid waste is demonstrated nonhazardous and is admixed with a bladeable material into a bladeable form, it is acceptable for disposal at the sanitary landfill with the concurrence of the sanitary landfill operator. 
(e)  Scavenging. 
(1)  There shall be no scavenging or removing of any items from the landfill. 
(f)  Use by non-residents. 
(1)  Only residents of Habersham County shall utilize the landfill, except that all solid waste which becomes solid waste in the county may be disposed of at the county landfill. No solid waste shall be brought into the county for the purpose of being disposed of at the county landfill. 
(g)  Control of litter from transport vehicles. 
(1)  All vehicles or containers used to transport solid waste in the county shall be covered or waste shall be otherwise contained so as to prevent the spillage of such solid waste and the littering of such solid waste on streets, highways, and public and private property in the transportation of such solid waste. 
(h)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction of such violation, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Res. of 11-3-1986, §§ 1—8; Res. of 7-24-1989; Res. of 10-16-1989; Res. of 3-18-2013, § 1(Att.) ) 
Sec. 54-3. - Disposal fee. 
(a)  A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for all solid waste brought into the landfill for disposal, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  A container will be provided at the landfill scales for automobiles which do not otherwise have to enter the landfill disposal site. A maximum of six bags may be deposited from a single automobile into the container without charge. Only bagged household garbage will be allowed in the container. 
(c)  Municipalities, commercial haulers, contractors, industries and individuals desiring to do so will be billed on a monthly basis, with a due date of the 15th of each month. An additional charge of 1½ percent will be added to all accounts not paid by the 15th of the month after the charges are incurred. For all accounts not paid within 30 days following the due date, such person will not be allowed to dispose of waste in the landfill until satisfactory arrangements are made for payment. 
(Res. of 12-2-1991, §§ A—C) 
Sec. 54-4. - Disposal of liquid waste. 
(a)  The county shall make no provisions, either at the county landfill site or at any other location, for the conversion of nonhazardous liquid waste into bladeable material in conformance with chapter 391-3-4.02 of the rules of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources providing for elimination of disposal of liquid waste. 
(b)  The county shall not allow disposal of any liquid waste into the landfill site until the waste is demonstrated as nonhazardous and is admixed with a bladeable material in conformance with O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., and chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the rules for solid waste management prior to submission for disposal. 
(c)  The county shall allow disposal of liquid waste demonstrated nonhazardous and admixed with a bladeable material in conformance with O.C.G.A. § 12-18-20 et seq. and chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the rules for solid waste management. 
(d)  The county or a designated agent thereof shall provide for the testing of any liquid waste converted to bladeable material at the time the waste is submitted to the site for disposal. The county reserves the right to refuse any liquid waste which does not meet the criteria set forth in chapter 391-3-4.01(v) of the rules for solid waste management, and more specifically defined by method 9095 (Paints Filter Liquid Test). 
(e)  The county shall not provide any test to determine whether liquid waste material is nonhazardous. All persons submitting liquid waste for disposal in the site shall certify as to the content of the material and the nonhazardous nature thereof. If the county has any question or concerns as to the content or nature of the material, the material shall be submitted to any test the county deems necessary and appropriate to determine whether the material is nonhazardous. Should a test be required, the test shall be made at the expense of the owner of the waste or person seeking submission of the liquid waste to the site. 
(Ord. of 6-18-1990, §§ 1—5) 
Sec. 54-5. - Control of litter from transport vehicles. 
(a)  All persons, firms, or corporations transporting solid waste within Habersham County shall enclose or cover said materials so as to prevent the accidental escape of litter therefrom. 
(b)  Upon conviction all violators of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 10-19-1981, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 54-6. - Solid waste full cost accounting manual. 
The county board of commissioners hereby adopts the Department of Community Affairs Solid Waste Full Cost Accounting Manual. 
(Res. No. 92-7, 10-5-1992) 
Sec. 54-7. - Yard trimmings. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(b)  Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste to be disposed of in the county landfill. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the county. 
(c)  Sorting, storing and composting yard trimmings. All yard trimmings brought to the landfill shall be directed to designated areas for recycling, composting or disposal. 
(Ord. No. 96-3, §§ 1—3, 9-16-1996) 
Sec. 54-8. - Litter control program. 
The solid waste manager for the county shall implement a litter control program in cooperation with interested citizen groups pursuant to the following regulations and procedures to be known as the Habersham County Adopt-a-Highway Program: 
(1)  The goal of the program is to provide a means by which non-profit organizations with the county can participate in cleaning litter from county owned roads and rights-of-way. 
(2)  Participation in this program shall be limited to non-profit organizations located within (or with local chapters or affiliates located within) the county. 
(3)  County roads considered for inclusion under this program shall be limited to collectors and arterials located within the unincorporated portions of the county. This program will not include neighborhood or local streets. 
(4)  Requests to adopt a segment of road shall be made to the office of the county commissioners on a form provided by the county. Every applicant shall provide the name and address of the organization and of at least two individuals qualified to represent the organization. The form shall also indicate the organization's preference for a road segment. No organization may adopt more than two segments at a time. 
(5)  The office of the county board of commissioners shall review all program requests and recommend for approval only those requests from responsible organizations deemed reasonably able to fulfill the goals of the program in compliance with the regulations set forth herein. 
(6)  The county administrator or his designee shall approve or deny adopt-a-highway requests on behalf of the county. 
(7)  The term of each approved adoption program shall be two years provided that the volunteer organization shall have an option to renew at the end of each two-year period, if it has provided litter pickup services substantially in accordance with these rules and regulations. 
(8)  Adoption of road segments will be granted on a "first come, first served" basis. Segment location will be established by the county. To the extent practical, beginning and ending points will be identified by intersecting roads or readily identifiable landmarks. The ends of each adopted segment shall be posted with an "Adopt-a-Highway" sign as provided below. Segments will normally be between one and two miles in length. 
(9)  The county will provide each adopting organization with trash bags, safety vests and safety instructional materials. 
(10)  The solid waste manager will arrange for collection of filled trash bags as soon as possible after notification that cleanup has been completed. The county shall assume responsibility for transport to the county landfill at county expense. 
(11)  Each adopting organization shall commit to the following: 
a.  Collection of litter and refuse from time-to-time on an as-needed basis, as determined by the adopting organization, but not less frequently than twice during each calendar year. 
b.  Notification to the solid waste manager at least two weeks in advance of each pickup day. 
c.  Utilization of only qualified members of the adopting organization, on a volunteer basis, to perform litter control activities. 
d.  Direction of all volunteers engaged in litter control activities to comply with the safety rules and guidelines provided by the county and monitor the conduct of volunteers as necessary to promote compliance with such rules and guidelines, including appropriate use of safety vests and warning signs, etc. 
e.  Notification to the county promptly upon finding or identifying discarded items which may pose health or environmental hazards or which may otherwise require special handling. Such items should be left in place and not disturbed. 
(12)  On any day when the volunteer organization schedules litter pickup on the designated roadway segment, the organization shall distribute a release and disclaimer form substantially in the format established from time to time by the county board of commissioners and the office of the county attorney for signature by each volunteer participating in litter pickup activities. Such release and disclaimer shall save and hold the county, its agents and employees, harmless from and against liability for any loss or injury incurred by any volunteer while engaged in litter cleanup or related activities. 
(13)  The ends of each adopted segment will be identified by a 24" × 18" sign (green back-ground, white letters) stating "Adopt-A-Highway Litter Control" followed by the organization name plaque. Such sign shall be erected and maintained by the county for so long as the program established by the resolution from which this chapter is derived remains in effect and the adopting organization identified on such sign satisfactorily performs litter control activities in compliance with all applicable policies and procedures as may be adopted by the county from time to time. 
(Res. of 4-3-2000, §§ 1—13; Res. of. 4-28-2000, § 1) 
Secs. 54-9—54-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 54-21. - Definitions. 
Commercial solid waste: means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22) 
County means any area lying and being in unincorporated Habersham County, Georgia. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 16-7-51) 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22) 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. Such waste includes, but not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22) 
Inert waste means wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed. 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in this article. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 16-7-42) 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22) 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. (As defined in section 391-3-4-.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Person means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22) 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 16-7-22) 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22) 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22) 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. (As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. (As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. (As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. (As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the Environmental Protection Division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. (As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. (As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources (subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. section 1342) or source, special nuclear, or by-product material. (As defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923); as defined in section 391-3-4.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities. (As defined in section 391-3-4.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management) 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste, a hazardous substance, or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of non-hazardous, low-impact animal by-products classified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, "waste" includes without limitation, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations. (As defined in O.C.G.A. 16-7-51) 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. (As defined in 12-8-22) 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-22. - Waste disposal—General. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all litter, waste, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, waste, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in Habersham County including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in Habersham County unless such litter or waste originates in Habersham County or other areas authorized by the Habersham County Board of Commissioners and: 
(1)  The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for the disposal of litter, waste, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, scrap tires or recovered materials and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)  The litter, waste, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, recyclables or scrap tires is placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-8-20, et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. applicable to solid waste. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-23. - Transporting solid waste and litter. 
(a)  All vehicles, driving or stationary, within the county shall be so constructed, loaded, covered, or securely fastened so as to prevent municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or any load, contents, litter, or other such waste or materials from flowing freely, being blown, scattered, leaked, spilt, or in any manner deposited in or upon any highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, sidewalk, other motor vehicles, pedestrians, or other public place, or upon private property within the county. However, this section shall not prohibit the necessary and permitted spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or public road construction operations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a business or private person(s) engaged in waste hauling or transportation for hire from businesses or private residences to dispose of materials as solid waste that have been intentionally sorted as recyclables by the business or private residence to a lawfully permitted disposal facility rather than placing the materials in the location designated by the county or appropriate authority for said recyclables. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any vehicle within the county, the wheels or tires of which carry unto or deposit in or upon any highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property within the county, mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-24. - Regulation of all solid waste or litter containers and receptacles. 
(a)  All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles and their surrounding area shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(b)  Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the appropriate container or receptacle. 
(c)  No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the Habersham County Board of Commissioners or their designee. 
(d)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle, or set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(e)  No person shall deposit large non-compatible articles in containers or receptacles such as but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bedsprings, automobile parts, boat parts, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for that purpose only. 
(f)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(g)  No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle, except containers or receptacles designed for such purpose and so designated by the Habersham County Board of Commissioners. 
(h)  No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the Habersham County Board of Commissioners. 
(i)  No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles except by written consent of the Habersham County Board of Commissioners. 
(j)  No person shall indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of any containers or receptacles. 
(k)  No person shall deposit any solid waste at a county solid waste collection and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in a manner that it can be handled by the attendant and shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation unless express written permission is given by the Habersham County Board of Commissioners or designee. 
(l)  No person shall deposit solid waste, litter or liquid of any kind at any county solid waste collection and recycling center into county owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for said material. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-25. - Regulation of municipal solid waste landfills, inert landfills, construction and demolition landfills, and solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(a)  No landfill shall be operated in Habersham County, Georgia other than a landfill designated by the Habersham County Board of Commissioners as the county landfill, and no private municipal solid waste landfill shall be operated in Habersham County, Georgia, without a solid waste handling permit issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(b)  No person shall deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(c)  No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(d)  No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier, or sign at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(e)  Price on solid waste brought to said center will be set to defray total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)  Hours of operation of said centers will be set to maximize convenience to residents of that area. 
(g)  All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge provided, it is not metal and is separated under current market specifications and likewise uncontaminated. 
(h)  All collection centers will be manned during hours of operation to ensure compliance with this ordinance and all applicable state and/or federal laws. 
(i)  Attendant on duty will have full authority of said center consistent with this article. 
(j)  All rules listed above shall apply to all public and/or private property in said county, all waters and/or waterways of said county, and all Habersham County Solid Waste Collection and Recycling Centers. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-26. - Recovered materials. 
Recovered materials and recovered materials processing facilities are subject to rules as defined in Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-27. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and written consent from the applicable regulatory agency, including but not limited to, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, Georgia Environmental Protection Division and/or the Georgia Forestry Commission. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state and/or federal law. 
(b)  No owner or occupant of any property shall cause, suffer or allow the accumulation, on his or her premises, of garbage, litter or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(c)  The conduct described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of the ordinance for each day the garbage, litter or waste material remains or continues to unlawfully pollute, contaminate or burn on such premises. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-28. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person(s), firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the Magistrate Court of Habersham County, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense: By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 (as provided in O.C.G.A. section 16-7-43(b.1)), or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the County from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the County to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
(2)  For the second or more offense(s): The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; and/or 
(b)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may also be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway and/or other public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence (as provided in O.C.G.A. section 16-7-43)b.2); and/or 
(c)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence (as provided in O.C.G.A. section 16-7-43(b.3); and/or 
(d)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this article; and/or 
(e)  The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation (as provided in O.C.G.A. section 16-7-53(d); and/or 
(f)  In case of an open dump or improper solid waste, litter or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this article. Habersham County shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(g)  The expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this article. 
(h)  In addition to actions filed by Habersham County for violations of this article, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Habersham County Board of Commissioners, the chief code enforcement officer or his/her designee and/or the Habersham County Sheriff's Office. 
(b)  Any person(s) authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this article, or by a judge's order upon said person(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(c)  Appeals for the violation of this article may be made to the Magistrate Court of Habersham County, or higher court if the person so chooses. The person always has the right to consult his/her attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-30. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation (as provided in O.C.G.A. sections 16-7-52 and 16-7-53). In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in subsection 54-28(a)(2). 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court and/or the board of commissioners may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, including but not limited to, any litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this ordinance, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the article on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-31. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)  Whenever litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this article, is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped by any person(s) or from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that said person(s) or the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Whenever any litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this article, which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-32. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 54-33. - Recycling. 
The Habersham County Board of Commissioners hereby finds that it is in the best interest of citizens of Habersham County, in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of; therefore, it is the policy of the Habersham County Board of Commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Chapter 58 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal corporation tax on insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1 et seq. 

Sec. 58-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Insurer means a company authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(2), § 1(50-131)) 
Sec. 58-20. - License fee for life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business location. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, that is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional annual license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(2), § 1(50-133)) 
Sec. 58-21. - Life insurance agency license fees; independent life insurance agencies, brokers not otherwise licensed. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by this article as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(2), § 1(50-134)) 
Sec. 58-22. - Gross premiums tax—Life insurers. 
There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the county in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums, as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(2), § 1(50-135)) 
Sec. 58-23. - Same—All other insurers. 
There is levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the county in an amount equal to 2 1/2 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums, as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(2), § 1(50-136)) 
Sec. 58-24. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(2), § 1(50-137)) 
Sec. 58-25. - License fees, all insurers doing business in the county. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the county as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. For each separate business location in excess of one operating on behalf of such insurers within the county, there is levied a license fee as provided in such schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(2), § 1(50-138)) 
Secs. 58-26—58-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOTEL EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 58-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
County means the County of Habersham and, variously, the unincorporated territory of said county, wherein the board of commissioners is empowered to impose this tax by law. 
County clerk means the duly appointed county clerk of the county or his designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means the primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method of payment. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the county including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guestroom or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for not less than ten continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 58-55. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the county a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 58-57. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 58-56. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider renting guestrooms in the county shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 58-57. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other taxes applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately; and must remit to the county any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 3) 
Sec. 58-57. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the state or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 4) 
Sec. 58-58. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the county shall immediately register with the county clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that the ordinance from which this article is derived becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the county clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The county clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 58-59. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the county clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the county by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the county shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud . In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the county of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the county clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the county clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the county may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 6) 
Sec. 58-60. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the county clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 58-59. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of . The county clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the county. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed . Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 7) 
Sec. 58-61. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the county clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the county clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 58-60(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 58-59. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 8) 
Sec. 58-62. - Collection of tax by county. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the county clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the county clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the county clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 9) 
Sec. 58-63. - Administration; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of county clerk. The county clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guestrooms in the county shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the county clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the county. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The county clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guestrooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the county clerk shall stipulate another place within the county. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this chapter, the county clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the county clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the county clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 10) 
Sec. 58-64. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 58-56 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 58-59, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the county, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2006, § 11) 
Secs. 58-65—58-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 16, 2015, § 4 deleted Art. IV, §§ 58-87—58-92, which pertained to Financial Institutions Business License Tax and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 21, 2005, § 1(50-100—50-105). 

Secs. 58-87—58-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 16, 2015 , § 1, deleted Art. V, §§ 58-111—58-142, which pertained to occupation tax and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 21, 2005, § 1(50-1—50-33). 

Secs. 58-111—58-142. - Reserved. 
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county compiles and publishes a traffic schedule which includes a list of locations where maximum speed limits have been established as provided by law. An official copy of such traffic schedule is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the regulations adopted by this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
Sec. 62-2. - Speed detection devices. 
The county board of commissioners approves of and desires the use of speed detection devices by its law enforcement officers. 
(Res. of 1-19-2004) 
Sec. 62-3. - [Speed limits.] 
The Commissioner of Habersham County is hereby requesting that the following roadways be approved for the use of speed detection devices: 
LIST OF ROADWAYS for HABERSHAM COUNTY  ON-SYSTEM  LIST NUMBER 0137-10-2015 

 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
***SCHOOL ZONE HOURS ARE EFFECTIVE*** 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 
( Ord. of 11-16-2015 ) 
Secs 62-4—62-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING ON COUNTY PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 62-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parking space means any space within a public parking lot or public area or along a public street which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street or parking area. 
Public parking area and public parking lot mean any paved or graveled surface area designated for the parking of vehicles on the property of the county, including but not limited to the public fairgrounds located on Highway 115, and the paved area surrounding the county courthouse in Clarkesville. 
(Ord. of 6-5-1989, § I) 
Sec. 62-24. - Designation of spaces; prohibited parking. 
(a)  The county administrator is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in the public parking areas and public parking lots described in section 62-23, and in such other public parking areas or public parking lots as may hereafter be established. Such parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street or lot. At each such space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that the vehicle is not entirely within the limits of the space so designated. It shall be unlawful to park in an area designated as the parking space for a particular vehicle, county employee or officer of the courts of the county, with the exception of the particular vehicle designated or the automobile of the party for whom the space is reserved. It shall be unlawful to park on any property of the county marked by a sign or other traffic control device designating the property as a no parking area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to: 
(1)  Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking space or in such a position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
(2)  Park any vehicle, other than the vehicle designated or the automobile of the party for whom the space is reserved, in a parking space marked as reserved for a particular vehicle, employee of the county or officer of the courts of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-5-1989, §§ II, III) 
Appendix A - COMPREHENSIVE LAND DEVELOPMENT RESOLUTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The comprehensive land development resolution is available on the Habersham County website. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A). 

 